NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MULTIFACTOR, NONLINEAR,
CONTINUOUS-TIME MODEL
OF INTEREST RATE VOLATILITY
Jacob Boudoukh
Matthew Richardson
Richard Stanton
Robert F. Whitelaw

Working Paper 7213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

We would like to thank John Cochrane, Lars Hansen, Chester Spatt, and seminar participants at the New York
Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Board, Goldman Sachs, Long Term Capital Management, University of
North Carolina, U.C. Berkeley, ITAM, the 1997 meetings of the Western Finance Association, the 1998 Utah
Winter Finance Conference, and the NBER asset pricing program for helpful comments. All opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson, Richard Stanton, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Multifactor, Nonlinear, Continuous-Time
Model of Interest Rate Volatility
Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson,
Richard Stanton, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 7213
July 1999
JEL No. G00
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a general, nonlinear version of existing multifactor models, such as
Longstaff and Schwartz (1992). The novel aspect of our approach is that rather than choosing the
model parameterization out of “thin air,” our processes are generated from the data using
approximation methods for multifactor continuous-time Markov processes. In applying this technique
to the short- and long-end of the term structure for a general two-factor diffusion process for interest
rates, a major finding is that the volatility of interest rates is increasing in the level of interest rates
only for sharply upward sloping term structures. In fact, the slope of the term structure plays a larger
role in determining the magnitude of the diffusion coefficient. As an application, we analyze the
model's implications for the term structure of term premiums.

Jacob Boudoukh
Stern School of Business
NYU
40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jboudouk@stern.nyu.edu

Matthew Richardson
Stern School of Business
NYU
40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mrichardson@stern.nyu.edu

Richard Stanton
Haas School of Business
U.C. Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
stanton@haas.berkeley.edu

Robert F. Whitelaw
Stern School of Business
NYU
40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
It is now widely believed that interest rates are a ected by multiple factors. Part of this
view derives from the fact that the returns on bonds of all maturities are not perfectly
correlated.1 In addition to this simple point, a number of theoretical studies promote multifactor bond pricing, including Brennan and Schwartz (1979), Schaefer and Schwartz (1984),
Heath, Jarrow and Morton (1988), Longsta and Schwartz (1992), and Chen and Scott
(1995), among others. Empirical studies of these and related models generally support the
existence of multiple factors (see, for example, Dai and Singleton (1997), Litterman and
Scheinkman (1991), Longsta and Schwartz (1992), Stambaugh (1988), Pearson and Sun
(1989), and Andersen and Lund (1997)). Despite this volume of evidence, surprisingly few
stylized facts are known about the stochastic behavior of interest rates in a multi-factor,
continuous-time setting.
This lack of evidence is particularly unfortunate as most of our intuition concerning
bond and xed-income derivative pricing comes from stylized facts generated by singlefactor, continuous-time interest rate models. For example, the nance literature is uniform
in its view that interest rate volatility is increasing in interest rate levels, though there is
some disagreement about the rate of increase (see, for example, Chan, Karolyi, Longsta and
Sanders (1992), Ait-Sahalia (1996b), Conley, Hansen, Luttmer and Scheinkman (1995), Brenner, Harjes and Kroner (1996) and Stanton (1997)). If interest rates possess multiple factors,
such as the level and slope of the term structure (Litterman and Scheinkman (1991)), then
this volatility result represents an average over all possible term structure slopes. Therefore,
conditional on any particular slope, volatility may be severely misestimated, with serious
consequences especially for xed-income derivative pricing.
Two issues arise in trying to generate stylized facts about the underlying continuous-time,
stochastic process for interest rates. First, how do we specify ex ante the drift and di usion
of the multivariate process for interest rates so that it is consistent with the true process
underlying the data? Second, given that we do not have access to continuous-time data, but
instead to interest rates/bond prices at discretely sample intervals, how can we consistently
infer an underlying continuous-time multivariate process from these data? Recently, in singlefactor settings, there has been much headway at addressing these issues (see, for example,
Ait-Sahalia (1996a), Conley, Hansen, Luttmer and Scheinkman (1995) and Stanton (1997)).
1 In a single factor world, the instantaneous returns on all interest rate dependent assets must be perfectly
correlated.

1

Essentially, using variations on nonparametric estimators with carefully chosen moments, the
underlying single-factor, continuous-time process can be backed out of interest rate data.
Here, we extend the work of Stanton (1997) to a multivariate setting and provide for
the non-parametric estimation of the drift and volatility functions of multivariate stochastic
di erential equations. Basically, we use Milshtein's (1978) approximation schemes for writing
expectations of functions of the sample path of stochastic di erential equations in terms of
the drift, volatility and correlation coecients. If the expectations are known (or, in our
case, estimated nonparametrically) and the functions are chosen appropriately, then the
approximations can be inverted to recover the drift, volatility and correlation coecients.
In this paper, we apply this technique to the short- and long-end of the term structure for
a general two-factor, continuous-time di usion process for interest rates.
In contrast, the common approach in the literature for investigating multifactor continuoustime interest rate models is to develop implications from the ane class of term structure
models. For example, Longsta and Schwartz (1992) specify preferences and production
technologies in such a way that they get closed-form solutions for bond prices and some
xed-income derivatives. Alternatively, other papers write down ane term structure models, with assumptions about the prices of risk, and value securities using no arbitrage. One
can view the approach taken in this paper as complementary to this literature. Here, we
consider nonlinear speci cations for the interest rate process and prices of risk. These general multifactor models then lead to implications for pricing xed-income securities (albeit
without closed forms). The novel aspect of our approach is that rather than choosing the
model parameterization out of \thin air", our processes are generated from the data using
the Milshtein (1978) approximation schemes described above. As such, one can consider
our model a general, nonlinear version of existing multifactor models, such as Longsta and
Schwartz (1992), with the added bene t that, estimation error aside, the model structure
is reasonable. In fact, we show directly how our model relates to the two-factor model of
Longsta and Schwartz (1992).
Our paper provides three contributions to the existing literature. First, in estimating this
multi-factor di usion process, some new empirical facts emerge from the data. Of particular
note, while the volatility of interest rates increases in the level of interest rates, it does so
primarily for sharply upward sloping term structures. Thus, the results of previous studies,
suggesting an almost exponential relation between interest rate volatility and levels, is due
to the term structure on average being upward sloping, and is not a general result per se.
Moreover, our volatility result holds for both the short- and long-term rates of interest.
2

Thus, conditional on particular values of the two factors, such as a high short rate of interest
and a negative slope of the term structure, the term structure of interest rate volatilities is
generally at a lower level across maturities than implied by previous work.
The second contribution is methodological. In this paper, we provide a way of linking
empirical facts and continuous-time modeling techniques so that generating implications for
xed-income pricing is straightforward. Speci cally, we use nonparametrically estimated
conditional moments of \relevant pricing factors" to build a multifactor continuous-time
di usion process which can be used to price securities. This process can be considered a
generalization of the Longsta and Schwartz (1992) two-factor model. Using this estimated
process, we then show how to value xed-income securities, in conjunction with an estimation
procedure for the functional for the market prices of risk. Since the analysis is performed
nonparametrically without any priors on the underlying economic structure, the method
provides a unique opportunity to study the economic structure's implications for pricing.
Of course, ignoring the last twenty- ve years of term structure theory and placing more
reliance on estimation error may not be a viable alternative on its own. Nevertheless, we
view this approach as helpful for understanding the relation between interest rate modeling
and xed-income pricing.
The nal contribution of the paper is to apply the above methodology to a particular
xed-income pricing application. In particular, we use our continuous-time model to provide
an analysis of term premiums. There is a considerable literature in nance on the shape of
the term structure of term premiums. Here, both factors, and the underlying nonlinearities
of the model, play an important role in xed-income pricing and can be directly linked to
the results in the literature. This is especially interesting given that some of the data, and
the corresponding moments, were not used in estimation of the model.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide some general empirical facts
about the conditional means and volatilities of the short- and long-rate of interest. Formal
tests suggest strong evidence of multi-factor pricing. Section 3 outlines the technique for
estimating the underlying multi-factor continuous-time process, and then applies this method
to estimate a general two-factor process for interest rates over the 1983 to 1998 period. Of
particular interest, this section contains a discussion of several new stylized facts about the
stochastic behavior of interest rates. In Section 4, we link our model of interest rate behavior
with a generalized version of the popular Longsta and Schwartz (1992) model, and show
how our estimated model can be used to capture an existing stylized fact about interest rates
and bond returns across maturities. Section 5 makes some concluding remarks.
3

2 The Stochastic Behavior of Interest Rates: Some Evidence
In this section, we provide some preliminary evidence for the behavior of interest rates
across various points of the yield curve. Speci cally, under the assumption that there are
two interest-rate dependent state variables, and that these variables are spanned by the
short rate of interest and the slope of the term structure, we document conditional means
and volatilities of changes in the 6-month through 5-year rates of interest. The results are
generated nonparametrically, and thus impose no structure on the underlying functional
forms for the term structure of interest rates.

2.1 Data Description
Daily values for constant maturity treasury yields on the 3-year, 5-year and 10-year U.S.
government bond were collected from Datastream over the period January 1983 to December 1998. In addition, 3-month, 6-month and 1-year T-bill rates were obtained from the
same source, and converted to annualized yields. This provides us with roughly 4,000 daily
observations.
The post-1982 period was chosen because there is considerable evidence that the period
prior to 1983 came from a di erent regime (see, for example, Huizinga and Mishkin (1984),
Sanders and Unal (1988), Klemkosky and Pilotte (1992), and Torous and Ball (1995)). In
particular, these researchers argue that the October 1979 change in Federal Reserve operating
policy led to a once-and-for-all shift in the behavior of the short term riskless rate. Since
the Federal Reserve experiment ended in November 1982, it is fairly standard to treat only
the post late 1982 period as stationary.
In estimating the conditional distribution of the term structure of interest rates, we
employ two conditioning factors. These factors are the short rate of interest | de ned here
as the 3-month yield | and the slope of the term structure | de ned as the spread between
the 10-year and 3-month yield. These variables are chosen to coincide with interest rate
variables used in other studies (see Litterman and Scheinkman (1991) and Chan, Karolyi,
Longsta and Sanders (1992), among others). Figure 1 graphs the time series of both the
short rate and spread. Over the 1983 to 1998 period, the short rate ranges from 3.00% to
11.50%, while the spread varies from -0.51% to 3.50%. There are several distinct periods
of low and high interest rates, as well as spread ranges. Since the correlation between the
4

short rate and spread is ,0:40, there exists the potential for the two variables combined to
possess information in addition to a single factor.
Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the short rate and term structure slope. Of particular
importance to estimating the conditional distribution of interest rates is the availability of
the conditioning data. Figure 2 shows that there are two holes in the data ranges, namely at
low short rates (i.e., from 3{5%) and low spreads (i.e., from -0.5{2%), and at high short rates
(i.e., from 9.5{11.5%) and low spreads (i.e., from -0.5{1.5%). This means that the researcher
should be cautious in interpreting the implied distribution of interest rates conditional on
these values for the short rate and spread.

2.2 The Conditional Distribution of Interest Rates: A First Look
In order to understand the stochastic properties of interest rates, consider conditioning the
data on four possible states: (i) high level (i.e., of the short rate)/high slope, (ii) high
level/low slope, (ii) low level/low slope, and (iv) low level/high slope. In a generalized
method of moments framework, the moment conditions are2 :

0
1
(it;t+1 , hr:hs)  It;hr:hs
BB
CC
(it;t+1 , hr:ls)  It;hr:ls
BB
CC


BB
CC
(it;t+1 , lr:ls)  It;lr:ls
BB
CC
(it;t+1 , lr:hs)  It;lr:hs
B
C
EB
(1)
BB [(it;t+1 , hr:hs)2 , hr :hs2 ]  It;hr:hs CCC = 0;
BB
C
BB [(it;t+1 , hr:ls)2 , hr :ls2]  It;hr:ls CCC
B@ [(it;t+1 , lr:ls)2 , lr :ls2 ]  It;lr:ls CA
[(it;t+1 , lr:hs)2 , lr :hs2]  It;lr:hs
where it;t+1 is the change in the  -period interest rate from t to t + 1, j is the mean
change in rates conditional on one of the four states occurring, j is the volatility of the
change in rates conditional on these states, and It;j = 1 if [j] occurs, zero otherwise. These
moments,  and  , thus represent coarse estimates of the underlying conditional moments

of the distribution of interest rates.


These moment conditions allow us to test a variety of restrictions. First, are hr
:hs = hr:ls
and lr :hs = lr :ls? That is, does the slope of the term structure help explain volatility at
various interest rate levels? Second, similarly, with respect to the mean, are hr:hs = hr:ls
2 We de ne a low (high) level or spread as one that lies below (above) its unconditional mean. Here, this
mean is being treated as a known constant, though, of course, it is estimated via the data.

5

and lr:hs = lr:ls? Table 1 provides estimates of j and j , and the corresponding test
statistics. Note that the framework allows for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity in the
underlying squared interest rate series when calculating the variance-covariance matrix of
the estimates. Further, the cross-correlation between the volatility estimates is taken into
account in deriving the test statistics.
Several facts emerge from Table 1. First, as documented by others (e.g., Chan, Karolyi,
Longsta and Sanders (1992), and Ait-Sahalia (1996a)), interest rate volatility is increasing
in the short rate of interest. Of some interest here, this result holds across the yield curve.
That is, conditional on either a low or high slope, volatility is higher for the 6-month, 1-year,
3-year and 5-year rates at higher levels of the short rate. Second, the slope also plays an
important role in determining interest rate volatility. In particular, at high levels of interest
rates, the volatility of interest rates across maturities is much higher at steeper slopes. For
example, the 6-month and 5-year volatilities rise from 6.23 and 6.89 to 8.28 and 8.43 basis


points, respectively. Formal tests of the hypothesis hr
:hs = hr:ls provide 1% level rejections
at each of the maturities. There is some evidence in the literature that expected returns on
bonds are higher for steeper term structures (see, for example, Fama (1986) and Boudoukh,
Richardson, Smith and Whitelaw (1999a,1999b)), which may provide a link to the volatility
result here. Third, the e ect of the slope is most important at high interest rate levels. At
low short rate levels, though the volatility at low slopes is less than that at high slopes, the
e ect is much less pronounced. This is con rmed by the fact that a number of the p-values
are no longer signi cant at conventional levels for the test of the hypothesis, lr :hs = lr :ls.
Fourth, the conditional means, though not in general reliably estimated, are consistent with
existing results in the literature (e.g., Chan, Karolyi, Longsta and Sanders (1992), AitSahalia (1996a), and Stanton (1997)). That is, at low levels of interest rates, the mean
tends to be greater than at high interest rates, which can be explained by mean reversion.
However, the table also provides an interesting new result, namely that the e ect of the
slope is of higher magnitude than the level. Further, low slopes tend to be associated with
negative changes in rates, while high slopes are linked to positive interest rate changes.
To understand the joint properties of interest rates, Table 1 presents the average correlation between the 6-month through 5-year yields, conditional on the four possible states.
Conditional on a particular interest rate level, there is little di erence between the correlations across interest rates, for low versus high term structure slopes. In contrast, for a given
term structure slope, low interest rate levels tend to be associated with lower correlations.
For example, conditional on a steep term structure, the correlation is 0.87 and 0.79 at high
6

levels and low levels, respectively.
The results of Table 1 suggest a complex variance-covariance structure for changes in
the term structure of interest rates, conditional on the current level and slope of the term
structure. Below, we take a closer look at this structure by estimating the conditional
distribution between interest rate changes and the level and slope.

2.3 The Conditional Distribution of Interest Rates: A Closer Look
We employ a kernel estimation procedure for estimating the relation between interest rate
changes and components of the term-structure of interest rates.3 Kernel estimation is a nonparametric method for estimating the joint density of a set of random variables. Speci cally,
given a time series it;t+1 , irt and ist (where ir is the level of interest rates, and is is the slope),
generated from an unknown density f (i ; ir ; is), then a kernel estimator of this density is

!

T
X
(i ; ir ; is) , (it;t+1 ; irt ; ist)
f^(i ; ir ; is) = Th1 m K
;
h
t=1

(2)

where K () is a suitable kernel function and h is the window width or smoothing parameter.
This xed window width estimator is often called the Parzen estimator. The density at any
point is estimated as the average of densities centered at the actual data points. The further
away a data point is from the estimation point, the less it contributes to the estimated
density. Consequently, the estimated density is highest near high concentrations of data
points and lowest when observations are sparse.
The econometrician has at his discretion the choice of K () and h. Results in the kernel
estimation literature suggest that any reasonable kernel gives almost optimal results; thus, we
employ the commonly used independent multivariate normal kernel. The other parameter,
the window width, is chosen based on the dispersion of the observations. For the independent
multivariate normal kernel, Scott (1992) suggests the window width,
,1
h^ = k^i T m+4 ;

where ^i is the standard deviation estimate of each variable zi, T is the number of observations, m is the dimension of the variables, and k is a scaling constant often chosen via
cross-validation. Here, we employ a cross-validation procedure to nd the k which provides
the right trade-o between the bias and variance of the errors. Across all the data points,
3 For examples of kernel estimation methods in the empirical asset pricing literature, see Pagan and Hong
(1991), Harvey (1991), Ait-Sahalia (1996a) and Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (1995).

7

we nd the k's which minimize the mean-squared error between the observed data and the
estimated conditional data. This mean-squared error minimization is implemented using a
Jackknife-based procedure. In particular, the various implied conditional moments at each
data point are estimated using the entire sample, except for the actual data point and its
nearest neighbors.4 Once the k is chosen, the actual estimation of the conditional distribution of interest rates involves the entire sample, albeit using window widths chosen from
partial samples.
Two moments of interest rate changes are particularly interesting to nancial economists,
namely the mean and volatility. Intuitively, within the kernel estimation procedure, one can
view estimates of the volatility and the mean as nonlinearly interpolating between functions
of data points (albeit in a multidimensional space). In particular, one can interpret these
estimates as a weighted combination of either observed interest rate changes (i.e., for the
mean estimate) or squared interest rate changes (i.e., for the volatility estimate). Speci cally,
it is possible to show that

^i

 (ir ; is )

=

^2 i (ir ; is) =





T
X
t=1
T
X
t=1

wt(ir ; is)it

(3)

wt(ir ; is)(it , ^i (ir ; is))2 ;

(4)





where wt(ir ; is) = K (i ;i ),h (it ;it ) = PTt=1 K (i ;i ),h (it ;it ) . The weights, wt (ir ; is), are determined by how close the chosen state, i.e., the particular values of the level and slope, ir and
is, is to the observed level and slope of the term structure, irt and ist.
As an illustration, using equations (3) and (4), Figures 3-4 provide estimates of the mean
and volatility of daily changes in the 1-year rate, conditional on the current level of the short
rate and the slope of the term structure (i.e., irt and ist). While Figures 3-4 provide estimates
for only the 1-year rate, the same e ects carry through to the rest of the yield curve and
have therefore been omitted for purposes of space. The gure maps these estimates to the
relevant range of the data, in particular, for short rates ranging from 3% to 11% and slopes
ranging from 0.0% to 3.5%. As seen from Figure 2, there are no observations of both low
spreads and either very low or very high interest rate levels. Thus, the parts of the gures
relating to these areas of the data should be treated with caution.
r s

r s

r s

r s

4 Due to the serial dependence of the data, we performed the cross-validation omitting 100 observations,
i.e., four months in either direction of the particular data point in question. Depending on the moments in
question, the optimal k's range from roughly 2.1 to 11.4, which implies approximately twice to eleven times
the smoothing parameter of Scott's asymptotically optimal implied value.

8

The cross-validation procedure provides a high smoothing parameter for the estimation
of the interest rate's drift. One way to interpret this result is in the context of the existing
literature which shows how dicult it is to estimate low fequency phenomena, like mean
reversion, in interest rates (see, for example, Bandi (1998), Chapman and Pearson (1998),
Jones (1998) and Pritzker (1998)). While the reliability of the estimates in Figure 3 are,
therefore, in question, it is interesting to note that the shape of the curve falls in line with
standard intuition. At higher rates and lower spreads, the drift is most negative; as the
term structure slope increases, and rates are in theory expected to rise, the drift increases
to re ect this rise. One notable point is that the drift is everywhere negative. This results
from the unfortunate fact that (i) on average, rates drifted down during the sample period,
and (ii) the data is oversmoothed to re ect the estimation problems of interest rate drifts.
With respect to Figure 4, while Table 1 gave a rough approximation of these conditional
moments, the gure provides a precise functional form (albeit estimated). For example, both
pieces of information suggest that volatility for the 1-year rate (and, in fact, all other points
on the yield curve) are maximized at high interest rate levels and high slopes. However, the
gures shows that the functional relation is relatively smooth and monotonic. That is, rather
than being a result about averages, we nd that larger squared changes in daily interest rates
over the 1983 to 1998 period tend to occur during times of steeper term structure slopes and
higher interest rate levels. Furthermore, a 1% change in the slope is much more important
than a 1% increase in rates at higher interest rate levels. It should be noted though that a
1% change in the slope is much more dramatic than a corresponding change in rates.
Figures 5 and 6 present cut-throughs of Figure 4 across the term structure at short rates of
8.0% and 5.5%, respectively. From Figure 2, these levels represent data ranges in which there
are many di erent slopes; thus, conditional on these levels, the estimated relation between
the volatility of the 6-month, 1-year, 3-year and 5-year rates as a function of the slope is
more reliable. Several observations are in order. First, as seen from the gures, volatility is
increasing in the slope for all maturities, though primarily only for steep term structures, i.e.,
above 2.0%. Second, volatility is also higher at greater magnitudes of the short rate, though
this di erence is more pronounced at higher slopes. These results suggest that any valuation
requiring a volatility estimate of interest rates should be done with caution. For example,
estimating volatility when the term structure is at relative to upward sloping should lead
to quite di erent point estimates. Third, the relation between volatility and the slope is
nonlinear, which, as it turns out in Section 3.3, will lead to a nonlinear continuous-time
di usion process. This feature can be potentially important as most of the multifactor, term
9

structure pricing models are derived from the ane class.
Alternatively, Figures 7 and 8 provide cut-throughs of Figure 4 across the term structure
at slopes of 2.75% and 1.00%, respectively. These slopes represent data ranges in which there
are a number of observations of the interest rate level. The gures show that the estimated
relation between the volatility of the 6-month, 1-year, and especially the 3-year and 5-year
rates as a function of the level depends dramatically on the slope of the term structure. For
example, the volatility of the 3- and 5-year interest rate change is almost at over levels of
3.0% to 8.5% at low slopes, whereas it increases 2 basis points daily (or approximately 31
basis points on a 250 trading day scale) at high slopes. Similarly, even at the short end of
the yield curve, the increase in volatility is 4 basis points daily versus 1.0 basis points at
high versus low slopes, respectively.

3 Estimation of a Continuous-Time Multi-factor Diffusion Process
The results of Section 2 suggest that the distribution of changes in the term structure of
interest rates depends on at least two factors. As proxies for the information content of
these factors, we used the level and slope of the term structure, as measured respectively
by the short rate of interest (i.e., the 3-month rate) and the spread between the long (i.e.,
the 10-year rate) and short rate. In particular, Figures 3-8 provide functional forms for
important moments of the conditional distribution of future interest rate changes, conditional
on current information about the interest rate factors. Given the importance of continuoustime mathematics in the xed income area, the question arises as to how these results can
be interpreted in a continuous-time setting. In particular,
 How can these results for discretely sampled data be made to coincide with a continuoustime process?

 What do these results imply for the speci cation of the drift and di usion of the twofactor process for interest rates?

 How can this two-factor process then be used to generate implications for valuing

xed-income contingent claims?
Over the past several years, there has been a urry of research on the estimation of
continuous-time interest rate models. The primary reason for this explosion in the literature
10

is the predominance of continuous-time mathematics in the xed-income area. Using data
on bond prices, and explicit theoretical pricing models (e.g., Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985)),
Brown and Dybvig (1989), Pearson and Sun (1994), Gibbons and Ramaswamy (1994) and
Dai and Singleton (1997) all estimate parameters of the underlying interest-rate process
in a fashion consistent with the underlying continuous-time model. Recently, researchers
have taken to more direct examinations of the interest-rate process. For example, Chan,
Karolyi, Longsta and Sanders (1992) examine a continuous-time single-factor model of
interest rates by empirically investigating its discrete-time counterpart. However, this type
of approximation is dicult to interpret, at least formally, in a continuous-time setting.
As a result, a new literature has emerged which allows estimation and inference of fairly
general continuous-time di usion processes using discretely sampled data. By employing the
in nitesimal generators of the underlying continuous-time di usion processes, Hansen and
Scheinkman (1995) and Conley, Hansen, Luttmer and Scheinkman (1995) construct moment
conditions which make the investigation of continuous-time models possible with discrete
time data. In a nonparametric framework, Ait-Sahalia (1996a,b) develops a procedure for
estimating the underlying process for interest rates using discrete data by choosing a model
for the drift of interest rates and then nonparametrically estimating its di usion function. As
an alternative method, Stanton (1997) employs approximations to the true drift and di usion
of the underlying process, and then nonparametrically estimates these approximation terms
to back out the continuous-time process (see also Bandi (1998), Chapman and Pearson (1998)
and Pritzker (1998)). The advantage of this approach is twofold: (i) similar to the other
procedures, the data need only be observed at discrete time intervals, and (ii) the drift and
di usion are unspeci ed, and thus may be highly nonlinear in the state variable.
In this section, we extend the work of Stanton (1997) to a multivariate setting and provide for the non-parametric estimation of the drift and volatility functions of multivariate
stochastic di erential equations. Similar to Stanton (1997), we use Milshtein's (1978) approximation schemes for writing expectations of functions of the sample path of stochastic
di erential equations in terms of the drift and volatility coecients. If the expectations
are known (albeit estimated nonparametrically in this paper) and the functions are chosen
appropriately, then the approximations can be inverted to recover the drift and volatility
coecients.

11

3.1 Drift, Di usion and Correlation Approximations
Assume that no arbitrage opportunities exist, and that bond prices are functions of two state
variables, the values of which can always be inverted from the current level, Rt , and a second
state variable, St. Assume that these variables follow the (jointly) Markov di usion process

dRt = R(Rt ; St) dt + R (Rt ; St) dZtR
dSt = S (Rt ; St) dt + S (Rt ; St) dZtS ;

(5)
(6)

where the drift, volatility and correlation coecients (i.e., the correlation between Z R and
Z S ) all depend on Rt and St . De ne the vector Xt = (Rt; St ).
Under suitable restrictions on , , and a function f , we can write the conditional
expectation Et [f (Xt+)] in the form of a Taylor series expansion,5
Et [f (Xt+)] = f (Xt ) + Lf (Xt) + 12 L2f (Xt)2 + : : : + n1! Lnf (Xt)n + O(n+1); (7)
where L is the in nitesimal generator of the multivariate process fXt g (see Oksendal (1985)
and Hansen and Scheinkman (1995)), de ned by

!
"
2 f (X ) !#
1
@
@f
(
X
t)
Lf (Xt) = @X X (Xt ) + 2 trace (Xt ) @X @Xt 0 ;
t
t t

where

!
R2 (Rt ; St)
(Rt ; St)R (Rt; St )S (Rt ; St)
(Xt ) =
:
(Rt ; St)R (Rt ; St)S (Rt ; St )
S2 (Rt ; St)
Equation 7 can be used to construct numerical approximations to Et [f (Xt+)] in the
form of a Taylor series expansion, given known functions R , S , , R and S (see, for
example, Milshtein (1978)). Alternatively, given an appropriately chosen set of functions
5 For a discussion see, for example, Hille and Phillips (1957), Chapter [11]. Milshtein (1974, 1978) gives
examples of conditions under which this expansion is valid, involving boundedness of the functions , , f
and their derivatives. There are some stationary processes for which this expansion does not hold for the
functions f that we shall be considering, including processes such as
dx =  dt + x3 dZ;

which exhibit \volatility induced stationary" (see Conley, Hansen, Luttmer and Scheinkman (1995)). However, any process for which the rst order Taylor series expansion fails to hold (for linear f ) will also fail if
we try to use the usual numerical simulation methods (e.g. Euler discretization). This severely limits their
usefulness in practice.

12

f () and nonparametric estimates of Et [f (Xt+)], we can use Equation 7 to construct approximations to the drift, volatility and correlation coecients (i.e., R , S , , R and S )
of the underlying multifactor, continuous-time di usion process. The nice feature of this
method is that the functional forms for R , S , , R and S are quite general, and can be
estimated nonparametrically from the underlying data. Rearranging Equation 7, and using
a time step of length i (i = 1; 2; : : :), we obtain
1 E [f (X ) , f (X )] ;
Eb i(Xt )  i
t
t+i
t
= Lf (Xt) + 1 L2f (Xt)(i) + : : : + 1 Lnf (Xt)(i)n,1 + O(n):
(8)
2
n!
From Equation 8, each of the Eb i is a rst order approximation to Lf ,
Eb i(Xt ) = Lf (Xt) + O():
Now consider forming linear combinations of these approximations, PNi=1 iEb i(Xt ). That is,
from Equation 8,
"X
#
"X
#
"X
N
N
N
N #
X
1
1
2
2
3
2
i
b
i i L f (Xt ) +
i i L f (Xt ) + : : : : (9)
i E (Xt ) =
i Lf (Xt ) +
2
6
i=1
i=1
i=1
i=1
Can we choose the i so that this linear combination is an approximation to Lf of order
N?
For the combination to be an approximation to Lf , we require rst that the weights
1 ; 2 ; : : : ; N sum to 1. Furthermore, from Equation 9, in order to eliminate the rst order
error term, the weights must satisfy the equation
N
X
i i = 0:
i=1

More generally, in order to eliminate the nth order error term (n  N , 1), the weights must
satisfy the equation,
N
X
n
i i = 0:
i=1

We can write this set of restrictions more compactly in matrix form as
0
1
0 1
1
1
1



1
BB
CC
BB 1 CC
3  N C
BB 1 2
BB 0 CC
CC
BB 1 4
2
9  N C
 V = BBB 0 CCC :
BB . .
C
... . . . ... C
BB ... CC
B@ .. ..
CA
@ A
1 2N ,1 3N ,1    N N ,1
0
13

The matrix V is called a Vandermonde matrix, and is invertible for any value of N . We can
thus obtain by calculating
0 1
BB 1 CC
B 0 CC
= V ,1 B
(10)
BB ... CC :
@ A
0:
For example, for N = 3, we obtain

0
1,1 0 1
1
1
1
BB
CC BB 1 CC
= B
@ 1 2 3 CA B@ 0 CA ;
1 4 9
0
0 1
BB 3 CC
= B
@ ,3 CA :
1

(11)
(12)

Substituting into Equation 9, and using Equation 8, we get the following third order
approximation of the in nitesimal generator of the process fXt g:
1 [18E (f (X ) , f (X )) , 9E (f (X ) , f (X )) + 2E (f (X ) , f (X ))]
Lf (Xt) = 6
t
t+
t
t
t+2
t
t
t+3
t
+ O(3):
To approximate a particular function g(x), we now need merely to nd a speci c function f
satisfying
Lf (x) = g(x):
For our purposes, consider the functions

f(1) (R)
f(2) (S )
f(3) (R)
f(4) (S )
f(5) (R; S )







R , Rt ;
S , St;
(R , Rt )2 ;
(S , St)2 ;
(R , Rt ) (S , St ) :

From the de nition of L, we have

Lf(1) (R) = R (R; S );
14

Lf(2) (S ) = S (R; S );
Lf(3) (R) = 2(R , Rt )R(R; S ) + R2 (R; S );
Lf(4) (S ) = 2(S , St)S (R; S ) + S2 (R; S );
Lf(5) (R; S ) = (S , St)R (R; S ) + (R , Rt )S (R; S ) + (R; S )R (R; S )S (R; S ):
Evaluating these at R = Rt , S = St, we obtain

Lf(1) (Rt )
Lf(2) (St)
Lf(3) (Rt )
Lf(4) (St)

=
=
=
=
Lf(5) (Rt ; St) =

R(Rt ; St );
S (Rt; St );
R2 (Rt ; St);
S2 (Rt ; St);
(Rt ; St)R (Rt; St )S (Rt ; St):

Using each of these functions in turn as the function f above, we can generate approximations
to R, S , R , S and  respectively. For example, the third order approximations (taking
square roots for R and S ) are
R (Rt ; St ) =
S (Rt ; St ) =
R (Rt ; St ) =
S (Rt ; St ) =
RS (Rt ; St ) =

1 [18E (R , R ) , 9E (R
t t+
t
t t+2 , Rt ) + 2Et (Rt+3 , Rt )]
6
+ O(3 );
(13)
1 [18E (S , S ) , 9E (S
t t+
t
t t+2 , St ) + 2Et (St+3 , St )]
6
3
r +O( h);
i
h
i
1 18E (R , R )2 i , 9E h(R
,
Rt )2 + 2Et (Rt+3 , Rt )2
t
t
+
t
t
t
+2
r 6  h
i
h
i
1 18E (S , S )2 i , 9E h(S
,
St )2 + 2Et (St+3 , St )2
t
t
+
t
t
t
+2
6
1 (18E [(R , R ) (S , S )] , 9E [(R
t t+
t t+
t
t t+2 , Rt ) (St+2 , St )]
6
+ 2Et [(Rt+3 , Rt ) (St+3 , St )]) :

The approximations of the drift, volatility and correlation coecients are written in
terms of the true rst, second and cross moments of multiperiod changes in the two state
variables. If the two-factor assumption is appropriate, and a large stationary time series is
available, then these conditional moments can be estimated using appropriate nonparametric
methods. In this paper, we estimate the moments using multivariate density estimation,
with appropriately chosen factors as the conditioning variables. All that is required is that
15

these factors span the same space as the true state variables.6 The results for daily changes
were provided in Section 2. Equation 13 shows that these estimates are an important part
of the approximations to the underlying continuous-time dynamics. By adding multiperiod
extensions of these nonparametric estimated conditional moments, we can estimate the drift,
volatility and correlation coecients of the multifactor process described by Equations 5
and 6.
Figure 9 provides the rst, second and third order approximations to the di usion of
the short rate against the short rate level and the slope of the term structure.7 The most
notable result is that a rst order approximation works well; thus, one can consider the
theoretical results of this section as a justi cation for discretization methods currently used
in the literature, e.g., Chan, Karolyi, Longsta and Sanders (1992). The description of
interest rate behavior given in Section 2, therefore, carries through to the continuous-time
setting. The question then is what does Figure 9, and more generally the rest of the estimated
process, mean for xed-income pricing?

4 A Generalized Longsta and Schwartz (1992) Model
Longsta and Schwartz (1992) provide a two-factor general equilibrium model of the term
structure. Their model is one of the more popular versions within the ane class of models
for describing the yield curve (see also Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985), Chen and Scott
(1993) and Due and Kan (1996)). In the Longsta and Schwartz setting, all xed-income
instruments are functions of two fundamental factors, the instantaneous interest rate and
its volatility. These factors follow di usion processes, which in turn lead to a fundamental
valuation condition for the price of any bond, or bond derivative. As an alternative, here we
also present a two-factor continuous-time model for interest rates. The results of Section 2
suggest that the ane class may be too restrictive.
While our results shed valuable light on the factors driving interest rate movements, however, there are potential problems in using this speci cation to price interest rate contingent
claims. A general speci cation for Rt and St (and the associated prices of risk) may allow
6 See Due and Kan (1996) for a discussion of the conditions under which this is possible (in a linear
setting).
7 Figures showing the various approximations to the drift of the short rate, the drift and di usion of the
slope, and the correlation between the short rate and the slope are available upon request.

16

arbitrage opportunities if either of these state variables is a known function of an asset price.8
Of course, this point is true of all previous estimations of continuous-time processes to the
extent that they use a priced proxy as the instantaneous rate. If we are willing to assume
that we have the right factors, then there is no problem in an asymptotic sense. That is,
since we are estimating these processes nonparametrically, as the sample size gets larger, our
estimates will converge to the true functions, which are automatically arbitrage-free (if the
economy is). Nevertheless, this is of little consolation if we are trying to use the estimated
functions to price assets.
To get around this problem, we need to write the model in a form in which neither state
variable is an asset price or a function of asset prices. In this paper, we follow convention by
using the observable 3-month yield as a proxy for the instantaneous rate, Rt . Furthermore,
suppose that the mapping from (R; S ) to (R; R ) is invertible,9 so we can write asset prices
as a function of R and R , instead of R and S .10 Since R is not an asset price, using this
variable avoids the inconsistency problem.
Speci cally, suppose that the true model governing interest rate movements is a generalization of the two factor Longsta and Schwartz (1992) model,

dRt = R (R; ) dt +  dZ1;
q
dt =  (R; )dt + (R; )s(R; ) dZ1 + 1 , 2 s dZ2;

(14)
(15)

where dZ1 dZ2 = 0.11 In vector terms,

d(Rt ; t ) = M dt +  dZ;

8 See, for example, Due, Ma and Wong (1995). The problem is that, given such a model, we can price
any bond, and are thus able to calculate what the state variable \ought" to be. Without imposing any
restrictions on the assumed dynamics for Rt and St , there is no guarantee that we will get back to the same
value of the state variable that we started with.
9 That is, for a given value of Rt , the volatility, R is monotonic in the spread, S . This is the case in
most existing multifactor interest rate models, including, for example all ane models, such as Longsta
and Schwartz (1992).
10 This follows by writing
V (R; S ) = V (R; S (R; R ))  U (R; R ):
11 This speci cation is the most convenient to deal with, since we now have orthogonal noise terms. The
correlation between the di usion terms is , and the overall variance of  is s2 dt.

17

where

0 1
M  @ R A ;

0 
1

0
A:
  @
p
s 1 , 2 s

Asset prices, and hence the slope of the term structure, can be written as some function of
the short rate and instantaneous short rate volatility, S (R; ).
From Equations 14 and 15, how do we estimate the underlying processes for R and 
given the estimation results of Section 3? Although the short rate volatility, , is not directly
observable, it is possible to estimate this process. Speci cally, using Ito's Lemma, together
with estimates for R , R , S , S and , it is possible to write
h
i
dt = R dRt +S dSt+ 12 RR 2 (Rt ; St) + SS S2 (Rt ; St) + 2RS (Rt ; St)S (Rt ; St)(Rt ; St ) dt:
Given this equation, and the assumption that the function S (R; ) is invertible, the dynamics
of t can be written as a function of the current level of R and  in a straightforward way.
This procedure requires estimation of a matrix of second derivatives. Although there are
well-known problems in estimating higher-order derivatives using kernel density estimation
techniques, it is possible to link the results of Section 2 and 3 to this generalized Longsta
and Schwartz (1992) model. In particular, using estimates of the second derivatives (not
shown), several facts emerge. First, due to the small magnitudes of the estimated drifts of
the state variables R and S , the drift of  depends primarily on the second order terms.
Consequently, the importance of the second factor (the slope) is determined by how much
the sensitivity of short rate volatility to this factor changes relative to the changes in the
sensitivty to the rst factor (the level). From Figure 9, it is clear that the second derivatives
are somewhat unstable, especially in the R dimension. Nevertheless, the general pattern is
that volatility increases at a slower rate for high slopes and levels. Consequently, for high
volatilities, the drift of volatility is negative, generating mean reversion. The e ect of the
second factor is to reinforce this phenomenon. Second, the di usion of  is determined by the
sensitivities of short rate volatility to the two factors and the magnitudes of the volatilities
of the factors. Based on the estimates of the volatilites and derivatives, the slope has the
dominant in uence on this e ect. In particular, the volatility of  is high for upward sloping
term structures, which also correspond to states with high short rate volatility. Moreover,
sensitivity of this di usion to the two factors is larger in the slope direction than in the level
direction.
18

As an alternative to the above method, we can estimate an implied series for  by
assuming that the function S (R; ) is invertible, i.e., that we can equivalently write the
model in the form

dRt = R(Rt ; St)dt + (Rt ; St)dZ1
dSt = S (Rt ; St )dt + S (Rt ; St)dZ2;
where Z1 and Z2 may be correlated. To estimate the function (R; S ), we apply the methodology described in Section 3.1 to the function f(3) (R; S )  (R , Rt )2. Applying the estimated
function to each observed (R; S ) pair in turn yields a series for the volatility , which we
can then use in estimating the generalized Longsta and Schwartz (1992) model given in
Equations 14 and 15.12 This procedure is in stark contrast to that of Longsta and Schwartz
(1992), and others, who approximate the dynamics of the volatility factor as a Generalized
Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) process. The GARCH process is
not compatible with the underlying dynamics of their continuous-time model; here, the
estimation is based on approximation schemes to the di usion process and is internally consistent. Due to the diculties in estimating derivatives, we choose this second approach to
estimate the continuous-time process.13

4.1 A General Two Factor Di usion Process: Empirical Results
Figures 11-14 show approximations to the drift and di usion coecients for the generalized
Longsta and Schwartz (1992) process as a function of the two factors, the instantaneous
short rate and its volatility. It is important to point out that there is little available data at
low short rates/high volatilities and high short rates/low volatilities, which corresponds to
the earlier comment about interest rates and spreads (see Figure 10). Therefore, results in
these regions need to be treated cautiously. With respect to the interest rate drift, Figure
11 shows a very similar gure to that of Figure 3. Here, interest rate volatility is proxying
for the slope of the term structure, or vice versa. Again, the gure is dramatically smoothed
through cross-validation due to the inability of the estimation method (or for that matter
any method) to uncover reliable functional forms for mean reversion in interest rates.

12 Although the use of an estimated series for  rather than the true series may not be the most ecient
approach, this procedure is consistent. That is, the problem will disappear as the sample size becomes large,
and our pointwise estimates of  converge to the true values.
13 Though the rst approach provides similar results to the second approach, the functional forms underlying the second method are more smooth and thus more suitable for analysis.

19

More interesting, Figures 12 and 13 provide the estimates of the continuous-time process
for the second interest factor, namely its volatility. Several observations are in order. First,
there is estimated mean-reversion in volatility; at low (high) levels of volatility, volatility
tends to drift upward (downward). The e ect of the level of interest rates on this relation
appears minimal. Second, and perhaps most important, there is clear evidence that the
di usion of the volatility process is increasing in the level of volatility, yet is a ected by the
level of interest rates only marginally. Moreover, volatility's e ect is nonlinear in that it takes
a ect only at higher levels. This nding suggests extreme caution should be applied when
inputting interest rate volatility into derivative pricing models. Most of our models take
the relation between the level and volatility for granted; however, with increases from 3% to
11% in the interest rate level, only mild increases in volatility are being reported for both
volatility's drift and di usion. On the other hand, changes in the volatility level of much
smaller magnitudes have a much larger impact on the volatility process. This nding links
the spread result documented earlier in the paper to a second factor, namely the volatility
of the instantaneous rate.
As the nal piece of the multifactor process for interest rates, Figure 14 graphs a third
order approximation of the correlation coecient between the short rate and the volatility, given values of the two factors. Taken at face value, the results suggest a complex
variance-covariance matrix between these series in continuous-time. In particular, while the
correlation decreases in the volatility for most interest rate levels, there appears to be some
nonmonotonicity across the level itself. Why is correlation falling as volatility increases?
Perhaps, high volatility, just like the corresponding high term structure slope, is associated
with aggregate economic phenomena that are less related to the level of interest rates. Given
that interest rates are driven by two relatively independent economic factors, namely expectations about both real rates and in ation, this argument seems reasonable. It remains an
open question, however, what the exact relation is between Figure 14 and these economic
factors.

4.2 Valuation of Fixed-Income Contingent Claims
Given the interest rate model described in equation (15), we can write the price of an
interest rate contingent claim as V (r; ; t), depending only on the current values of the two

20

state variables plus time. Then, by Ito's Lemma,
dV (r; ; t) = m(r; ; t) dt + s (r; ; t) dZ + s (r; ; t) dZ ;
1
1
2
2
V (r; ; t)
where
h
i
m(r; ; t) V = Vt + r (r; )VR +  (r; )V + 12 trace T r2 V (r; )  ;
= Vt + r (r; )Vr +  (r; )V + 21 2Vrr + 12 s2V + sVr ;
s1(r; ; t) V = V
q r + sV ;
s2(r; ; t) V = 1 , 2 sV :

(16)

(17)

The volatility of the asset, V , is given by

q
V V = (Vr + sV )2 + (1 , 2) s2V2;
q
= 2Vr2 + 2sVr V + s2V2:

With a one factor interest rate model, to prevent arbitrage, the risk premium on any asset
must be proportional to its standard deviation.14 Similarly, with two factors, absence of
arbitrage requires the excess return on an asset to be a linear combination of its exposure
to the two sources of risk. Thus, if the asset pays out dividends at rate d, we can write
(18)
m = r , Vd + r (r; ) VVr +  (r; ) VV ;
where r and  are the prices of short rate risk and volatility risk respectively. Substituting
equation (18) into equation (17), and simplifying, leads to a partial di erential equation
that must be satis ed by any interest rate contingent claim, assuming the usual technical
smoothness and integrability conditions (see, for example, Due (1988)),
1 2V + [ ,  ] V + 1 s2V + [ ,  ] V + sV + V , rV + d = 0; (19)
r
r r

 
r
t
2 rr
2 
subject to appropriate boundary conditions. To price interest rate dependent assets, we need
to know not only the processes governing movements in r and , but also the prices of risk,
r and  .
Given estimates for the process governing movements in r and , and also for the functions
r and  , we can value interest rate dependent assets in one of two ways. The rst is to solve

14 Suppose this did not hold for two risky assets. We could then create a riskless portfolio of these two
assets with a return strictly greater than r, leading to an arbitrage opportunity (see Ingersoll(1987)).

21

equation (19) numerically using a method such as the Hopscotch method of Gourlay and
McKee (1977). The second is to use the fact that we can write the solution to equation (19)
in the form of an expectation. Speci cally, we can write V , the value of an asset which pays
out cash ows at a (possibly path dependent) rate Ct , in the form

"Z T R s
#
,
(
b
r
)
du
u
Vt = E
e t
Cs ds ;
t

(20)

where rb follows the \risk adjusted" process,

drb = [r (rb ; b ) , r (rb ; b )] d + b dZ1;
q
db = [ (rb ; b ) ,  (rb ; b )] d + s(rbt au; b ) dZ1 + 1 , 2 s dZ2;

(21)
(22)

for all  > t, and where

rbt = rt;
bt = t :
This says that the value of the asset equals the expected sum of discounted cash ows paid
over the life of the asset, except that it substitutes the risk adjusted process (rb; b ) for the
true process (r; ).
This representation leads directly to a valuation algorithm based on Monte Carlo simulation. For a given starting value of (rt; t ), simulate a number of paths for rb and b using
equations (21) and (22). Along each path, calculate the cash ows Ct, and discount these
back along the path followed by the instantaneous riskless rate, rbt. The average of the sum
of these values taken over all simulated paths is an approximation to the expectation in
equation (20), and hence to the security value, Vt . The more paths simulated, the closer the
approximation.

4.2.1 Estimating the Prices of Risk
Recall that to price interest rate dependent assets, we need to know not only the processes
governing movements in r and , but also the prices of risk, r and  . Equation (18) gives
an expression for these functions in terms of the partial derivatives Vr and V , which could
be used to estimate the prices of risk, given estimates of these derivatives for two di erent
assets, plus estimates of the excess return for each asset. As mentioned above, it is dicult
to estimate derivatives precisely using nonparametric density estimation. Therefore, instead
22

of following this route, we shall avoid directly estimating the partial derivatives, Vr and
V , by considering the instantaneous covariances between the asset return and changes in
the interest rate/volatility, cV r and cV  . From equations (14), (15) and (16) (after a little
simpli cation),

0
1 0
1 0 2
10
1
c
dV
dr=V
dt

s
V
=V
V
r
r
@
A@
A=@
A@
A:
2
cV 
dV d=V dt
s s
V =V

(23)

This can be inverted, as long as jj < 1, to obtain

0
1
0 2
1,1 0
1
V
=V

s
c
r
V
r
@
A = @
A @
A;
2
V =V
s s
cV 
0
10
1
2 ,=s
1
=
c
1
V
r
@
A@
A:
=
1 , 2 ,=s 1=s2
cV 

To preclude arbitrage, the excess return on the asset must also be expressible as a linear
combination of cV r and cV  ,
(24)
m = r , Vd +  r (r; )cV r +   (r; )cV  :
Given two di erent interest rate dependent assets, we can estimate the instantaneous covariances for each in the same way as we estimated (r; ) above. We can also estimate the
excess return for each asset, mi(r; ) , r as a function of the two state variables. The two
excess return can be expressed in the form

0
1 0 1 1 10  1
m
,
r
1
@
A = @ cV2 r cV2  A @  r A ;
m2 , r
cV r cV 


which can be inverted to yield an estimate of the prices of risk,

0  1 0 1 1 1,1 0
1

c
c
m
,
r
@  r A = @ V2 r V2  A @ 1 A :

cV r cV 
m2 , r

Finally, for estimates of the more standard representation of the prices of risk, r and  ,
equate equations (18) and (24), using equation (23), to obtain

10  1
0 1 0 2

s

 r A:
@ r A=@
A
@

s s2
 
23

Figures 15 and 16 provide estimates of the prices of risk for the instantaneous rate and
volatility in terms of the current levels of these variables. While the researcher needs to
be a little cautious in interpreting the results due to the range of observed data, several
observations are in order. First, the price of short rate risk tends to be negative. One way
of interpreting this result is that, for a given volatility and interest rate level, the short
rate needs to be risk-adjusted upward. The main e ect of a negative price is to make term
premiums positive and upward sloping. Second, the price of short rate risk is more negative
at lower rates; in contrast, the e ect of volatility has an ambiguous e ect on this price.
Third, the price of volatility risk seems to be relatively at for most values of the interest
rate level and its volatility. Only at higher volatilities does the price of risk vary, with low
(high) rates imposing a high (low) price.

4.3 The Term Structure of Term Premiums
Figures 11-16 provide a complete description of the underlying processes for interest rates
and interest rate risk. Using these estimates, and the valuation theory outlined in Section
4.2, we can begin to address the following question:
What are the implications of the empirical facts, such as the especially high volatility at
steep slopes, for expected returns on bonds?
This is an important question, which, to date, is unanswered in the literature due to the
multifactor, nonlinear nature of these facts. Below, we provide a rst pass at understanding
these implications by focusing on the term structure of term premiums.
There is substantial support in the literature for time-varying risk premia on bonds. For
example, Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983), Fama (1984, 1986), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Fama and Bliss (1987), Stambaugh (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1991),
Klemkosky and Pilotte (1992) and Engle and Ng (1993) all report evidence that the risk
premia on bonds of various maturities are predictable. Moreover, a common conditioning
variable is the slope of the term structure, since it can be shown to embed expectations
about future rates as well as risk premiums on bonds. In this paper, we have transformed a
two-factor world with the level and slope into a generalized Longsta and Schwartz (1992)
model.
Figure 17 documents the term structure of term premiums at two di erent short rates as
implied by the pricing model described earlier in this section. The short rates were chosen
to coincide with the available data and the earlier Figures 5 and 6. Speci cally, we report
24

the ex ante excess return on the 6-month, 1-year, 3-year and 5-year par bonds, as a function
of the short rate's volatility. Several observations are in order. First, these term premiums
vary with both the level and the volatility. Recall from equation 18 that these excess returns
are determined by two components: (i) the prices of risk, and (ii) the sensitivities of the
bond prices to the interest rate factors. The former component is dominated by the short
rate (see Figures 15 and 16), while the latter component is related to interest rate volatility,
which is related mostly to the slope (see Figure 9).
Second, the predictability appears highly nonlinear, with both the level of the short
rate and the degree of interest volatility playing important roles. For example, given high
levels of volatility, the term structure of term premiums is at a higher level at rates of 5.5%
than at rates of 8%. In contrast, at low levels of volatility, the term structure of term
premiums is similar, irrespective of the interest rate level. Third, and most interesting, is
that the overall e ect of multiple factors is consistent with the stylized facts in the term
premium literature (see, for example, Fama (1986), Fama and Bliss (1987) and Boudoukh,
Richardson, Smith and Whitelaw (1999a,1999b)). In particular, it is well-documented that
there exists a positive relation between the term structure slope and the term structure of
expected returns on bonds. Given the link between volatility and the slope, it should not
be surprising then that, for low levels of volatility, the term structure of term premiums is
relatively at compared to that for high levels of volatility.

5 Conclusion
This paper provides a method for estimating multifactor continuous-time Markov processes.
Using Milshtein's (1978) approximation schemes for writing expectations of functions of the
sample path of stochastic di erential equations in terms of the drift, volatility and correlation
coecients, we provide non-parametric estimation of the drift and di usion functions of
multivariate stochastic di erential equations. We apply this technique to the short- and
long-end of the term structure for a general two-factor, continuous-time di usion process
for interest rates. In estimating this process, one major result is that the volatility of
interest rates is increasing in the level of interest rates, only for sharply, upward sloping term
structures. Thus, the result of previous studies, suggesting an almost exponential relation
between interest rate volatility and levels, is due to the term structure on average being
upward sloping, and is not a general result per se. Moreover, the slope of the term structure,
on its own, plays a large role in determining the magnitude of the di usion coecient. These
25

volatility results hold across maturities, which suggests that a low dimensional system (with
nonlinear e ects) may be enough to explain the term structure of interest rates.
There are several advantages of the procedure adopted in this paper. First, there is
a constant debate between researchers on the relative bene ts of using equilibrium versus
arbitrage-free models. Here, we circumvent this issue by using actual data to give us the
process and corresponding prices of risk. Since the real world coincides with the intersection
of equilibrium and arbitrage-free models, our model is automatically consistent. Of course, in
a small sample, statistical error will produce estimated functional forms that do not conform.
This problem, however, is true of all empirical work. Second, one of the motivations of
this paper is to use our estimates of the underlying multifactor continuous-time di usion
process to generate pricing results, which may lead to an explanation of some of the stylized
facts in the literature. We show how our results can be interpreted within a generalized
Longsta and Schwartz (1992) framework, that is, one in which the drift and di usion
coecients of the instantaneous interest rate and volatility are both (nonlinear) functions of
the level of interest rates and the volatility. Very preliminary results suggest that this more
generalized model will have some success at explaining the term structure of bond premiums
in a uni ed framework. Third, the approach of this paper may be useful in providing forecasts
of the conditional distribution of changes in the term structure of interest rates. As a rst
pass, the model is reasonably adept at replicating some of the important characteristics of
the estimated conditional distribution. Due to the Markov property of the model, these
forecasts are not limited to the frequency of the observed data. We are currently working on
research along these lines. Fourth, and perhaps most important, the pricing of xed-income
derivatives depends crucially on the level of volatility. The results in this paper suggest that
volatility depends on both the level and slope of the term structure. This result, coupled
with the prices of risk, lead us to believe that the model produced here may have insights
into the pricing of these derivatives. We are currently analyzing the implications of these
types of models for valuing interest rate caps and oors.

26

References

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, 1996a, \Nonparametric Pricing of Interest Rate Derivative Securities," Econometrica 64, 527{560.
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, 1996b, \Testing Continuous-Time Models of the Spot Interest Rate," Review
of Financial Studies, 9(2):385-426.
Andersen, T. and J. Lund, 1997, \Estimating continuous time stochastic volatility models of the
short term interest rate," Journal of Econometrics 77, 343{377.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, Tom Smith and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1999a, \Ex Ante
Bond Returns and the Liquidity Preference Hypothesis," Journal of Finance, 54(3):1153-1167.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, Tom Smith and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1999b, \Bond Returns and Regime Shifts," working paper, NYU.
Brennan, Michael and Eduardo Schwartz, 1979, \A Continuous Time Approach to the Pricing of
Bonds," Journal of Banking and Finance, 3:133-155.
Brenner, Robin, Richard Harjes and Kenneth Kroner, 1996, \Another Look at Models of the ShortTerm Interest Rate," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 31(1):85{107.
Brown, Stephen and Phil Dybvig, 1986, \The Empirical Implications of the Cox, Ingersoll Ross
Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance 41, 617-630..
Campbell, John, 1995, \Some Lessons from the Yield Curve," working paper no. 5031, NBER.
Campbell, John and Robert Shiller, 1991, \Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird's
Eye View," Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.
Chan, K.C., A. Karolyi, F. Longsta and A. Sanders, 1992, \An Empirical Comparison of Alternative Models of the Short-Term Interest Rate," Journal of Finance, 47:1209{1227.
Chapman, D. A., and Pearson, N. D., 1998, "Is the Short Rate Drift Actually Nonlinear," forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Chen, Ren-Raw and Louis Scott, 1992, \Pricing Interest rate Options in a Two-Factor CoxIngersoll-Ross Model of the Term Structure," Review of Financial Studies, 5(4):613-636.
Conley, Timothy, Lars Hansen, Erzo Luttmer and Jose Scheinkman, 1995, \Estimating Subordinated Di usions from Discrete Time Data," The Review of Financial Studies, 10:525-577.
Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr. and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, \A Theory Of The Term
Structure Of Interest Rates," Econometrica 53, 385-408.
Dai, Qiang and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, \Speci cation Analysis of Ane Term Structure Models," working paper (Stanford University).
Due, Darrell, 1988, Security Markets: Stochastic Models, Academic Press, Boston.
Due, Darrell and Rui Kan, 1996, \A yield-factor model of interest rates," Mathematical Finance
6, 379{406.
Due, Darrell, J. Ma, and J. Yong, 1995, \Black's consol rate conjecture," Annals of Applied
Probability, 5(2):356{382.

27

Fama, Eugene F., 1986, \Term Premiums And Default Premiums In Money Markets," Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 175-196.
Gibbons, Michael and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1993, \A Test of the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross Model
of the Term Structure," Review of Financial Studies 6, 619-658.
Hansen, Lars and Jose Scheinkman, 1995, \Back to the Future: Generating Moment Implications
for Continuous Time Markov Processes," Econometrica 63, 767-804.
Heath, David, Robert Jarrow, and Andrew Morton, 1992, \Bond Pricing and the Term Structure
of Interest Rates," Econometrica 60, 77-105.
Hille, E. and R. Phillips, 1957, Functional Analysis and Semigroups, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I.
Huizinga, John and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1986, \Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and the Unusual
Behavior of Real Interest Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, 24, 231-274.
Ingersoll, Jonathan, 1987, Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman and Little eld, Totowa,
NJ.
Jones, C. S., 1998, "A Simple Bayesian Method for the Analysis of Di usion and Jump-Di usion
Processes," working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Klemkosky, Robert C. and Eugene A. Pilotte, 1992, \Time-Varying Term Premiums On U.S.
Treasury Bills And Bonds," Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 87-106.
Litterman, Robert and Jose Scheinkman, 1991, \Common Factors A ecting Bond Returns," Journal of Fixed Income 1, 54-61.
Longsta , Francis and Eduardo Schwartz, 1992, \Interest rate volatility and the term structure: A
two-factor general equilibrium model," Journal of Finance, 47(4):1259{1282.
Milshtein, G.N., 1974, \Approximate Integration of Stochastic Di erential Equations," Theory of
Probability and Its Applications, 19:557{562.
Milshtein, G.N., 1978, \A Method of Second-Order Accuracy Integration for Stochastic Di erential
Equations," Theory of Probability and Its Applications, 23:396{401.
Oksendal, B., 1985, Stochastic Di erential Equations: An Introduction with Applications, 3rd edition, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Pearson, Neal and Tong-Shen Sun, 1994, \Exploiting the Conditional Density in Estimating the
Term Structure: An Application to the Cox, Ingersoll Ross Model," Journal of Finance 49, 1279{
1304.
Pritsker, M., 1998 " Nonparametric Density Estimation of Tests of Continuous Time Interest Rate
Models," The Review of Financial Studies, 11:449-487.
Sanders, A.B. and H. Unal, 1988, \On the Intertemporal Stability of the Short Term Rate of
Interest," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 417-423.
Schaefer, Stephen and Eduardo Schwartz, 1984, \A Two-Factor Model of the Term Structure: An
Approximate Analytical Solution," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 19:413{424.

28

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1988, \The Information In Forward Rates: Implications For Models Of The
Term Structure," Journal of Financial Economics 21, 41-70.
Stanton, Richard, 1997, \A Nonparametric Model of Term Structure Dynamics and the Market
Price of Interest Rate Risk," Journal of Finance 52, 1973-2002.
Torous, Walter and Cli ord Ball 1995, \Regime Shifts in Short Term Riskless Interest Rates,"
working paper (London Business School).

29

</ref_section>

TABLE 1: Conditional Moments of Daily Interest Rate Changes (basis points)
Mean
(Std. err)
Hypothesis
2 Test

High Level, High Slope
High Level, Low Slope
Low Level, High Slope
Low Level, Low Slope
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
0.008
0.007
-0.346
-0.401
0.093
0.114
-0.165
-0.190
(0.288)
(0.302)
(0.222)
(0.247)
(0.152)
(0.165)
(0.132)
(0.147)
(HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 6-mth (HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 1-yr (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 6-mth (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 1-yr
0.951 (.33 p-val)
1.093 (.30 p-val)
1.657 (.20 p-val)
1.889 (.17 p-val)

Mean
(Std. err)
Hypothesis
2 Test

High Level, High Slope
3-year
5-year
-0.063
-0.122
(0.296)
(0.293)
(HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 3-yr
0.415 (.52 p-val)

Vol
(Std. err)
Hypothesis
2 Test
Vol
(Std. err)
Hypothesis
2 Test

High Level, Low Slope
3-year
5-year
-0.312
-0.234
(0.249)
(0.245)
(HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 5-yr
0.087 (.77 p-val)

Low Level, High Slope
3-year
5-year
0.049
0.021
(0.184)
(0.184)
(LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 3-yr
1.104 (.29 p-val)

Low Level, Low Slope
3-year
5-year
-0.217
-0.229
(0.174)
(0.176)
(LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 5-yr
0.962 (.33 p-val)

High Level, High Slope
High Level, Low Slope
Low Level, High Slope
Low Level, Low Slope
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
6-month
1-year
8.275
8.685
6.229
6.925
5.328
5.813
4.480
4.996
(0.526)
(0.534)
(0.247)
(0.292)
(0.227)
(0.214)
(0.227)
(0.213)
(HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 6-mth (HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 1-yr (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 6-mth (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 1-yr
12.160 (.00 p-val)
8.181 (.00 p-val)
6.772 (.01 p-val)
7.048 (.01 p-val)
3-year
5-year
3-year
5-year
3-year
5-year
3-year
5-year
8.514
8.427
6.996
6.887
6.476
6.480
5.890
5.984
(0.494)
(0.475)
(0.288)
(0.273)
(0.205)
(0.208)
(0.215)
(0.209)
(HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 3-yr (HR,HS)=(HR,LS) 5-yr (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 3-yr (LR,HS)=(LR,LS) 5-yr
6.888 (.01 p-val)
7.729 (.01 p-val)
3.680 (.06 p-val)
2.680 (.10 p-val)
High Level, High Slope
0.870

Average Correlation
High Level, Low Slope
Low Level, High Slope
0.842
0.787

Low Level, Low Slope
0.794

Table 1 presents summary statistics for daily changes in the 6-month, 1-year, 3year, and 5-year yields on U.S. government securities over the 1983 to 1998 period.
Speci cally, the table provides the mean, volatility, and cross-correlation of these
series, conditional on whether the level of the short rate and slope of the term structure
are either low or high. A Wald test that the conditional moments are equal is also
provided for the mean and volatility of these series.

30

0.12
Short Rate
Slope
0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02
84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

Year

Figure 1: Time series plot of the 3-month rate and term structure slope (i.e., the spread
between the 10-year and 3-month rate) over the 1983-1996 period.
0.04

0.035

0.03

Spread

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07
Short Rate

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

Figure 2: Scatter plot of the 3-month rate vs. the term structure slope over the 1983-1996
period.
31

Drift (bp/day) (1y)

-0.04
-0.05
-0.06
-0.07
-0.08
-0.09
-0.1
-0.11
-0.12
-0.13
-0.14
-0.15
0.03

0.035
0.03
0.025
0.04

0.05

0.06

0.02
0.015
0.07

0.08

r

0.09

0.1

0.01
0.005

Slope

0.11 0

Figure 3: The mean of the daily change in the 1-year yield (in basis points), conditional on
the short rate and the slope of term structure.

Volatility (bp/day) (1y)

11
10
9
8
7
6
5

0.035
0.03
0.025

4
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06
r

0.02
0.015
0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.01
0.005

Slope

0.11 0

Figure 4: The volatility of the daily change in the 1-year yield (in basis points), conditional
on the short rate and the slope of term structure.
32

9.5
6m
1y
3y
5y

9

Volatility (bp/day)

8.5

8

7.5

7

6.5

6

5.5
0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

Slope

Figure 5: The volatility of the daily change in yields vs. the spread, with the short rate xed
at 8%.
9
6m
1y
3y
5y

8.5
8

Volatility (bp/day)

7.5
7
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
4
0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

Slope

Figure 6: The volatility of the daily change in yields vs. the spread, with the short rate xed
at 5.5%.
33

9
6m
1y
3y
5y

8.5
8

Volatility (bp/day)

7.5
7
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
4
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07
r

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

Figure 7: The volatility of the daily change in yields vs. the short rate, with the spread xed
at 2.75%.
8
6m
1y
3y
5y

7.5

Volatility (bp/day)

7

6.5

6

5.5

5

4.5

4
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07
r

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

Figure 8: The volatility of the daily change in yields vs. the short rate, with the spread xed
at 1%.
34

1st order
2nd order
3rd order
Volatility (r)

0.02
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.01
0.008
0.006

0.035
0.03
0.025

0.004
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06
r

0.02
0.015
0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.01
0.005

Slope

0.11 0

Figure 9: First, second, and third order approximations to the di usion (annualized) of the
short rate vs. the short rate and the slope of the term structure.

35

0.015

0.014

0.013

Sigma

0.012

0.011

0.01

0.009

0.008
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11

Short Rate

Figure 10: Scatter plot of the 3-month rate vs. the term structure volatility over the 19831996 period.

36

Drift (r)

-0.0014
-0.0016
-0.0018
-0.002
-0.0022
-0.0024
-0.0026
-0.0028
-0.003

0.014

-0.0032
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.05

0.01
0.06
r

0.07

0.008
0.08

0.09

0.1

Sigma

0.006
0.11

Figure 11: First order approximation to the drift (annualized) of the short rate vs. the short
rate and the volatility of the term structure.

37

Drift (sigma)

0.0004
0.0002
0
-0.0002
-0.0004
-0.0006
-0.0008
0.014
-0.001
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.05

0.01
0.06

0.07

Sigma

0.008
0.08

r

0.09

0.1

0.006
0.11

Figure 12: First order approximation to the drift (annualized) of the volatility vs. the short
rate and the volatility of the term structure.

Volatility (sigma)

0.009
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001

0.014

0
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.05

0.01
0.06
r

0.07

0.008
0.08

0.09

0.1

Sigma

0.006
0.11

Figure 13: First order approximations to the di usion (annualized) of the volatility vs. the
short rate and the volatility of the term structure.
38

Correlation (r, sigma)

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

0.014

-0.4
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.05

0.01
0.06
r

0.07

0.008
0.08

0.09

0.1

Sigma

0.006
0.11

Figure 14: First order approximation to the correlation coecient between changes in the
short rate and the volatility vs. the short rate and the volatility of term structure.

39

Price of short rate risk

0
-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02
0.014
-0.025
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.01
0.05

0.06

0.07

r

Sigma

0.008
0.08

0.09

0.006
0.1

Figure 15: The price of short rate risk vs. the short rate and the volatility of the term
structure.

Price of volatility risk

0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
-0.002
-0.004
-0.006

0.014

-0.008
0.03

0.012
0.04

0.01
0.05

0.06
r

0.07

0.008
0.08

0.09

Sigma

0.006
0.1

Figure 16: The price of volatility risk vs. the short rate and the volatility of the term
structure.
40

0.16

0.04
Low vol: 0.0075
Med. vol:0.01125
High vol:0.015

0.14

0.035

0.12

0.03

0.1

0.025
Term Premium

Term Premium

Low vol: 0.0075
Med. vol:0.01125
High vol:0.015

0.08

0.02

0.06

0.015

0.04

0.01

0.02

0.005

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

Maturity

3
Maturity

(a) r = 5.5%

(b) r = 8.0%

Figure 17: Term structure of term premia

41

4

5

