                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    BEHAVIORALIZE THIS!
                                INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON
                                AUTOCORRELATION PATTERNS
                                    OF STOCK INDEX AND
                                     FEATURES RETURN

                                          Dong-Hyun Ahn
                                          Jacob Boudoukh
                                         Matthew Richardson
                                         Robert F. Whitelaw


                                         Working Paper 7214
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7214

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




Thanks to Eli Ofek and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve, Washington, D.C. for helpful comments.
All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Dong-Hyun Ahn, Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioralize This! International Evidence on
Autocorrelation Patterns of Stock Index and Futures Returns
Dong-Hyun Ahn, Jacob Boudoukh,
Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 7214
July 1999
JEL No. G00

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper investigates the relation between returns on stock indices and their corresponding
futures contracts in order to evaluate potential explanations for the pervasive yet anomalous evidence
of positive, short-horizon portfolio autocorrelations. Using a simple theoretical framework, we
generate empirical implications for both microstructure and behavioral models. These implications
are then tested using futures data on 24 contracts across 15 countries. The major findings are (I)
return autocorrelations of indices tend to be positive even though their corresponding futures
contracts have autocorrelations close to zero, (ii) these autocorrelation differences between spot and
futures markets are maintained even under conditions favorable for spot-futures arbitrage, and (iii)
these autocorrelation differences are most prevalent during low volume periods. These results point
us towards a market microstructure-based explanation for short-horizon autocorrelations and away
from explanations based on current popular behavioral models.


Dong-Hyun Ahn                                    Jacob Boudoukh
Kenan-Flagler Business School                    Stern School of Business
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill        NYU
CB#3490, Carroll Hall                            40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490                       New York, NY 10012
ahnd@icarus.bschool.unc.edu                      and NBER
                                                 jboudouk@stern.nyu.edu

Matthew Richardson                               Robert F. Whitelaw
Stern School of Business                         Stern School of Business
NYU                                              NYU
40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160                  40 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012                               New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                         rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu
mrichardson@stern.nyu.edu
1 Introduction
Arguably, one of the most striking asset pricing anomalies is the evidence of large, positive,
short-horizon autocorrelations for returns on stock portfolios, rst described in Hawawini
(1980), Conrad and Kaul (1988,1989,1998) and Lo and MacKinlay (1988,1990a). The ev-
idence is pervasive both across sample periods and across countries, and has been linked
to, among other nancial variables, rm size (Lo and MacKinlay (1988)), volume (Chordia
and Swaminathan (1998)), analyst coverage (Brennan, Jegadeesh and Swaminathan (1993)),
institutional ownership (Badrinath, Kale and Noe (1995) and Sias and Starks (1997)), and
unexpected cross-sectional return dispersion (Connolly and Stivers (1998)).1 The above
results are puzzling to nancial economists precisely because time-variation in expected re-
turns is not a high-frequency phenomenon; asset pricing models link expected returns with
changing investment opportunities, which, by their nature, are low frequency events.
    As a result, most explanations of the evidence have centered around the so-called lagged
adjustment model in which one group of stocks reacts more slowly to aggregate information
than another group of stocks. Because the autocovariance of a well-diversi ed portfolio is
just the average cross-autocovariance of the stocks that make up the portfolio, positive auto-
correlations result. While nancial economists have put forth a variety of economic theories
to explain this lagged adjustment, all of them impose some sort of underlying behavioral
model, i.e., irrationality, on the part of some agents, that matters for pricing. (See, for
example, Holden and Subrahmanyam (1992), Brennan, Jegadeesh and Swaminathan (1993),
Jones and Slezak (1998), and Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (1998).) Alternative,
and seemingly less popular, explanations focus on typical microstructure biases (Boudoukh,
Richardson and Whitelaw (1994)) or transactions costs which prevent these autocorrela-
tion patterns from disappearing in nancial markets (Mech (1993)). The latter explanation,
however, does not explain why these patterns exist in the rst place.
    This paper draws testable implications from the various theories by exploiting the relation
between the spot and futures market.2 Speci cally, while much of the existing focus in the
   1 Another powerful and related result is the short-term continuation of returns, the momentum e ect,
documented by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). While this evidence tends to be rm-speci c, it also produces
positive autocorrelation in short-horizon stock returns (see Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1998) as recent exam-
ples). Moreover, this evidence holds across countries (e.g., Rouwenhorst (1998)) and across time periods.
   2 Miller, Muthuswamy and Whaley (1994) and Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (1994) also argue
that the properties of spot index and futures returns should be di erent. Miller, Muthuswamy and Whaley
(1994) look at mean-reversion in the spot-futures basis in terms of nontrading in S&P 500 stocks, while

                                                    1
literature has been on the statistical properties of arti cially constructed portfolios (such as
size quartiles), there are numerous stock indices worldwide which exhibit similar properties.
Moreover, many of these indices have corresponding futures contracts. Since there is a direct
link between the stock index and its futures contract via a no arbitrage relation, it is possible
to show that, under the aforementioned economic theories, the futures contract should take
on the properties of the underlying index. In contrast, why might the properties of the
returns on the index and its futures contract diverge? If the index, or for that matter,
the futures prices are constructed based on mismeasured prices (e.g., stale prices, bid or
ask prices), then the link between the two is broken. Alternatively, if transaction costs on
the individual stocks comprising the index are large enough, then the arbitrage cannot be
implemented successfully. This paper looks at all of these possibilities in a simple theoretical
framework and tests their implications by looking at spot and futures data on 24 stock
indices across 15 countries.
    The results are quite remarkable. In particular,
     The return autocorrelations of indices with less liquid stocks (such as the Russell 2000
      in the U.S., the TOPIX in Japan, and the FTSE 250 in the U.K.) tend to be positive
      even though their corresponding futures contracts have autocorrelations close to zero.
      For example, the Russell 2000's daily autocorrelation is 22%, while that of its respective
      futures contract is 6%. The di erences between these autocorrelation levels are both
      economically and statistically signi cant.
     Transactions costs cannot explain the magnitude of these autocorrelation di erences
      as the magnitude changes very little even when adjusting for periods favorable for
      spot-futures arbitrage. We view this as strong evidence against the type of irrational
      models put forth in the literature.
     Several additional empirical facts point to microstructure-type biases, such as staleness
      of pricing, as the most probable source of the di erence between the autocorrelations of
      the spot and futures contracts. For example, in periods of generally high volume, the
Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (1994) look at combinations of stock indices, like the S&P 500 and
NYSE, in order to isolate portfolios with small stock characteristics. While the conclusions in those papers
are consistent with this paper, those papers provide only heuristic arguments and focus on limited indices
over a short time span. This paper develops di erent implications from various theories and tests them
across independent, international data series.


                                                     2
     return autocorrelation of the spot indices drops dramatically. The futures contract's
     properties change very little, irrespective of the volume in the market.
    All of these results hold domestically, as well as internationally. This is especially
     interesting given that the cross-correlation across international markets is fairly low,
     thus providing independent evidence in favor of our ndings.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an analysis of the relation
between stock indices and their corresponding futures contracts under various assumptions,
including the random walk model, a nontrading model, and a behavioral model. Of special
interest, we draw implications for the univariate properties of these series with and without
transactions costs. Section 3 describes the data on the various stock index and futures
contracts worldwide, while Section 4 provides the main empirical results of the paper. In
Section 5, we make some concluding remarks.

2 Models of the Spot-Futures Relation
There is a large literature in nance on the relation between the cash market and the stock
index futures market, and, in particular, on their lead-lag properties. For example, MacKin-
lay and Ramaswamy (1988), Stoll and Whaley (1990), and Chan (1992), among others, all
look at how quickly the cash market responds to market-wide information that has already
been transmitted into futures prices. While this literature shows that the cash and futures
market have di erent statistical properties, there are several reasons why additional analysis
is needed. First, while there is strong evidence that the futures market leads the cash mar-
ket, this happens fairly quickly. Second, most of the analysis is for indices with very active
stocks, such as the S&P 500 or the MMI, which possess very little autocorrelation in their
return series. Third, these examinations have been at the intraday level and not concerned
with longer horizons that are more relevant for behavioral-based models.
    In this section, we provide a thorough look at implications for the univariate statistical
properties of the cash and futures markets under various theoretical assumptions about
market behavior with and without transactions costs. In order to generate these implications,
we make the following assumptions:
    The index, S , is an equally-weighted portfolio of N assets with corresponding futures

                                              3
       contract, F .3
     To the extent possible (i.e., transactions costs aside), there is contemporaneous arbi-
       trage between S and F . That is, the market is rational with respect to index arbitrage.
     Prices of individual securities, Si ; i = 1; :::; N , follow a random walk in the absence
       of irrational behavior. This assumption basically precludes any \equilibrium" time-
       variation in expected returns at high frequencies. All lagged adjustment e ects, there-
       fore, are described in terms of irrational behavior on the part of some agents, i.e., some
       form of market ineciency.
     The dividend processes for each asset, di, and the interest rate, r, are independent of
       the index price, S . Violations of this assumption are investigated in Section 4 and
       evaluated for their e ect on the relation between the cash and futures market
    Under these assumptions, we consider three models. The rst is the standard model with
no market microstructure e ects or irrational behavior. The implications of this model are
well known, and are provided purely as a benchmark case. The second model imposes a
typical market structure bias, namely nontrading on a subset of the stocks in the index. The
third model imposes a lagged adjustment process for some of the stocks in the index. In
particular, we assume that some stocks react to market-wide information more slowly due to
the reasons espoused in the literature. Transaction costs are then placed on the individual
stocks in the index, as well as on the futures contract, to better understand the relation
between the cash and futures markets.

2.1 Case I: The Random Walk Model
Applying the cost of carry model and using standard arbitrage arguments, the futures price
is simply the current spot price times the compounded rate of interest (adjusted for paid
dividends):4
                        Ft;T = St e(i,d)(T ,t)
   3 The assumption of equal weights is used for simplicity.
   4 See, for example, MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988). Note that, for the moment, we assume that
interest rates and dividend yields are constant. In practice, this assumption is fairly robust due to the fact
that these nancial variables are signi cantly less variable than the index itself. Violations of this assumption
are explored in Section 4.

                                                       4
         where      Ft;T is the futures price of the index, maturing in T-t periods,
                    St is the current level of the index,
                    i is the continuously compounded rate of interest,
                    d is the continuously compounded rate of dividends paid, and
                    T is the maturity date of the futures contract.
Thus, under the cost of carry model, we can write the return on the futures as
                                      rF = rS + (i , d);                                     (1)
where rF and rS are the continuously compounded returns on the futures and the underlying
spot index respectively, and (i , d) is the change in the continuously compounded interest
rate (adjusted for the dividend rate).
   Several observations are in order. First, under the random walk model, and assuming
that (i , d) has either low volatility or little autocovariance, the autocorrelation of futures'
returns will mimic that of the spot market, i.e., it will be approximately zero. Second, the
variance of futures' returns should exceed that of the spot market by the variance of (i , d),
assuming no correlation between the index returns and either dividend changes or interest
rate changes. Third, even in the presence of transaction costs, these results should hold as
the futures price should still take on the properties of the expected future stock index price,
which is the current value of the index in an ecient market.

2.2 Case II: A Nontrading Model
The market microstructure literature presents numerous examples of market structures which
can induce non-random walk behavior in security prices. Rather than provide an exhaustive
analysis of each of these structures, we focus on one particular characteristic of the data
that has received considerable attention in the literature, namely nonsynchronous trading.
Nontrading refers to the fact that stock prices are assumed to be recorded at a particular
point in time from period to period when in fact they are recorded at irregular points in time
during these periods. For example, stock indices are recorded at the end of trading using
the last transaction price of each stock in the index. If those stocks (i) did not trade at the
same time, and (ii) did not trade exactly at the close, then the index would be subject to
nontrading-induced biases in describing its characteristics. The best known characteristic, of
course, is the spurious positive autocorrelation of index returns, as well as the lower variance
of measured returns on the index.
                                               5
     Models of nontrading, and corresponding results, have appeared throughout the nance
literature, including, among others, Fisher (1966), Scholes and Williams (1977), Cohen,
Maier, Schwartz and Whitcomb (1978), Dimson (1979), Atchison, Butler and Simonds
(1987), Lo and MacKinlay (1990b), and Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (1994). In
this paper, we choose the simple model of Lo and MacKinlay (1990b) to illustrate the rela-
tion between the spot and futures markets. In their model, in any given period, there is an
exogenous probability i that stock Si does not trade. Furthermore, each security's return,
ri , is described by one zero-mean, i.i.d. factor, M , with loading, i . Lo and MacKinlay
(1990b) show that the measured returns on an equally-weighted portfolio of N securities,
denoted rS^, can be written as
                                                          X1
                                   ^ = S + (1 , S ) S
                                  rS;t                        Sk Mt,k ;
                                                          k=0
where S and S are the average mean and average beta of the portfolio of the N stocks,
and S is the probability of nontrading assuming equal nontrading probabilities across the
stocks. Of course, the true returns are simply described by
                                         rS;t = S + S Mt ;
where any idiosyncratic risk has been diversi ed away.
   In a no arbitrage world, the price of the futures contract will re ect the present value of
the stock index at maturity. That is,
                                 Ft;T = PV(S^T )e(i,d)(T ,t) :                             (2)
Note that, due to nontrading, the present value of the index is no longer its true value, but
instead a value that partly depends on the current level of nontrading. This is because the
futures price is based on the measured value of the index at maturity, which includes stale
prices. Within the Lo and MacKinlay (1990b) model, nontrading today has some, albeit
small, information about the staleness of prices in the distant future. However, as long as
the contract is not close to expiration, the e ect, which is of order T ,t, is miniscule. In
particular, it is possible to show that the corresponding futures return is:
                       rF   t;T
                                  = S + S (Mt , T ,tMt,1 ) + (i , d)
                                  = rS;t , S T ,t Mt,1 + (i , d):                       (3)
   Not surprisingly, in contrast to the measured index returns, futures returns will not be
autocorrelated due to the eciency of the market and the no arbitrage condition between the
                                                 6
cash and futures market. However, the futures return will di er from the true spot return
because it is priced o the measured value of the spot at maturity. This di erence leads to
a lower volatility of the futures return than the true spot return, though by a small factor
for long-maturity contracts. Speci cally, within the framework of this model, the variance
ratio between futures returns and true spot returns is (1 , T ,t )2 , whereas the ratio between
measured index returns and true returns is (11,,)2 . Except for very short maturity contracts,
                                                    2


futures returns volatility will be greater than that of the measured index return.5

2.3 Case III: The Partial-Adjustment Model
As an alternative to market microstructure-based models, the nance literature has devel-
oped so-called partial adjustment models. Through either information transmission, noise
trading or some other mechanism, these models imply that some subset of securities partially
adjust, or adjust more slowly, to market-wide information. While there is some debate about
whether these models can be generated in both a reasonable and rational framework, all the
models impose some restrictions on trading so that the partial adjustment e ects cannot get
arbitraged away. There are a number of models that produce these types of partial adjust-
ment e ects (e.g., see Holden and Subrahmanyam (1992), Foster and Viswanathan (1993),
Badrinath, Kale and Noe (1995), Chordia and Swaminathan (1998) and Llorente, Michaely,
Saar and Wang (1998)).
    Here, we choose one particular model, which coincides well with Section 2.2 above, namely
Brennan, Jegadeesh and Swaminathan (1993). We assume that the index is made up of two
equally-weighted portfolios of stocks, SF and SP , which for better terminology stand for full
(i.e., F ) and partial (i.e., P ) response stocks. (Brennan, Jegadeesh and Swaminathan (1993)
consider stocks followed by many analysts versus those followed by only a few analysts.)
Assume that the returns on these two portfolios can be written as
                                   RF;t = F + F Mt
   5 It can be shown that futures returns volatility will be greater than that of the measure index return if
                                                           q 
                                                      ln 1 , 11+,
                                       (T , t) >           ln 
                                                     r
                                                         1 :
                                                        1 , 2
Even when  is 50%, which is a unrealistically large number, the volatility ratio will be greater than one if
the maturity of the futures contract is greater than 1.25 days.

                                                      7
                               RP;t = P + P Mt + P Mt,1 :
Thus, for whatever reason, the return on the partial response stocks is a ected by last period's
realization of the factor. One o ered explanation is that market-wide information is only
slowly incorporated into certain stock prices, yielding a time-varying expected return that
depends on that information. Note that similar to Lo and MacKinlay (1990b) and Section
2.2 above, we have also assumed that these two portfolios are suciently well-diversi ed that
there is no remaining idiosyncratic risk.
    Assume that the index contains ! of the fully adjusting stock portfolio and 1 , ! of
the partially adjusting portfolio. Under the assumption of no transactions costs and no
arbitrage, it is possible to show that the returns on the index and its corresponding futures
contract can be written as:
                                 RS;t = S + S Mt + S Mt,1                                  (4)
                                 RF;t = RS;t + (i , d)
                             where S = !F + (1 , !)P
                                    S = ! F + (1 , ! ) P
                                    S = (1 , ! ) P :

The returns on both the stock index and its futures contract coincide, and therefore pick up
similar autocorrelation properties. In fact, their autocorrelations can be solved for
                                 [! F + (1 , !) P ](1 , !) P :
                              [! F + (1 , !) P ]2 + [(1 , !) P ]2
For indices with relatively few partial-adjustment stocks (i.e., high !) or low lagged response
coecients (i.e., small P ), the autocorrelation reduces to approximately :
                                          (1 , !) P :
                                       ! F + (1 , ! ) P
With the additional assumption that the beta of the index to the factor is approximately
one, an estimate of the autocorrelation is (1 , !) P . That is, the autocorrelation depends
on the proportion of partially adjusting stocks in the index and on how slowly these stocks
respond. These results should not seem surprising. With the no arbitrage condition between
the cash and futures market, the price of the futures equals the present value of the future
spot index, which is just the current value of the index. That is, though the spot price at
maturity includes lagged e ects, the discount rate does also, leading to the desired result.
                                               8
With nontrading, because the lagged e ects are spurious, discounting is done at S , which
leads to zero autocorrelation of futures returns.
    In response, a behavioralist might argue that the futures return does not pick up the
properties of the cash market due to the inability of investors to actually conduct arbitrage
between the markets. Of course, the most likely reason for the lack of arbitrage is the
presence of transactions costs, that is, commissions and bid-ask spreads paid on the stocks
in the index and the futures contract. The level of these transactions costs depend primarily
on costs borne by the institutional index arbitrageurs in these markets. Abstracting from
any discussion of basis risk and the price of that risk, we assume here that arbitrageurs buy
or sell all the stocks in the index, at a multiplicative cost of . Thus, round-trip transactions
costs per arbitrage trade are equal to 2. In this environment, it is possible to show that, in
the absence of arbitrage, the futures price must satisfy the following constraints:
                         ,(2 + i)  Ft;T , St e(i,d)(T ,t)  (2 + i):                      (5)
In other words, the futures price is bounded by its no arbitrage value plus/minus round-trip
transactions costs.
    What statistical properties do futures returns have within the bounds? There is no
obvious answer to this question found in the behavioral literature. If the futures is priced o
the current value of the spot index, then, as described above, futures returns will inherit the
autocorrelation properties of the index return. Alternatively, suppose investors in futures
markets are more sophisticated, or at least respond to information in M fully. That is, they
price futures o the future value of the spot index, discounted at the rate S . In this case,
the futures returns will not be autocorrelated, and expected returns on futures will just equal
S + E [(i , d)].
    Of course, if the futures-spot parity lies outside the bound, then arbitrage is possible,
and futures prices will move until the bound is reached. It is possible to show that futures
prices at time t will lie outside the bound (in the absence of arbitrage) under the following
condition:
                                       jMt j  (12, +!)i :                                (6)
                                                        P
That is, three factors increase the possibility of lying outside the bound: (i) large recent
movement in the stock index (i.e., jMt j), (ii) low transactions costs (i.e., ), (iii) large auto-
correlation in the index (i.e., (1 , !) P ). If condition (6) is met, then, even in the case of
sophisticated futures traders, expected returns on futures will not be a constant, but instead

                                                9
capture some of the irrationality of the index. Speci cally, if (6) is true, then
                             Et [RF;t ] = (1 , ! ) P Mt , (2 + i):                          (7)
Figure 1 illustrates the pattern in expected futures returns under this model. Within the
bounds, expected futures returns are at. Outside the bound, futures begin to take on the
properties of the underlying stock index, and futures returns are positively autocorrelated for
more extreme past movements. Figure 1 provides the basis for an analysis of the implications
of futures markets in the presence of index return autocorrelation.
    Similarly, we can calculate the volatility of the returns on the index and the volatility of
the returns on its corresponding futures contract. Within the bound, using equation (4), it
is possible to show that the return variances are:
                               R2S
                                      = ( S2 + S2 )M2
                               R2
                                 F
                                      = ( S + S )2M2 + (
                                                         2
                                                            i,d) :

In other words, as long as S is positive (which is the prevailing view), the volatility of futures
returns will be higher than the volatility of the spot index returns. However, volatility of
interest rate changes aside, the volatility of the spot and futures returns will start to converge
when condition (6) is realized. This is because the futures return takes on the properties of
the index return as index arbitrage forces convergence of the two.

2.4 Implications
The above models for index and corresponding futures prices are clearly stylized and very
simple. For example, the Lo and MacKinlay (1988) model of nontrading has been general-
ized to heterogeneous nontrading and heterogeneous risks of stocks within a portfolio which
provides more realistic autocorrelation predictions (see, for example, Boudoukh, Richardson
and Whitelaw (1994)). Which model is best, however, is besides the point for this paper.
The purpose of the models is to present, in a completely transparent setting, di erent impli-
cations of two opposing schools of thought. The rst school believes that the time-varying
patterns in index returns are not tradeable, and in fact may actually be completely spurious,
i.e., an artifact of the way we measure returns. The second school believes that these pat-
terns are real and represent actual prices, resulting from some sort of inecient information
transmission in the market. The implications we draw from these models are quite general

                                               10
and robust to more elaborate speci cations of nontrading or agent's ability to incorporate
information quickly.
    In particular, according to the models described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, it is possible
to make several observations about the relative statistical properties of index and futures
returns:
    Under a market microstructure setting, the index returns will be positively autocor-
     related while the futures returns will not be autocorrelated (bid-ask bounce aside).
     Moreover, the magnitude of these di erences will be related to the level of microstruc-
     ture biases. In contrast, the behavioral model predicts spot index and futures returns
     will inherit the same autocorrelation properties.
    Similar implications occur for the volatility of the index and futures returns. Behavioral
     models predict spot and futures returns will have approximately the same volatility
     (interest rate volatility aside), while market microstructure models imply di erent
     volatilities. Again, the di erence in volatilities will be related to the magnitude of the
     microstructure biases.
    In the presence of transactions costs, behavioral models can potentially form a wedge
     between the statistical properties of spot index and futures returns. However, this
     wedge leads to particular implications, namely that the spot index and futures returns
     will behave similarly in periods of big stock price movements and possibly quite dif-
     ferently in periods of small movements. For example, the autocorrelation of futures
     returns should be zero for small movements, and positive for large movements. Like-
     wise, the relative volatility between the futures and spot market should be higher in
     the futures market for small past movements versus large past movements.
    Finally, a nontrading-based explanation of the patterns in spot index and futures re-
     turns implies the following characteristic of the data. As the nontrading probability 
     goes down, i.e., higher volume, the spot index return's properties, such as its autocor-
     relation, should look like the true return process. Moreover, while the properties of the
     index return change with volume, the properties of the futures return should remain
     the same for long maturity contracts.
These observations are the basis for an empirical comparison of spot index and corresponding
futures returns. To build up as much independent evidence as possible, this analysis is

                                              11
performed on over 24 indices across 15 countries. Because the daily index returns across
these countries are not highly correlated, the results here will have considerably more power
to di erentiate between the implications of the two schools.

3 The Data
All the data are collected from Datastream; speci cally, price levels of each stock index and
corresponding futures contract at the close of trade every day, daily volume on the overall
stock market in a given country, daily open interest and volume for each futures contract,
short-term interest rates and dividend yields. The data are collected to coincide with the
length of the available futures contract. For example, if the futures contract starts on June
1, 1982 (as did the S&P 500), all data associated with this contract start from that date.
    The futures data are constructed according to usual conventions. In particular, a single
time series of futures prices is spliced together from individual futures contracts prices. For
liquidity, the nearest contract's prices are used until the rst day of the expiration month,
then the next nearest is used, and so on. For a futures contract to be used, we require
at least four years of data (or roughly 1000 observations) to lower the standard errors of
the estimators. This leads us to drop a number of countries such as the Eastern European
block, emerging countries in Asia like Thailand, Korea and Malaysia, as well as some small
stock based indices like the MDAX in Germany. Given this criteria, we are left with 24
futures contracts on stock indices covering 15 countries. Table 1 gives a brief description
of each contract, the exchange it is traded on, its country aliation, its starting date, as
well as some summary statistics on the futures' returns, open interest and trading volume.
Summary statistics on the underlying index returns are also provided.
    Some observations are in order. First, given the wide breadth of countries used in this
analysis as seen in Table 1, and the fact that daily returns across countries have relatively
small contemporaneous correlations (e.g, with a mean of .39 and a median of .32), the data
in this study provide considerable independent information about the economic implications
described in Section 2. Second, while the unconditional means of the index returns and
corresponding futures returns are basically the same for all contracts, their volatilities are
substantially di erent. While part of these di erences can be explained by interest rate
volatility, the majority of the di erences come from some other source (see Section 4). As
shown in Section 2, these types of di erences are more commonly associated with market
microstructure biases since behavioral models imply the volatility will be picked up in both
                                              12
markets. Third, the futures contracts have considerable open interest and daily volume in
terms of the number of contracts. Table 1 provides the mean for these contracts, and, for
less liquid ones such as the Russell 2000 and Value Line, these means are still high relative
to less liquid stocks, e.g., 455 and 197 contracts per day respectively. The fact that these
contracts are liquid allows us to focus primarily on market microstructure biases related to
the stocks in the underlying index. Section 4 of the paper addresses any potential biases
related to the futures contracts.

4 Empirical Results
In this section, we focus on providing evidence for or against the implications derived from
the models of Section 2. In particular, we investigate (i) the autocorrelation properties of
the spot index and corresponding futures returns, (ii) the relative time-varying properties of
spot index and future returns conditional on recent small and large movements in returns,
and (iii) the relation between these time-varying properties and underlying stock market
volume.

4.1 Autocorrelations
Table 2 presents the evidence for daily autocorrelations of spot indices and their corre-
sponding futures returns across 24 contracts. The most startling evidence is that, for every
contract, the spot index autocorrelation exceeds that of the futures. This cannot be ex-
plained by common sampling error as many of the contracts are barely correlated given
the 15 country cross-section. Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the autocorrelations of the
futures and spot indices, i.e., a graphical representation of these results. On the 45 degree
line, the spot and futures autocorrelations coincide; however, as the graph shows, all the
points lie to the right of this line. Thus, all the spot autocorrelations are higher than their
corresponding futures.
    Moreover, other than the Nikkei 225 contracts (which have marginally negative values),
all of the spot index returns are positively autocorrelated. Some of these indices, such as
the Russell 2000 (small rm US), ValueLine (equal-weighted US), FTSE 250 (medium- rm
UK), TOPIX (all rms Japan), OMX (all rms Sweden) and Australian All-Share index,
have fairly large autocorrelations | .22, .19, .21, .10, .12 and .10, respectively. Interestingly,
these indices also tend to be ones which include large weights on rms which trade relatively

                                               13
infrequently. In contrast, the value-weighted indices with large, liquid, actively-traded stocks,
such as the S&P 500 (largest 500 US rms), FTSE 100 (100 most active U.K. rms), Nikkei
225 (active 225 Japan stocks), and DAX (active German rms), are barely autocorrelated
| .03, .08, -.014 and .02, respectively.
    Note that while the autocorrelations of both the index and futures alone are dicult
to pinpoint due to the size of the standard errors, the autocorrelation di erences should
be very precisely estimated given the high contemporaneous correlation between the index
and futures. In terms of formal statistical tests, for 21 out of 24 contracts we can reject
the hypothesis that the spot index autocorrelation equals that of its futures contract at the
5% level. To the extent that this is one of the main comparative implications of market
microstructure versus behavioral models, this evidence supports the microstructure-based
explanation.6 The evidence is particularly strong as 17 of the di erences are signi cant the
1% level. These levels of signi cance should not be surprising given that the index and
its futures capture the same aggregate information, yet produce in 12 cases autocorrelation
di erences of at least 10% on a daily basis!

4.2 Time-Varying Patterns of Returns
The results in Section 4.1 are suggestive of di erences between the time-varying properties
of spot index and futures returns. While this tends to be inconsistent with behavioral-
based explanations of the data, we showed in Section 2.3 that it is possible to construct
a reasonable scenario in which large di erences can appear. Speci cally, the reason why
behavioral models imply a one-to-one relation between spot and futures returns is that
they are linked via spot-futures arbitrage. If spot-futures arbitrage is not possible due to
transactions costs, then theoretically spot and futures prices might diverge if their markets
are driven by di erent investors. Figure 1 shows that the implication of this transaction-
based model is that, conditional on extreme recent movements, the statistical properties of
spot and futures returns should be similar; for small movements, they can follow any pattern,
including the spot return being positively autocorrelated and its futures return being serially
uncorrelated.
    In order to test this implication directly, consider a piecewise linear regression of the
   6 Of course, futures returns, due to either nontrading or bid-ask bounce, should have negative autocor-
relations, which could partially explain the di erences even without index microstructure biases. Section 4
looks at the extent to which futures biases can explain the result.


                                                    14
futures return on its most recent lag. In particular:
      rF;t+1 = a + b1 rF;t + (b2 , b1 )Max[0; rF;t , a1 ] + (b3 , b2 )Max[0; rF;t , a2 ] + t+1 ;        (8)
where a1 and a2 are the breakpoints of the piecewise regression. These breakpoints are
equivalent to the transactions costs bounds described in Section 2.3. Here, we choose these
points as -1.0% and 1.0%, respectively. Thus, any daily return of plus/minus 1% or greater
in magnitude allows index arbitrage to take place. The coecients b1 , b2 and b3 re ect the
slopes of the piecewise relation. In the context of Figure 1, b1 and b3 are positive while b2 is
zero under the behavioral model. In the market microstructure model, bid-ask bounce aside,
these coecients should be zero.
     Table 3A presents the regression results from equation (8) for each contract across the
15 countries. From the behavioral viewpoint, equation (8) implies, as its null hypothesis, a
series of inequality constraints, b1  0 & b3  0. Because the constraints are inequalities,
these restrictions are very weak. Nevertheless, thirteen of the twenty- ve contracts reject the
behavioral theory at conventional levels using an inequality restrictions-based test statistic
(see Wolak (1987) and Boudoukh, Richardson and Smith (1993) for a description of the
test methodology).7 More important, however, is that, for these cases, all of them give
estimates which are consistent with b1  0 and b3  0, the exact opposite implication of
the behavioral model. This suggests some amount of symmetric behavior at the extremes.
Perhaps the strongest evidence is that across all 24 contracts, b1 > 0 only ve times, though
not signi cantly! Thus, for the circumstances most favorable to spot-futures arbitrage, there
is little evidence of local positive autocorrelation of the futures return.
     Figure 3 provides a graphical presentation of these results for three contracts which con-
tain illiquid stocks, namely the Russell 2000, TOPIX and FTSE 250. The graph represents
a kernel estimation of the mean of rF;t+1, conditional on the value of rF;t. As seen from these
three somewhat independent graphs, the implications of the behavioral model (i.e., Figure 1)
are not borne out. Time-variation of expected futures returns, if any, occur for low current
values of returns. Conditional on high values, the relation looks quite at.8 Of course, the
   7 To understand the nature of how weak inequality restrictions are, consider the test from the perspective
of the microstructure viewpoint, i.e., the null of b1 = 0&b3 = 0 versus the alternative of b1  0&b3  0.
Performing tests of this restriction yields not one rejection in favor of the behavioral theory.
   8 The exception here is the FTSE 250 for current values of rF;t > 1:5%. However, for the post 1994
sample period we have here for this contract, there are hardly any observations. Thus, the results fall into
the so-called Star-Trek region of the data, and are unreliable.


                                                     15
strongest evidence in the graph is that there is not much time-variation in the estimated ex-
pected return on the futures anywhere, which is not a prediction of behavioral-based models.
    One potential point of discussion is that the model described in Figure 1 implies a linear
relation between next period's return and the current period's return. While this is consistent
with almost all the behavioral models described in the literature, it is not necessarily an
appropriate assumption. The more general implication is that, outside the transaction costs
bounds, the spot and futures return take on similar characteristics, linear or nonlinear as
the case may be. In order to address this issue more completely, we provide an analogous
regression to (8) above, namely
 rS;t+1 , rF;t+1 = a + b1 rF;t + (b2 , b1 )Max[0; rF;t , a1 ] + (b3 , b2 )Max[0; rF;t , a2 ] + t+1 : (9)

Under more general versions of the model of Section 2.3, we would expect b1 = b3 = 0, that
is, the spot index and futures return to behave the same under conditions for spot-futures
arbitrage. Table 3B provides results for the regression in (9) across all the countries.
    In contrast to this behavioral-based implication, 21 of the 24 contracts reject the hy-
pothesis, b1 = b3 = 0, in favor of the microstructure alternative, b1  0; b3  0, at the 5%
level. This is especially surprising given that some of these contracts include, for the most
part, actively traded stocks. Almost all the b1 and b3 coecients are positive (i.e., only 4
negative estimates amongst 50), which again implies that the time-variation of the expected
spot index returns is both greater than that of its corresponding futures contract and more
positively autocorrelated. To the extent that the microstructure based theory would imply
that all three coecients (b1 ; b2; b3 ) should be positive, 70 of 75 of them are. Since these
coecients represent relations over di erent (and apparently independent) data ranges and
across 15 somewhat unrelated countries, this evidence, in our opinion, is strong.

4.3 Autocorrelations and Volume
One obvious implication of the nontrading-based model of Section 2.2 is that there should
be some relation between the spot index properties and volume on that index, whereas the
futures should for the most part be unrelated to volume. Of course, behavioral-based models
may also imply some correlation between volume and autocorrelations (e.g., as in Chordia
and Swaminathan (1998)), but it is clearly a necessary result of the nontrading explanation.
   In order to investigate this implication, we collected data from Datastream on overall
stock market volume for each of the 15 countries. While this does not represent volume for

                                                   16
the stocks underlying the index, it should be highly correlated with trading in these stocks
because all the indices we look at are broad-based, market indices. That is, on days in which
stock market volume is low, it seems reasonable to assume that large, aggregate subsets of
this volume will also be relatively low. During the sample periods for each country, there has
been a tendency for volume to increase (partly due to increased equity values and greater
participation in equity markets). The standard approach is to avoid the nonstationarity
issue and look at levels of detrended volume. For the US stock market, Figure 4 graphs the
two volume series, and illustrates the potential di erences between the two series. For the
purposes of estimation, the detrended series looks more useful.
    In order to investigate the e ect of trading volumes on autocorrelations of the spot index
and its futures return, we consider the following nonlinear regressions:

                              0 + [h 1 + 2 (Max(Vol ) , Volt )] irS;t + t+1
                 rS;t+1 =     s     s     s          s       s         s                 (10)
                              0 + 1 + 2 (Max(Vol ) , Volt ) rF;t + t+1 ;
                 rF;t+1 =     f       f   f         s        s            f

where Max(Vols) is the maximum volume of the stock market during the sample period.
Note that these regressions represent fairly logical representations of the relation between
next period's return and current returns and volume. Speci cally, there are two components
to the time-variation of expected returns: (i) the magnitude of last period's return, and (ii)
the level of volume in the market.
    The hypothesis that the trading volume is a factor that in uences autocorrelation di er-
entials can be represented as follows:
 (1) The trading volume reduces the autocorrelation of the spot, but not the futures con-
     tract:
                                              s
                                              2 > 0
                                              f
                                              2 = 0

 (2) We can interpret 1s and 1f as the autocorrelations of the spot index and the futures
     contact returns when the trading volume of the spot is highest. In that case, the
     autocorrelation of the spot as well as the futures should be close to zero:
                                              s
                                              1 = 0
                                              f
                                              1 = 0

                                              17
Some observations are in order. Hypothesis (1) is an obvious implication of index returns
being driven by nontrading-based models, and the most important component of our hy-
potheses. Note that it is possible that 2s = 0, in which case 1s represents the autocorrelation
of the index return in a world in which volume plays no role. With respect to hypothesis
(2), it appears to be redundant given (1). However, we want to be able to test whether
the negative relation is strong enough to bring forth the desired result that the spot index
return autocorrelation becomes zero at the highest level of the trading volume. Finally, an
important hypothesis to test is whether the futures contract's autocorrelation is independent
of trading volume.
    Table 4 provides results for each of the 24 stock indices across the 15 countries. First,
there is a negative relation between the trading volume and the autocorrelation of the spot
index return for most of the countries (i.e., 2s > 0). While the estimators are individually
signi cant at the 5% level for only a few of the indices (e.g., the Russell 2000's estimate
is 0.54 with standard error 0.19), 21 of 24 of them are positive. Moreover, relative to the
futures return coecient on volume (i.e., 2f ), about 70% have values of 2s > 2f . While
only a few of these are individually signi cant at the 5% level (i.e., S&P 500, Russell 2000,
NYSE, FTSE 250, Switzerland, Amsterdam, Hong Kong, and Belgium), only one contract
goes in the direction opposite to that implied by the nontrading-based theory.
    Second, independent of volume, the relation between futures return autocorrelations and
trading volume is very weak. Even though many of the autocorrelation coecients, 2f , are
positive, they tend to be very small in magnitude and are thus both economically and statis-
tically insigni cant. Furthermore, the estimates at high levels of nontrading imply negative
autocorrelation in futures returns, which is consistent with the Table 2 results. Combining
the estimates of 1f and 2f together in equation (10) implies that the autocorrelations of
futures returns are rarely positive irrespective of volume levels. This result is consistent with
the bid-ask bounce e ect which will be looked at in Section 4.5.
    Third, at the highest level of trading, the autocorrelations of the spot and futures return
are for the most part insigni cantly di erent from zero. For example, only 3 contracts, all
of which are based on Japanese stock indices (i.e., Nikkei 225, Nikkei 300, and TOPIX),
violate this hypothesis. However, for each of these cases, the autocorrelations are negative
at high volume, and thus do not contradict the nontrading-based theory per se. In fact, 21
of the 24 indices imply negative autocorrelation of the spot index return during periods of
highest volume. While these autocorrelations are not estimated precisely, it does point out
that adjustments for trading volume lead to changes in the level of autocorrelations. For

                                               18
example, the Russell 2000's autocorrelation changes from Table 2's estimate of 0.22 to -0.09
at highest volume levels in Table 4. The most obvious explanation for the negative values is
misspeci cation of the regression model in (10).
    In order to address this issue, we perform a nonparametric analysis of the e ect of trad-
ing volumes on autocorrelations of the spot and futures return for the Russell 2000 contract.
Speci cally, using multivariate density estimation methods, we look at the expected return
di erential, rS;t+1 , rF;t+1, on detrended market volume and the most recent stock market
innovation, estimated by current futures returns rF;t. For multidimensional estimation prob-
lems like this, it is important to document the area of relevant data. Figure 5 provides a
scatter plot of detrended volume and futures returns, which represents the applicable space.
Any results using observations outside this area should be treated cautiously.
    Figure 6 graphs the relation between futures returns and past returns and volume, i.e.,
the nonparametric alternative to the regression described in equation (10). For low volume
periods, the di erential is positive and particularly steep when past returns are high, and
negative when past returns are low. In other words, low volume periods seem to be an im-
portant factor describing di erences in the statistical properties of spot and futures returns.
Interestingly, for average and heavy-volume days, there appears to be little di erence in their
time-varying properties. As a ner partition of this graph, Figure 7 presents cut-throughs
of the relation between spot-future return di erentials and past market innovations for four
di erent levels of volume within the range of the data. As seen from Figure 7, while there are
positive di erentials for all levels of volume (as consistent with the one-dimensional analysis
of Sections 4.1 and 4.2), the most striking evidence takes place during low volume periods.
To the extent that low volume periods are associated with nontrading, these results provide
evidence supportive of the type of models described in Section 2.2. It is, of course, possible
for researchers to devise a behavioral model that ts these characteristics as well, but they
must do so in the presence of spot-futures arbitrage.

4.4 Volatility Ratios
Section 2 provides implications for the variance ratio between the futures and the underlying
index return. The ratios given in Table 1 do not support the behavioral explanation as
futures return volatility exceeds that of the spot index. In this subsection, we explore these
results more closely by addressing two issues: (I) the e ect of the volatility of interest rates
and dividend yields, and (II) the behavior of the volatility ratios in periods most suited to

                                              19
spot-futures arbitrage.
    With respect to (I), Table 5 provides the ratio of the futures return variance over the
measured spot index return variance, adjusted for the variance (and covariance) of the cost of
carry, (i , d). Not surprisingly, due to the fact that stock volatility is so much greater than
interest rate volatility, the results from Table 1 carry through here. For every single contract,
the variance ratio exceeds 1, and signi cantly so for all but one. This result provides strong
evidence in favor of a nontrading-based explanation.
    With respect to (II), Section 2.4 showed that the behavioralists imply, for extreme lagged
returns, the variance ratio should be closer to one than for small lagged returns. In practice,
due to heteroskedasticity, one would expect variances to increase during the extreme periods,
but that the ratios stay relatively constant. Since extreme values are more suitable for spot-
futures arbitrage, spot and futures volatility should be closer together (at least outside the
transactions cost range). In contrast to the previous results regarding behavioral hypotheses,
Table 5 provides some (albeit weak) support for the theory. Nineteen of the twenty- ve
contracts produce greater variance ratios in normal periods; however, only eight of these are
signi cant at conventional levels. Microstructure-based explanations do not address this issue
per se. However, if extreme moves tend to be associated with high volume environments,
then rational theories would also suggest that the volatility ratio decline here (i.e., due to
the better measurement of the stock index). In any event, the main prediction, namely that
futures volatility exceeds spot volatility, is strongly supported in the data.

4.5 Can Bid-Ask Bounce Explain the Autocorrelation Di erences?
One possible explanation for the di erences between spot index and futures' return autocor-
relations is that the futures contract themselves su er from microstructure biases. That is, a
behavioralist might argue that the true autocorrelation is large and positive, yet the futures'
autocorrelation gets reduced by bid-ask bounce and similar e ects. In fact, it is well known
that bid-ask bias leads to negative serial correlation in returns (see, for example, Roll (1984)
and Blume and Stambaugh (1983)). How large does the bid-ask spread need to be to give
credibility to this explanation?
    Consider a variation of the Blume-Stambaugh (1983) model in which the measured futures
price, F m , is equal to the true price, F , adjusted for the fact that some trades occur at the
o er or asking price, i.e.,
                                         Ftm = Ft (1 + t );

                                               20
where t equals the adjustment factor. In particular, assume that t equals 2s with probability
2 (i.e., the ask price), , 2 with probability 2 (i.e., the bid price), or 0 with probability 1 , p
p                          s                  p
(i.e., a trade within the spread). Here, s represents the size of the bid-ask spread, and can be
shown to be directly linked to the volatility of t . Speci cally, we can show that 2 = p s42 . In
words, the additional variance of the futures price is proportional to the size of the spread and
the probability that trades take place at the quotes. Using the approximation ln(1 + x)  x,
it is possible to show that the implied autocorrelation of futures returns is given by
                                              ,ps2    :                                  (11)
                                         4R2 + 2ps2
                                               F


    Table 6 reports the autocorrelation di erences between the stock index and futures re-
turns. If these di erences were completely due to bid-ask bias in the futures market, then
equation (11) can be used to back out the relevant bid-ask spread. The last two columns
of Table 6 provide estimates of the size of this spread in percentage terms of the futures
price. The two columns represent two di erent values of p, the probability of trading at
the ask or bid, equal to either 0.5 or 1.0. Of course, a value of 1.0 is an upper bound on
the e ect of the bid-ask spread. The implied spreads in general are much larger than those
that occur in practice. To see this, we document actual spreads at the end of the sample
over a week period, and nd that they are approximately one-tenth the magnitude (i.e., see
column (4) of Table 6). Alternatively, using the actual spreads, and the above model, we
report implied autocorrelations, which are all close to zero. Therefore, the di erences in
the autocorrelations across the series is clearly not driven by bid-ask bounce in the futures
market.

5 Concluding Remarks
The simple theoretical results in this paper, coupled with the supporting empirical evi-
dence, lead to several conclusions. First, there are signi cant di erences between the sta-
tistical properties of spot index and corresponding futures returns even though they cover
the same underlying stocks. These di erences can most easily be associated with market
microstructure-based explanations as behavioral models do not seem to capture the charac-
teristics of the data. Second, in the presence of transactions costs and the most favorable
conditions for behavioral models, the empirical results provide very di erent conclusions.
When futures-spot arbitrage is possible, the spot and futures contract exhibit the most dif-
ferent behavior, the opposite implication of a behavioral model. Third, an important factor
                                                   21
describing these di erent properties is the level of volume in the market, which is consistent
with nontrading-based explanations as well as possibly behavioral-based models linked to
volume.
    The unique aspect of this paper has been to di erentiate, rather generally, implications
from two very di erent schools of thought and provide evidence thereon. Our conclusion
is generally not supportive of the behavioral, partial-adjustment models that have become
popular as of late. What then is going on in the market that can describe these large daily
autocorrelations of portfolio returns?
    Previous authors (e.g., Conrad and Kaul (1989) and Mech (1993), among others) have
performed careful empirical analyses of nontrading by taking portfolios that include only
stocks that have traded. Their results, though somewhat diminished, suggest autocorrela-
tions are still positive and large for these portfolios. It cannot be the case that exchange-based
rules, like price continuity on the NYSE, explain these patterns because these results hold
across exchanges and apparently across countries. Whatever the explanation, it must be
endemic to all markets.
    Rational models predict that the price of a security is the discounted value of its future
cash ow. Within this context, how should we view a trade for 100 shares when there is little
or no other trading? Does it make sense to discard a theory based on a single investor buying
a small number of shares at a stale over- or undervalued (relative to market information)
price, or a dealer inappropriately not adjusting quotes for a small purchase or sale? Our
view is that the important issue is how many shares can trade at that price (either through
a large order or numerous small transactions). What would researchers nd if we took
portfolios of stocks that trade meaningfully, and then what would happen if these portfolios
got segmented via size, number of analysts, turnover, et cetera? These are questions which
seem very relevant given the results of this paper.




                                               22
   REFERENCES
    Atchison, M., K. Butler, and R. Simonds, 1987, \Nonsynchronous Security Trading and
Market Index Autocorrelation," Journal of Finance, 42, 533-553.
    Badrinath, S., J. Kale and T. Noe, 1995, \Of Shepherds, Sheep, and the Cross-Autocorrelations
in Equity Returns," Review of Financial Studies 8, 401-430.
    Bessembinder, H., and M. Hertzel, 1993, \Return Autocorrelations around Nontrading
Days," Review of Financial Studies, 6, 155-189.
    Blume, M., and R. Stambaugh, 1983, \Biases in Computed Returns: An Application to
the Size E ect," Journal of Financial Economics, 12, 387-404.
    Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson and T. Smith, 1993, \Is the Ex-Ante Risk Premium Al-
ways Positive?: A New Approach to Testing Conditional Asset Pricing Models," Journal of
Financial Economics 34, pp.387-409.
    Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson and R. Whitelaw, 1994, \A Tale of Three Schools: Insights
on Autocorrelations of Short-Horizon Stock Returns," Review of Financial Studies 7, 539-
573.
    Brennan, M., N. Jegadeesh and B. Swaminathan, 1993, \Investment Analysis and The
Adjustment of Stock Prices to Common Information," Review of Financial Studies 6, 799-
824.
    Chan, K., 1992, \A further analysis of the lead-lag relationship between the cash market
and stock index futures market," Review of Financial Studies 5, 123-152.
    Chordia, T. and B. Swaminathan, 1998, \Trading Volume and Cross-Autocorrelations in
Stock Returns," forthcoming Journal of Finance.
    Cohen, K., S. Maier, R. Schwartz, and D. Whitcomb, 1986, The Microstructure of Secu-
rity Markets, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cli s, NJ.
    Connolly, R., and C. Stivers, 1998, \Conditional Stock Market Return Autocorrelation
and Price Formation: International Evidence from Six Major Equity Markets," working
paper, University of North Carolina.
    Conrad, J., and G. Kaul, 1988, \Time Varying Expected Returns," Journal of Business,
61, 409-425.
    Conrad, J., and G. Kaul, 1989, \Mean Reversion in Short-Horizon Expected Returns,"
Review of Financial Studies, 2, 225-240.
    Conrad, J., and G. Kaul, 1998, \An Anatomy of Trading Strategies," Review of Financial
Studies 11, 489-519.

                                            23
    Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, \A Theory of Overcon dence,
Self-Attribution, and Security Market Under- and Overreactions," forthcoming Journal of
Finance.
    Fisher, L., 1966, \Some New Stock Market Indexes," Journal of Business, 39, 191-225.
    Foster, D. and S. Viswanathan, 1993, \The E ect of Public Information and Competition
on Trading Volume and Price Volatility," Review of Financial Studies 6, 23-56.
    Grinblatt, M. and T. Moskowitz, 1998, \Do Industries Explain Momentum," working
paper, University of Chicago.
    Hawawini, G., 1980, \Intertemporal Cross Dependence in Securities Daily Returns and
the Short-Term Intervailing E ect on Systematic Risk," Journal of Financial and Quantita-
tive Analysis, 15, 139-149.
    Holden, A. and A. Subrahmanyam, 1992, \Long-Lived Private Information and Imperfect
Competition," Journal of Finance 47, 247-270.
    Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, \Returns on Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Market Eciency," Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
    Jones,C. and S. Slezak, 1998, \The Theoretical Implications of Asymmetric Informa-
tion on the Dynamic and Cross-Section Characteristics of Asset Returns," Working paper,
University of North Carolina.
    Llorente, Michaely, R., G. Saar and J. Wang, 1998, \Dynamic Volume-Return Relation
of Individual Stocks," working paper, Cornell University.
    Lo, A., and C. MacKinlay, 1988, \Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks:
Evidence from a Simple Speci cation Test," Review of Financial Studies, 1, 41-66.
    Lo, A., and C. MacKinlay, 1990a, \When are Contrarian Pro ts Due to Stock Market
Overreaction?" Review of Financial Studies, 3, 175-205.
    Lo, A., and C. MacKinlay, 1990b, \An Econometric Analysis of Nonsynchronous Trad-
ing," Journal of Econometrics, 45, 181-211.
    MacKinlay, C. and K. Ramaswamy, 1988, \Index-Futures Arbitrage and the Behavior of
Stock Index Futures Prices," Review of Financial Studies, 1, 137-158.
    Mech, T., 1993, \Portfolio Return Autocorrelation," Journal of Financial Economics 34,
307-344.
    Miller, M., J. Muthuswamy and R. Whaley, 1994, \Mean Reversion of Standard & Poor's
500 Index Basis Changes: Arbitrage-induced or Statistical Illusion?" Journal of Finance 49,
479-414.
    Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, \A Simple, Positive Semi-De nite, Heteroscedasticity

                                            24
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
   Roll, R., 1984, \A Simple Implicit Measure of the E ective Bid-Ask Spread," Journal of
Finance 39, pp. 1127-1139.
   Rouwenhorst, G., 1998, \International Momentum Strategies," Journal of Finance.
   Scholes, M., and J. Williams, 1977, \Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 309-327.
   Sias, R. and L. Starks, 1997, \Return Autocorrelation and Institutional Investors," Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 46, 103-131.
   Stoll, H. and R. Whaley, 1990, \The Dynamics of Stock Index and Stock Index Futures
Returns," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 441-468.
   Wolak, F., 1987, \An Exact Test for Multiple Inequality and Equality Constraints in the
Linear Regression Model," Journal of the American Statistical Association 82, 782-793.




                                            25
</ref_section>
                                  Table 1: Sample Statistics for Indices and Futures Contracts
Reported for each contract are the exchange, country, number of observations, start date, end date, mean and standard deviation of index return
and futures return, open interest and futures trading volume.
                                                                            Returns                                      Open Interest        Trading Volume
                                                                                     Index             Futures
Contract             Exchange        Country      No      Start       End        Mean       Std     Mean       Std      Mean         Std       Mean        Std
S&P 500              CME                 US       4350   06/01/82   02/03/99      0.0559   0.9851    0.0560   1.1911   274693.78   130827.85 62089.07 32102.39
RUSSELL 2000         CME                 US       1558   02/11/93   02/03/99      0.0396   0.7813    0.0396   0.9418     5466.76     4002.12     455.17 705.14
NIKKEI 225           CME                 US       2169   10/10/90   02/03/99     -0.0215   1.4357   -0.0204   1.5385    20324.65     8122.63 1732.23 1905.72
NYSE-STOCK           NYSE                US       4368   05/06/82   02/03/99      0.0495   0.9081    0.0495   1.1799     6740.36     3691.51 6132.52 3975.41
MAXI VALUE LINE      KCBT                US       2791   05/23/88   02/03/99      0.0503   0.6635    0.0512   0.9025     2498.05     2006.71     197.13 303.51
FTSE 100             LIFFE               UK       3848   05/03/84   02/03/99      0.0430   0.9486    0.0432   1.0964    93947.63    67882.48 9041.89 10053.11
FTSE 250             LIFFE               UK       1287   02/25/94   02/03/99      0.0214   0.5607    0.0211   0.6330     5232.38     1872.38       N/A      N/A
TOPIX                TSE               Japan      2716   09/05/88   02/03/99     -0.0241   1.1789   -0.0241   1.3280    61164.59    41705.49 9940.63 6469.21
NIKKEI 225           OSX               Japan      2716   09/05/88   02/03/99     -0.0242   1.4150   -0.0244   1.4166    152646.3    75833.12 37204.19 23681.51
NIKKEI 300           OSX               Japan      1296   02/14/94   02/03/99     -0.0214   1.1622   -0.0208   1.3256   120634.89    29613.88 7940.81 12508.13
DAX                  EUREX           Germany      1981   07/01/91   02/03/99      0.0580   1.1717    0.0576   1.2450   175100.14    90140.25 18856.4 11907.66
SWISS MARKET         EUREX          Switzerland   2147   11/09/90   02/03/99      0.0760   1.0570    0.0757   1.0970    23893.42    28975.27 6623.03 8699.17
AEX                  AMSTERDAM      Netherlands   2681   10/24/88   02/03/99      0.0577   1.0526    0.0579   1.1169    21538.75    14465.87 4751.23 5574.94
BELFOX-20            BELFOX           Belgium     1372   10/29/93   02/03/99      0.0665   0.8718    0.0667   0.9214     6616.48     4061.94 1429.17 1933.21
HANG SENG            HKFE           Hong Kong     2881   01/18/88   02/03/99      0.0462   1.7099    0.0459   1.9631    31604.23    24939.12 11800.48 12777.53
IBEX 35 PLUS         MEFF              Spain      1771   04/20/92   02/03/99      0.0729   1.2625    0.0725   1.4750    36196.55    21435.12 14519.69 15056.57
MIB 30               MIF                Italy     1091   11/28/94   02/03/99      0.0792   1.5513    0.0776   1.6605    19685.53     9234.24 14008.73 9486.82
OMX-STOCK            OMX              Sweden      2370   01/02/90   02/03/99      0.0530   1.3241    0.0524   1.5853    59106.35    68598.88       N/A      N/A
ATX                  OTOT             Austria     1692   08/07/92   02/03/99      0.0248   1.1096    0.0258   1.2468    30523.44    15544.54 1596.17 1489.93
NIKKEI 225           SIMEX           Singapore    3148   01/06/87   02/01/99     -0.0084   1.4153   -0.0088   1.6491    13222.81    11834.87 152646.30 75833.12
NIKKEI 300           SIMEX           Singapore    1042   02/03/95   02/03/99     -0.0196   1.2327   -0.0194   1.3230    14816.72     8380.19       N/A      N/A
TORONTO 35           TFE              Canada      2071   02/25/91   02/03/99      0.0328   0.8464    0.0324   1.0129    14508.86      7204.8     645.20 997.97
AUSTRALIA            SFE             Australia    3937   01/03/84   02/03/99      0.0334   0.9983    0.0331   1.4475    23745.64    34674.36 1345984.04 868007.19
CAC 40               MATIF             France     2698   01/03/88   02/03/99      0.0401   1.1692    0.0399   1.2503    47530.65    62667.04 4910.75 7712.68
                                                                            26
                                  Table 2: Daily Autocorrelations of Index and Futures Returns
Reported are daily autocorrelations of index and futures returns. The 12 statistic tests Index = F uture. Standard errors are serial correlation
and heteroskedasticity-adjusted using Newey and West (1987).
              Contract                  Exchange             Index          s.e.     Future        s.e.         12        p-value
              S&P 500                   CME                   0.0267      0.0269      -0.0386      0.0278       26.5625       0.0000
              RUSSELL 2000              CME                   0.2155      0.0457       0.0668      0.0399       45.5922       0.0000
              NIKKEI 225                CME                  -0.0346      0.0261      -0.0910      0.0264        6.6635       0.0098
              NYSE-STOCK                NYSE                  0.0589      0.0282      -0.0582      0.0288       45.3751       0.0000
              MAX VALUE LINE            KCBT                  0.1877      0.0309      -0.0270      0.0357       61.6370       0.0000
              FTSE 100                  LIFFE                 0.0836      0.0312       0.0262      0.0284       12.3201       0.0004
              FTSE 250                  LIFFE                 0.2082      0.0663       0.1201      0.0563        4.6523       0.0310
              TOPIX                     TSE                   0.0985      0.0260      -0.0114      0.0260       44.6339       0.0000
              NIKKEI 225                OSX                  -0.0141      0.0242      -0.0275      0.0246        1.1324       0.2873
              NIKKEI 300                OSX                   0.0132      0.0347      -0.0760      0.0322       33.8410       0.0000
              DAX                       EUREX                 0.0249      0.0277       0.0010      0.0297        4.2482       0.0393
              SWISS MARKET              EUREX                 0.0539      0.0299       0.0298      0.0288        4.9607       0.0259
              AEX                       AMSTERDAM             0.0356      0.0254       0.0034      0.0278        6.5739       0.0103
              BELFOX-20                 BELFOX                0.1510      0.0390       0.1008      0.0355        4.0746       0.0435
              HANG SENG                 HKFE                  0.0124      0.0429      -0.0529      0.0450       21.8761       0.0000
              IBEX 35 PLUS              MEFF                  0.1270      0.0294       0.0076      0.0311       37.6380       0.0000
              MIB 30                    MIF                   0.0108      0.0369      -0.0379      0.0375       10.0323       0.0015
              OMX-STOCK                 OMX                   0.1179      0.0262      -0.0357      0.0370       18.0804       0.0000
              ATX                       OTOT                  0.0897      0.0374      -0.0102      0.0395       67.2461       0.0000
              NIKKEI 225                SIMEX                -0.0163      0.0263      -0.0433      0.0299        0.6547       0.4184
              NIKKEI 300                SIMEX                 0.0091      0.0379      -0.0435      0.0369       10.7257       0.0011
              TORONTO 35                TFE                   0.0841      0.0311      -0.0799      0.0702        5.2843       0.0215
              AUSTRALIA                 SFE                   0.1025      0.0290      -0.0744      0.0385       23.5963       0.0000
              CAC 40                    MATF                  0.0474      0.0217       0.0129      0.0222       12.4701       0.0004
                                                                        27
                   Table 3A: Daily Autocorrelations of Futures Returns: Piecewise Regression Analysis
Reported are daily autocorrelations of futures returns. Extreme movements in lagged futures returns are based on the cut-o points -1.0% and
1.0%. The regression is
                                rtF+1 = a + b1 rtF + (b2 , b1 ) Max[0; rtF , a1 ] + (b3 , b2 ) Max[0; rtF , a2 ] + tF+1 ;
where a1 = ,0:01 and a2 = 0:01. The 2 2 statistic tests H0 : b1  0 & b3  0 vs Ha : b1 6 0 or b3 6 0. Standard errors are serial correlation
and heteroskedasticity-adjusted using Newey and West (1987).
       Contract                Exchange              b1          s.e.        b2        s.e.       b3          s.e.      22      p-value
       S&P 500                 CME                 -0.1398    0.0687      0.0136     0.0358      0.0316    0.0876      4.1394      0.0540
       RUSSELL 2000            CME                 -0.1910    0.1209      0.2241     0.0517     -0.0793    0.1855      3.0496      0.0931
       NIKKEI 225              CME                 -0.1901    0.0810     -0.0931     0.0524      0.0129    0.0710      5.5107      0.0255
       NYSE-STOCK              NYSE                -0.1435    0.0730      0.0005     0.0334     -0.0320    0.0774      3.8699      0.0626
       MAX VALUE LINE          KCBT                -0.3946    0.1107      0.1233     0.0421     -0.0106    0.0804     12.7142      0.0006
       FTSE 100                LIFFE                0.0651    0.1253      0.0552     0.0349     -0.1109    0.1344      0.6804      0.3871
       FTSE 250                LIFFE               -0.2898    0.2225      0.3097     0.0594     -0.4351    0.2919      3.3905      0.0800
       TOPIX                   TSE                 -0.1021    0.0843      0.0211     0.0429      0.0153    0.0807      1.4645      0.2332
       NIKKEI 225              OSX                 -0.0556    0.0799     -0.0504     0.0468      0.0350    0.0740      0.4832      0.4402
       NIKKEI 300              OSX                 -0.2271    0.1076      0.0129     0.0600     -0.0994    0.1061      6.0696      0.0184
       DAX                     EUREX                0.0071    0.1330      0.0211     0.0478     -0.0484    0.0877      0.3270      0.5123
       SWISS MARKET            EUREX                0.0298    0.1401      0.0891     0.0470     -0.1158    0.0799      2.1042      0.1591
       AEX                     AMSTERDAM           -0.0921    0.0936      0.1053     0.0374     -0.1173    0.0875      2.5778      0.1238
       BELFOX-20               BELFOX               0.2066    0.1667      0.1107     0.0435     -0.0411    0.0972      0.1789      0.5600
       HANG SENG               HKFE                -0.1892    0.0932      0.2104     0.0792     -0.1329    0.0827      4.3282      0.0517
       IBEX 35 PLUS            MEFF                 0.0207    0.0873      0.1000     0.0557     -0.1616    0.1065      2.2996      0.1432
       MIB 30                  MIF                  0.0930    0.1213      0.0473     0.0790     -0.2656    0.0729     13.2769      0.0005
       OMX-STOCK               OMX                 -0.2223    0.0766      0.2455     0.0517     -0.2149    0.1334     13.5719      0.0004
       ATX                     OTOT                -0.2811    0.1118      0.1996     0.0608     -0.1043    0.0932      6.3696      0.0172
       NIKKEI 225              SIMEX               -0.0693    0.0929      0.0638     0.0489     -0.1303    0.0805      4.5310      0.0405
       NIKKEI 300              SIMEX               -0.2587    0.1209      0.0602     0.0690     -0.0454    0.1133      5.5742      0.0235
       TORONTO 35              TFE                 -0.2504    0.0888      0.2113     0.0523     -0.4903    0.1806     24.1307      0.0000
       AUSTRALIA               SFE                 -0.1290    0.0557      0.0433     0.0517     -0.1726    0.1775      5.6866      0.0238
       CAC 40                  MATF                -0.0049    0.0886      0.0452     0.0421     -0.0372    0.0703      0.2809      0.5121
                                                                        28
           Table 3B: Daily Autocorrelations of Spot-Futures Return Spread: Piecewise Regression Analysis
Reported are daily autocorrelations of the spot-futures return spread. Extreme movements in lagged futures returns are based on the cut-o
points -1.0% and 1.0%. The regression is
                                                                                                                        S ,F
                            rtS+1 , rtF+1 = a + b1 rtF + (b2 , b1 ) Max[0; rtF , a1 ] + (b3 , b2 ) Max[0; rtF , a2 ] + t+1 ;
where a1 = ,0:01 and a2 = 0:01. The 2 2 statistic tests H0 : b1 = b3 = 0 vs Ha : b1  0 & b3  0. Standard errors are serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity-adjusted using Newey and West (1987).
       Contract                Exchange             b1          s.e.        b2        s.e.      b3          s.e.     22       p-value
       S&P 500                 CME                0.0602     0.0339      0.1288    0.0119     -0.0105    0.0472      5.5935     0.0268
       RUSSELL 2000            CME                0.1666     0.0332      0.1339    0.0183      0.1363    0.0548     28.0097     0.0000
       NIKKEI 225              CME                0.3706     0.0669      0.2150    0.0332      0.2163    0.0445     48.8751     0.0000
       NYSE-STOCK              NYSE               0.0988     0.0419      0.1727    0.0147      0.0722    0.0657      5.7848     0.0244
       MAX VALUE LINE          KCBT               0.3470     0.0873      0.1323    0.0222      0.0990    0.0555     19.4654     0.0000
       FTSE 100                LIFFE              0.1654     0.0291      0.0516    0.0124      0.0790    0.0359     41.0167     0.0000
       FTSE 250                LIFFE             -0.0462     0.0420      0.0164    0.0275      0.4978    0.2388      7.5059     0.0097
       TOPIX                   TSE                0.1204     0.0391      0.1818    0.0170      0.0257    0.0286      9.4947     0.0034
       NIKKEI 225              OSX                0.0186     0.0271      0.0735    0.0204      0.0004    0.0374      0.4875     0.4325
       NIKKEI 300              OSX                0.0588     0.0400      0.1373    0.0204      0.0449    0.0357      3.8178     0.0623
       DAX                     EUREX              0.1035     0.0362      0.0025    0.0149      0.0381    0.0170     13.0757     0.0005
       SWISS MARKET            EUREX              0.0192     0.0198      0.0708    0.0113      0.0325    0.0164      4.6248     0.0409
       AEX                     AMSTERDAM          0.0114     0.0282      0.0485    0.0114      0.0350    0.0172      4.2490     0.0498
       BELFOX-20               BELFOX            -0.0665     0.0621      0.0956    0.0202      0.0009    0.0405      0.0341     0.6553
       HANG SENG               HKFE               0.0816     0.0329      0.1525    0.0292      0.0866    0.0332      8.7237     0.0053
       IBEX 35 PLUS            MEFF               0.1110     0.0271      0.1388    0.0267      0.2095    0.0681     24.9556     0.0000
       MIB 30                  MIF                0.0376     0.0247      0.0967    0.0255      0.0737    0.0286      8.1299     0.0066
       OMX-STOCK               OMX                0.1972     0.0610     -0.0023    0.0298      0.2689    0.0980     20.1802     0.0000
       ATX                     OTOT               0.1320     0.0229      0.0892    0.0167      0.1209    0.0257     53.1407     0.0000
       NIKKEI 225              SIMEX             -0.0455     0.1398      0.1008    0.0473      0.0924    0.0199     22.8572     0.0000
       NIKKEI 300              SIMEX              0.0375     0.0405      0.0901    0.0224      0.0486    0.0485      1.9027     0.1803
       TORONTO 35              TFE                0.1020     0.0666      0.0509    0.0403      0.4369    0.1803     11.5582     0.0010
       AUSTRALIA               SFE                0.6983     0.1019      0.1796    0.0557      0.4143    0.1250     52.1736     0.0000
       CAC 40                  MATF               0.0046     0.0237      0.0711    0.0122      0.0073    0.0133      0.3108     0.4951
                                                                       29
                                           Table 4: Daily Autocorrelations and Trading Volume
Reported are the regression coecients describing the relationship between the daily autocorrelations of spot and futures returns and the trading volume of
the lagged spot index. The regressions are
                                                                      h            n                    oi
                                                                          1 + 2 Max(Vol ) , Volt rt + t+1
                                                   rtS+1 =      S         S    S                S   S        S       S
                                                                0+
                                                                      h         n                 oi
                                                                          1 + 2 Max(Vol ) , Volt rt + t+1
                                                   rtF+1 =      F         F   F        S        S    F  F
                                                                0 +
The 22 statistic tests 1S = 1F = 0, and the z , value statistic tests 2S , 2F > 0. Standard errors are serial correlation and heteroskedasticity-adjusted using
Newey and West (1987).
  Contract               Exchange              S
                                               1         s.e.
                                                                      F
                                                                      1            s.e.
                                                                                            S
                                                                                            2       s.e.
                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                 2       s.e.   22   p-value   z-value   p-value
  S&P 500                CME                -0.0912   0.1038    -0.0541       0.0839 0.0791 0.0553 0.0122 0.0464 0.9858 0.6108                   2.7059   0.0034
  RUSSELL 2000           CME                -0.0909   0.1374    -0.0649       0.1255 0.5395 0.1894 0.2231 0.1751 0.4411 0.8021                   2.6527   0.0040
  NIKKEI 225             CME                -0.0767   0.1469    -0.0420       0.1891 0.0092 0.0261 -0.0070 0.0339 0.2726 0.8726                  0.4862   0.3134
  NYSE-STOCK             NYSE               -0.0646   0.1078    -0.0447       0.0825 0.0831 0.0570 -0.0100 0.0449 0.3589 0.8357                  3.0447   0.0012
  MAX VALUE LINE         KCBT               -0.0368   0.1351    -0.1708       0.1436 0.2412 0.1221 0.1543 0.1269 1.6147 0.4460                   0.7341   0.2315
  FTSE 100               LIFFE              -0.0385   0.1890    -0.0300       0.1502 0.0868 0.1249 0.0345 0.1016 0.0421 0.9792                   1.0850   0.1390
  FTSE 250               LIFFE               0.0794   0.2135     0.1037       0.1722 0.2252 0.2464 0.0363 0.2029 0.7737 0.6792                   1.9764   0.0241
  TOPIX                  TSE                 0.0603   0.0813    -0.1411       0.0756 0.0144 0.0231 0.0385 0.0197 10.4209 0.0055                 -1.1928   0.8835
  NIKKEI 225             OSX                -0.0812   0.0773    -0.1120       0.0829 0.0213 0.0214 0.0248 0.0227 1.8738 0.3918                  -0.3197   0.6254
  NIKKEI 300             OSX                -0.1241   0.1263    -0.2255       0.1316 0.1162 0.0865 0.1138 0.0897 5.4123 0.0668                   0.0650   0.4741
  DAX                    EUREX              -0.1711   0.2144    -0.3306       0.1905 0.0733 0.0787 0.1246 0.0688 5.9837 0.0502                  -1.4791   0.9304
  SWISS MARKET           EUREX              -0.0363   0.0878     0.0325       0.0662 0.0546 0.0436 0.0004 0.0312 2.7580 0.2518                   2.2095   0.0136
  AEX                    AMSTERDAM           0.1622   0.0853    -0.0030       0.1167 -0.0268 0.0141 0.0014 0.0207 14.4554 0.0007                -2.3730   0.9912
  BELFOX-20              BELFOX             -0.1362   0.2184     0.0990       0.1569 0.1410 0.1021 -0.0009 0.0730 2.6858 0.2611                  1.8761   0.0303
  HANG SENG              HKFE               -0.2912   0.1232    -0.2384       0.1472 0.1926 0.0609 0.1192 0.0708 12.2509 0.0022                  3.5046   0.0002
  IBEX 35 PLUS           MEFF                0.0822   0.1563     0.0687       0.1302 0.0226 0.0665 -0.0241 0.0556 0.3068 0.8578                  1.1286   0.1295
  MIB 30                 MIF                -0.1473   0.1332    -0.2030       0.1246 0.1538 0.1052 0.1551 0.0994 4.3753 0.1122                  -0.0391   0.5156
  OMX-STOCK              OMX                 0.0610   0.2270    -0.2349       0.2342 0.0154 0.0584 0.0538 0.0619 2.2468 0.3252                  -0.6963   0.7569
  ATX                    OTOT               -0.3985   0.2680    -0.3835       0.2846 0.1840 0.0907 0.1376 0.0939 2.2953 0.3174                   1.6024   0.0545
  NIKKEI 225             SIMEX              -0.0816   0.0772    -0.2536       0.1015 0.0213 0.0214 0.0545 0.0244 6.4681 0.0394                  -1.5575   0.9403
  NIKKEI 300             SIMEX              -0.1217   0.1404    -0.1154       0.1451 0.1177 0.0977 0.0487 0.1072 0.7569 0.6849                   1.0256   0.1525
  TORONTO 35             TFE                -0.0789   0.0753    -0.3695       0.2108 0.2183 0.0798 0.3976 0.2261 3.5942 0.1658                  -0.8296   0.7966
  AUSTRALIA              SFE                -0.2421   0.0912    -0.6325       0.2734 0.1391 0.0348 0.1978 0.0925 7.6987 0.0213                  -0.7807   0.7825
  CAC 40                 MATF               -0.1311   0.0953    -0.1198       0.1030 0.0685 0.0341 0.0501 0.0378 1.9053 0.3857                   0.9663   0.1670
                                                                                       30
                                                                 Table 5: Volatility Ratios
                                                                                ,                                                             
Reported are volatility ratios of the futures and spot returns.  is 2 (RF )=2 RS + 4(i , d) . 4(i) is de ned as ln(1 + ita+1 ) , ln(1 + ita ) =6, i.e., the change
in continuously compounded 2-month interest rates. 4(d) is similarly computed. n and e stand for the volatility ratios for the normal range and extreme
range of Mt , respectively. Speci cally, extreme movements in lagged futures returns are based on the cut-o points -1.0% and 1.0%. The regressions are
                                      rtS+1 = nS (1 , Ie ) + eS Ie + tS+1       rtF+1 = nF (1 , Ie ) + eF Ie + tF+1
                                      tS+1 2 = nS 2 (1 , Ie ) + eS 2 Ie + "tS+1 tF+1 2 = n nS 2 (1 , Ie ) + e eS 2 Ie + "tF+1
where Ie = 0 if ,0:01  rtF+1  0:01; otherwise Ie = 1. The z-value statistic tests n , e > 0. Standard errors are serial correlation and heteroskedasticity-
adjusted using Newey and West (1987).
     Contract                    Exchange                             s.e.           n            s.e.        e           s.e.        z-value        p-value
     S&P 500                     CME                    1.4488       0.1231         1.2764      0.0208        1.6581       0.2048        -1.8529        0.9681
     RUSSELL 2000                CME                    1.4456       0.0530         1.5522      0.0557        1.3154       0.0869         2.5419        0.0055
     NIKKEI 225                  CME                    1.1450       0.0430         1.2572      0.0721        1.0586       0.0550         2.1472        0.0159
     NYSE-STOCK                  NYSE                   1.6714       0.1171         1.5368      0.0376        1.8408       0.2123        -1.3907        0.9178
     MAX VALUE LINE              KCBT                   1.8343       0.0980         1.9619      0.0986        1.5944       0.1269         3.0624        0.0011
     FTSE 100                    LIFFE                  1.3237       0.0356         1.4133      0.0529        1.2004       0.0850         1.7271        0.0421
     FTSE 250                    LIFFE                  1.2570       0.0807         1.2663      0.0777        1.2350       0.1540         0.2104        0.4167
     TOPIX                       TSE                    1.2660       0.0391         1.3805      0.0555        1.1646       0.0704         2.0736        0.0191
     NIKKEI 225                  OSX                    1.0002       0.0236         1.0539      0.0258        0.9580       0.0361         2.1363        0.0163
     NIKKEI 300                  OSX                    1.2975       0.0575         1.3466      0.0983        1.2378       0.0506         0.9608        0.1683
     DAX                         EUREX                  1.1296       0.0337         1.1595      0.0415        1.0891       0.0338         1.7010        0.0445
     SWISS MARKET                EUREX                  1.0731       0.0209         1.0925      0.0190        1.0477       0.0378         1.0930        0.1372
     AEX                         AMSTERDAM              1.1189       0.0251         1.1337      0.0267        1.1004       0.0433         0.6728        0.2505
     BELFOX-20                   BELFOX                 1.1133       0.0430         1.1357      0.0557        1.0644       0.0464         1.1090        0.1337
     HANG SENG                   HKFE                   1.3138       0.0396         1.3422      0.0333        1.2956       0.0625         0.6587        0.2550
     IBEX 35 PLUS                MEFF                   1.3639       0.0495         1.4767      0.0698        1.2508       0.0533         2.8952        0.0019
     MIB 30                      MIF                    1.1397       0.0294         1.1750      0.0418        1.1065       0.0365         1.3303        0.0917
     OMX-STOCK                   OMX                    1.4433       0.0875         1.3577      0.0656        1.5153       0.1497        -0.9774        0.8358
     ATX                         OTOT                   1.2588       0.0250         1.2780      0.0339        1.2342       0.0410         0.7972        0.2127
     NIKKEI 225                  SIMEX                  1.1303       0.0499         1.0986      0.0408        1.1613       0.0883        -0.6478        0.7414
     NIKKEI 300                  SIMEX                  1.1483       0.0338         1.1595      0.0514        1.1378       0.0418         0.3325        0.3697
     TORONTO 35                  TFE                    1.4338       0.2347         1.1669      0.0620        1.9188       0.6497        -1.1478        0.8745
     AUSTRALIA                   SFE                    2.0811       0.3024         2.4615      0.1780        1.8776       0.4293         1.3342        0.0911
     CAC 40                      MATF                   1.1442       0.0184         1.1367      0.0253        1.1541       0.0232        -0.5358        0.7039
                                                                                 31
                                 Table 6: Futures Return Autocorrelations and the Bid-Ask Spread
Table 6 reports the di erence between autocorrelations of the spot index and futures return for each contract, and the actual estimated bid-ask spread of each
futures contract. Using a Blume-Stambaugh (1993) bid-ask model, the table provides (I) implied autocorrelation di erences based on actual spreads, and (II)
the implied spread necessary to explain the actual autocorrelation di erences. Low probability (i.e., 50%) and high probability (i.e., 100%) states refer to the
probability that the trades take place at the quotes rather than within the quoted spreads.
                                                                                         Implied AC                    Implied Spread
                  Contract            AC Di .          Vol.        Spread          low prob.      high prob.       low prob.       high prob.
                  S&P 500              0.0653         1.1911         0.037          0.0001          0.0002           0.86             0.61
                  Russell 200          0.1487         0.9418         0.150          0.0032          0.0063           1.03             0.73
                  Nikkei 225           0.0564         1.5385         0.060          0.0002          0.0004           1.03             0.73
                  NYSE                 0.1171         1.1799         0.040          0.0001          0.0003           1.14             0.81
                  Value Line           0.2147         0.9025         0.100          0.0015          0.0031           1.18             0.84
                  FTSE 100             0.0574         1.0964         0.150          0.0023          0.0047           0.74             0.53
                  FTSE 250             0.0881         0.6330          NA             NA              NA              0.53             0.38
                  TOPIX                0.1099         1.3280         0.038          0.0001          0.0002           1.25             0.88
                  Nikkei 225           0.0134         1.4166         0.059          0.0002          0.0004           0.46             0.33
                  Nikkei 300           0.0892         1.3256         0.500          0.0178          0.0356           1.12             0.79
                  DAX                  0.0239         1.2450         0.060          0.0003          0.0006           0.54             0.38
                  Swiss                0.0241         1.0970         0.014          0.0000          0.0000           0.48             0.34
                  AEX                  0.0322         1.1164         0.089          0.0008          0.0016           0.57             0.40
                  BELFOX 20            0.0502         0.9214         0.217          0.0069          0.0139           0.58             0.41
                  Hang Seng            0.0653         1.9631         0.037          0.0000          0.0001           1.42             1.00
                  IBEX 35              0.1194         1.4750         0.070          0.0003          0.0006           1.44             1.02
                  MIB 30               0.0487         1.6605         0.068          0.0002          0.0004           1.04             0.73
                  OMX                  0.1536         1.5853         0.032          0.0001          0.0001           1.76             1.24
                  ATX                  0.0999         1.2468         0.308          0.0076          0.0153           1.11             0.79
                  Nikkei 225           0.0270         1.6491         0.060          0.0002          0.0003           0.77             0.54
                  Nikkei 300           0.0526         1.3230         0.375          0.0100          0.0201           0.86             0.61
                  Toronto 35           0.1640         1.0129         0.127          0.0020          0.0039           1.16             0.82
                  Australia            0.1769         1.4475         0.032          0.0001          0.0001           1.72             1.22
                  CAC 40               0.0345         1.2503          NA             NA              NA              0.66             0.46
                                                                              32
         RtF+1




                                                                  The Adjustment Model
                                                                       
                                                                   
                                                          
     S
+E [4(i , d)]                                       
                                                                 The Nontrading Model
                         
                    
                  slope=
                    (1 , w)   P




                                    ML              MH                       Mt
                                  =, ,
                                     2 +i
                                    (1 w ) p
                                                = (12,+w)
                                                          i
                                                              p




Figure 1: The theoretical relation between the futures return (RtF+1 ) and the lagged market inno-
vation (Mt ) in the lagged adjustment model with transaction costs (solid line) and the nontrading
model (dashed line).




                                               33
Figure 2: Autocorrelations of futures and spot returns for 24 indices. The solid line is the 45 degree
line.




                                                 34
Figure 3: Nonparametric kernel estimates of the relation between the lagged return (rtF ) and the
return (rtF+1 ) on three futures contracts: the Russell 2000, FTSE 250, and TOPIX.




                                               35
Figure 4: Trading volume in the U.S. spot market (ln (1 + voltS )) and detrended trading volume.




                                              36
Figure 5: Scatter plot of detrended trading volume in the U.S. spot market and the return on the
Russell 2000.




                                              37
Figure 6: Three dimensional plot of the kernel estimate of the relation between the spot-futures
return spread, the lagged return on the futures and detrended trading volume for the Russell 2000.



                                               38
Figure 7: Two-dimensional cut-through of the relation between the lagged futures return (rtF ) and
the current spot-futures spread (rtS+1 , rtF+1 ) of the Russell 2000 at di erent values of the lagged
log-volume (ln (1 + voltS )).




                                                 39
