                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        ON MUTUAL FUND
                                      INVESTMENT STYLES

                                           Louis K.C. Chan
                                            Hsiu-Lang Chen
                                           Josef Lakonishok


                                         Working Paper 7215
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7215

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1999




This paper has been presented at the American Finance Association 1999 meetings and the University of
Rochester. We thank Ray Ball, Eugene Fama, Wayne Ferson, Jason Karceski, Mark Laplante, Scott Ritter,
and Jerry Warner for comments, and Martin Gruber, the discussant. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Louis K.C. Chan, Hsiu-Lang Chen, and Josef Lakonishok. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
On Mutual Fund Investment Styles
Louis K.C. Chan, Hsiu-Lang Chen, and Josef Lakonishok
NBER Working Paper No. 7215
July 1999
JEL No. G11, G23

                                           ABSTRACT

       We provide an exploratory investigation of mutual funds’ investment styles. Funds’ styles
tend to cluster around a broad market benchmark. When funds deviate from the benchmark they are
more likely to favor growth stocks with good past performance. There is some consistency in styles,
although funds with poor past performance are more likely to change styles. Some evidence suggests
that growth funds have better style-adjusted performance than value funds. The results are not
sensitive to style identification procedure, but an approach based on fund portfolio characteristics
performs better in predicting future fund returns.


Louis K.C. Chan                                      Hsiu Lang Chen
Department of Finance                                Department of Finance
College of Commerce and                              College of Commerce and
     Business Administration                             Business Administration
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign              University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street                              1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 62820                                  Champaign, IL 62820
l-chan2@uiuc.edu

Josef Lakonishok
Department of Finance
College of Commerce and
    Business Administration
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 62820
and NBER
lakonish@ux1.cso.uiuc.edu
     Many crucial investment decisions rest on identifying and selecting portfolio managers who are
 expected to deliver superior performance. Professional investment managers, however, follow a vari-
 ety of approaches. Some rely solely on quantitative models. Others are more qualitatively-oriented
 and consider information from sources such as firm managers, press reports and security analysts'
 recommendations. They adopt different criteria for stock selection — identifying underpriced se-
 curities, seeking growth potential, or following past price trends, to use a handful of examples.
 The bewildering variety of approaches complicates the already difficult problem of evaluating the
 performance of investment managers.
    One segment of the institutional investment community, namely, pension funds, has responded

to the proliferation of investment approaches by paying more attention to a manager's investment
style. The focus on style stems from several motivations. Taking a manager's style into account
helps in performance evaluation by giving a clearer picture about the manager's skill. For example,
a manager who invests in small stocks should not necessarily deserve all the credit if the portfolio
did well in a particular period; rather, small stocks in general may have done better than the market
benchmark. A second stimulus arises from plan sponsors' desires to control the risk of the overall
portfolio. A plan sponsor might select a few active managers who are expected to achieve superior
performance, but this may be scant comfort if they all follow similar styles. In this case they would
tend to select similar stocks, resulting in an overall portfolio that is highly undiversified relative
to a broad-based benchmark. By picking managers with different styles, a sponsor can avoid large
deviations in performance away from a general index.
  The focus on style has gradually carried over into another group of institutional investors,
mutual funds. Investor interest in mutual funds has exploded in recent years. At the end of
1990, fund net assets stood at 246 billion dollars but soared to 1.3 trillion dollars by 1995 and 2.4
trillion dollars by 1997. In part, the growth has been fueled by the increase in defined contribution
or 401(k) pension assets. Administrators of such plans have a fiduciary responsibility to provide
an appropriate variety of asset classes to participants. As a result, many administrators screen


                                                 1
  funds and present to employees a menu of funds representing different styles. More generally,
 individual investors are becoming more educated and sophisticated about allocating their assets
 across mutual funds with different objectives. To a growing extent, therefore, fund managers and
 fund investors alike recognize the importance of differentiating funds in terms of their investment
 styles. For example one leading vendor of information on mutual funds, Morningstar, classifies
 funds by investment style in terms of two dimensions: market capitalization and value-growth
 orientation. Consulting firms and software vendors are also providing investors with the tools to
 identify investment style.'
     Academic research has generally lagged behind investors' interest in fund styles. To help cor-
 rect the imbalance, this paper provides an exploratory investigation of the investment styles of
 mutual funds. In doing so we hope to improve our understanding of the behaviorof this large and
 growing group of investors. Specifically, we begin by documenting the characteristics of fund port-
 folios. When placed alongside results on the pension fund industry (see, for example, Lakonishok,
 Shleifer and Vishny (1997)), our findings help uncover reasons why so few institutional investors
 demonstrate consistently superior performance. We also provide evidence on consistency in fund
styles over time, and the forces that may drive managers to change styles. In addition to being an
important practical issue to fund investors, shifts in style may reflect situations where managers'
behavior are influenced by considerations other than the maximization of portfolio risk-adjusted
performance. Although the issue of fund performance is not our main concern, our analysis also
lets us check whether differences in style are associated with differences in performance. Finally,
this paper provides a comparative evaluation of the performance of different methodologies for style
identification.

    In studying the distribution of fund styles we intend to provide some clues to resolve an apparent
paradox in fund performance. Previous academic research on mutual funds has extensively studied
their investment performance. Important contributions have been made by, among others, Jensen
   1Hemmerick (1998), for example, reports on software provided over the Internet, based on work by William Sharpe,
to analyze fund style.


                                                        2
 (1968), Ippolito (1989), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), and Malkiel (1995). Other studies
 examine whether there is persistence in performance (Grinblatt and Titman (1992), Hendricks,
 Patel and Zeckhauser (1993), Brown and Goetzmann (1995), Elton, Gruber and Blake (1996)). In
 general the findings do not seem to indicate that funds as a group out-perform passive benchmarks.
 This evidence is even more striking when juxtaposed against the voluminous research documenting
 an assortment of return anomalies. For example, a portfolio of "value" stocks (with high ratios
 of book-to-market value of equity) generated on paper returns that have in the past averaged five
 percent per year in excess of the S&P 500 index. The puzzle then is why there is such a scarcity of
funds with consistently superior performance.
     One place to look for possible explanations is in the pension fund industry. A growing area of
research indicates that institutional investors' behavior may be colored by considerations beyond
the maximization of portfolio return or diversification. In the case of defined-benefit pension plans,

for instance, Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1992) point out that many parties influence the
process of investing pension assets, including corporate managers, treasurers, external consultants
and money managers. Given the multiplicity of such interests, an agency problem arises. One result
is that external investment managers are evaluated not only in terms ofinvestment performance, but
also along dimensions such as prudence, which in practice is influenced by what other managers are
doing. Accordingly, a manager's holdings, as well as the return on the portfolio, are scrutinized.
For example, Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1994) speculate that money managers' concerns
about their careers lead them to tilt toward investing in growth stocks.2
    Based on the evidence for pension fund managers, one conjecture is that there are similar non-
   2The agency problem in pension fund management shows up in other forms as well. For example, Lakonishok,
Shleifer, Thaler and Vishny (1991) find evidence that managers tend to rebalance their portfolios at year-end away
from poorly-performing (and hence potentially embarrassing) stocks toward larger, more successful firms (which are
easier to justify to plan sponsors). Similarly, the pressures of relative performance benchmarking may create an
incentive for institutions to herd (buy or sell the same stocks at the same time), as studied by Lakonishok, Shleifer
and Vishny (1992).



                                                         3
 performance considerations that affect mutual fund managers' choice of investment styles.3 To the
 extent that these choices degrade performance, then a result is the general underperformance of
 mutual funds. Mechanically extrapolating the argument about non-performance distortions within
 the pension fund industry to mutual funds would not be appropriate, however. Unlike a pension
 fund, there are typically fewer intermediaries such as firm managers, treasurers or consultants
 between investors and mutual fund managers. On this account mutual fund managers should be
 able to concentrate more on maximizing return for a given level of risk. However, other influences
 may also come into play. Managers' personal career concerns, together with the relatively short
 horizons over which they are evaluated, may induce them to play it safe and not deviate substantially
 from popular benchmarks (such as the S&P 500). There may be room for distortions because some
 investors are slow to move away from poorly-performing funds. Their inertia may reflect search
costs (see, for example, Sirri and Tufano (1998)), or cognitive biases (Goetzmann and Peles (1997)).
     Our examination of the investment styles followed by U.S. equity mutual funds checks for the
importance of non-performance distortions (because of agency or other reasons). Taking at face
value the evidence on return anomalies, an outside observer might expect to find that mutual funds

should aggressively pursue certain investment strategies that have been documented to produce
superior returns in the past. An alternative hypothesis is that managers face high personal career
risks for adopting these styles. Instead, they choose portfolios that do not deviate markedly from
market benchmarks (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) refer to such behavior as "bunching
at the center"). In so doing they hope to avoid being penalized for under-performance, but sacrifice
the opportunity for out-performance.
    A second task of this paper is to see if there is consistency in fund styles. The concept of
investment style rests on the premise that fund managers select from a well-defined domain such as
   3Some evidence is accumulating about the incentives faced by mutual fund managers and how they shape funds'
behavior. Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995) investigate herding behavior for mutual funds. Brown, Harlow and
Starks (1996), Chavalier and Ellison (1997) find that a mutual fund's past performance affects its futurerisk-taking
behavior. Karceski's (1998) model suggests that funds tend to favor growth stocks over value stocks.


                                                         4
 small stocks or growth stocks. It is possible that managers structure their portfolios very differently.
 For example, they may choose stocks they believe to be underpriced regardless ofunderlying traits
such as size or book-to-market. In this case, the same manager would tend to drift between stocks
 with very different features, and hence the idea of a coherent style would not be meaningful. At
this most basic level, therefore, it is important to check for consistency in styles toverify that they
correspond to meaningful dimensions of fund behavior. In practical terms, an investor structuring
a portfolio of funds would be concerned if fund managers deviate from their declared styles. This
would introduce additional variability in the overall portfolio relative to a benchmark. A final
motivation for checking on style consistency is in the context of the above discussion of distortions
in investment behavior. In particular, in some situations a manager may have an incentive to
deviate from his declared style, in hopes of recovering from past losses or simply to follow the
crowd and adopt whichever style has been successful. For these reasons we check to see if there is
any consistency in fund style, and whether funds alter their styles in response to past performance.
    A final contribution of this paper is on the methodological front. While there is little disagree-
ment on the importance of style identification, there is scant scientific evidence on how this is to
be done most informatively. One approach (Sharpe (1992), Carhart (1997)) which is commonly
used by practitioners and academics is to relate the past history of fund returns to observable in-
dices or factors (see also Brown and Goetzmann (1997)). Each index represents a dimension of the

behavior of returns corresponding to a particular style (for example, small stocks or value stocks).
The fund's estimated sensitivities or loadings are taken as measures of its style. Alternatively, the
characteristics of the stocks held by a fund serve as another indicator of the types of firms in which
the fund invests, and hence its style. Grinblatt and Titman (1989) use such an approach to evaluate
fund performance. While each method has its strengths and limitations, there has been little work
evaluating the performance of each approach on actual fund data. On a related note, Daniel and
Titman (1997) find that stock characteristics rather than factor loadings explain the cross-sectional
behavior of average returns. We confront the different approaches to style classification on a broad


                                                   5
sample of funds. Style measures based on factor sensitivities are compared against measures using
 portfolio holdings.
    Our basic finding is that mutual funds tend to adopt styles that cluster around a broad index
such as the Standard & Poor's 500 index. Few funds take extreme positions relative to the index.
When they choose to stray from the benchmark, however, they are more prone to favor growth
stocks and stocks with good past performance. These results from the mutual fund industry,
together with related evidence from the pension fund industry, are consistent with explanations
related to agency or behavioral factors.

    Funds overall display some consistency in the styles they follow, suggesting that the dimensions
we use are meaningful portrayals of fund behavior. However, funds who have performed poorly in
the past are more prone to subsequent shifts in style. Such style drifts are particularly notable in
the case of value funds which have experienced poor past performance (compared to growth funds
with poor returns).
    Our basic findings are not sensitive to the procedure used to identify fund style. A fund's
portfolio characteristics, and its factor sensitivities, generally give similar readings of its style.
Confronting the two approaches in those cases where they differ, however, we find that the approach
based on portfolio characteristics tends to do a better job in predicting future fund performance.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the data and gives some details
on the characteristics of mutual fund portfolios. Section 2 provides another perspective on funds'
styles in terms of their exposures to common return factors. As a bridge to prior research, we
also provide some results on average fund performance classified by style in this section. Section 3
deals with funds' style consistency and its relation to past performance. A comparison of the two
approaches to style analysis is contained in section 4. A final section concludes.




                                                 6
 1. Mutual fund portfolio characteristics
 1.1. Data

 Our analysis is based on two datasets from Morningstar, Inc. The sample includes all domestic

 equity funds existing at the end of 1997. Data on defunct funds is available as well, but begins
 only in 1989. Given that our focus is on fund styles and not fund performance, the presence of a
 survivorship bias in the earlier years of the sample period may be a less worrisome concern. The
 first dataset reports monthly fund returns from January 1976 to December 1997. A second dataset
 reports funds' portfolio holdings, beginning in 1983. After merging the two datasets and checking
 against the Compustat file, there are 3,336 funds with information on returns and holdings as of
the end of 1997.

     Table I reports the number of funds at the end of each calendar year over the sample period.
The size of the sample grows over time, with particularly high growth during the 1990s. In addition,
the table compares the performance of the sample with the return on several market indices. To
measure aggregate fund performance, we compute monthly returns on the equally-weighted portfolio
of funds and then compound to get calendar year returns. The verdict on aggregate performance
is familiar — net of expenses, the fund sample fails to match the performance of the overall market.

The average return on the fund portfolio is 16.32 percent, which is lower than the return on any
of the other market indices. In particular, funds' average under-performance relative to the S&P
500 index is 1.6 percent. This is not too far from estimates of funds' expense ratios that have been

reported in other studies. For example, Carhart (1997), Gruber (1996), Sirri and Tufano (1998)
all report average expense ratios between 1.1 and 1.4 percent. Note that the evidence suggests
under-performance even before taking into account the survivorship bias that affects this sample
before 1989.
   4Part of the mutual funds' portfolios may also be held as cash, representing a drag on performance relative to
equities over most of this period.




                                                       7
 1.2. Mutual fund portfolios
 A fund's investment style could be measured along many distinct dimensions. It is common practice,

 however, for investment managers to break the domestic equity investment universe down into four
 classes: large-capitalization or small-capitalization growth stocks, and large-capitalization or small-
 capitalization value stocks. Correspondingly, two dimensions are used to identify a manager's style:
 whether the manager concentrates on large-capitalization or low-capitalization stocks, and whether
 the fund is oriented toward value or growth stocks (typically defined by whether the stocks have high
 or low ratios, respectively, of book to market value of equity) . Perhaps not surprisingly, academic
 research also finds that size and book-to-market are important for capturing the variation in stock
returns (see, for example, Fama and French (1992,1993), Chan, Karceski and Lakonishok (1998)).
Accordingly, in what follows we focus on these two dimensions of investment style. In addition,
following up on the results of Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995), we provide some results on
fund styles with respect to prior stock returns.
     Table II paints a portrait of fund styles along the dimensions of size (panel A), book-to-market
(panel B), and past returns (panels C and D). As a basis of comparison we use the Standard
& Poor's 500 index (S&P500). While other benchmarks have begun to be widely accepted by
investors, the S&P500 index has been the most popularly used reference portfolio through much of
our sample period.
    The details underlying the calculations in Table II are as follows. At the end of each calendar
year all available domestic stocks are ranked by the relevant characteristic (for example, size) and
given a percentile ranking from zero (for the lowest-ranked firm) to one (for the highest-ranked
firm).6 Given the holdings of a portfolio, we can calculate the weighted average of the percentile
rankings over all stocks in the portfolio. A stock's weight is the percent of the portfolio's value
invested in the stock.
   5For example, most pension plan sponsors use these two dimensions when they screen investment managers.
   6Our use of percentile rankings makes it more meaningful to compute averages over time when the entire distri-
bution of characteristics (such as market value) has undergone considerable shifts.


                                                         8
     This procedure can be applied to any portfolio. In our first comparison we consider two portfo-
 lios: the S&P500 index, and the fund sample in the aggregate. In the latter case we pool the equity
 holdings of all funds into a "superfund".7 This comparison tells us whether funds as a whole are
 more or less aggressive with respect to size or book-to-market relative to the index.
     We also want to make comparisons across funds, so in our second exercise we take the unit
of analysis to be an individual fund. For each fund portfolio we compute its weighted average
characteristic as above, and place it along a distribution to see whether the fund has a more or less
aggressive style. Our benchmark distribution is, as above, given by the set of stocks comprising
the S&P500 index. Accordingly we use the size (or book-to-market) ranks of the stocks in the
S&P500 to determine decile breakpoints at each year-end. Comparing each fund's weighted average
characteristic to these breakpoints lets us place each fund into a decile. We look at the percentage of
funds in each decile as one measure of where funds are concentrated. In addition we compare funds
and the benchmark in terms of the concentration of market value in each decile. For the benchmark
the combined capitalization of all S&P500 stocks in each decile is calculated and expressed relative
to the total capitalization of the index. The ratio represents the relative magnitude of the asset
pool available in the benchmark for investors who wish to select from a particular category of size
or book-to-market. Similarly for all funds falling in a particular decile we calculate the total value
of their equity holdings, and express this as a fraction of total fund net assets. This fraction tells
us the concentration (in terms of dollars invested) of funds in a decile. Finally, the distributions for
the index and for funds are averaged across time.8 As an illustration, decile 10 for the S&P500 in
panel A of Table II contains the largest ten percent (or fifty stocks) in the index, and these issues
on average account for 47.01 percent of the value of the index.
   7We use the most recently reported holdings as of the year-end for each of the underlying mutual funds.
   5When we average the distributions of funds we weight each annual observation by the number of funds in the
sample that year.




                                                      9
 1.2.1. Size

 The mutual fund sample in the aggregate tends to hold smaller firms than those in the S&P 500
 index (panel A). The weighted-average size characteristic for the index is 0.98, while the weighted-
average size for the fund sample (that is, for the superfund) is 0.94. The difference is perhaps
not surprising, since the funds cannot all be concentrated in the same set of large S&P stocks,
and since there are many firms who are much smaller than those in the index. If anything the
comparison with respect to size understates the difference in dollar magnitudes because we use
percentile ran kings.9
    The distribution of funds by size indicates that there are many funds concentrating in smaller
stocks compared to the S&P500. About 26 percent of the funds, for example, have a weighted-
average size rank that places them in the bottom decile. However, these small-capitalization funds
do not amount to a large percentage of total fund holdings (for example, the funds in the bottom
decile represent only 11 percent of total fund holdings). Arguably, the market for the smaller stocks
may be less informationally efficient. In this category, then, fund managers may be operating under
the belief that they can distinguish themselves by exploiting such opportunities.

1.2.2. Book-to-market

In panel B we use the same methodology to calculate the distribution of funds across tencategories
of book-to-market ratio.10 The superfund, which has a weighted average book-to-market rank of
0.35, is more oriented toward growth stocks than the S&P500 (its corresponding rank is 0.38).
Nonetheless, funds tend to be heavily clustered around the index. The S&P500's weighted average
book-to-market rank puts it in the fourth decile. If we look at this and the adjacent two deciles,
we find that sixty percent of the funds, representing 67 percent of fund holdings, have average
book-to-market ranks falling in the third to fifth deciles.
   9For instance, at year-end 1997 the weighted average size for the S&P 500 is about 47 billion dollars while the
weighted average size for the mutual fund sample is roughly half as large (26 billion dollars).
 '°In the underlying calculations all stocks with negative book values are excluded.


                                                         10
    Conversely, very few funds have average book-to-market ratios that are relatively extreme.
Given the extensive evidence on book-to-market effects on returns, for instance, it might be expected
that there would be more concentration of funds in stocks with high book-to-market ratios. There
is little evidence of this, however. For example, the top three deciles in panel B represent about 17
percent of the capitalization of the S&P500. However, only 3.2 percent of the funds have average
book-to-market ranks that put them in these deciles. Moreover, these funds are relatively small.
In terms of portfolio values, they only account for 1.9 percent of holdings. At the other tail of the
distribution, the bottom decile makes up roughly the same percentage (about 18 percent) of the
capitalization of the index as the top three deciles. Here, however, funds appear to have a larger
appetite for growth stocks with relatively low book-to-market ratios. The book-to-market ratios
of about 4.5 percent of the funds fall in the lowest decile, representing about 3.2 percent of total
holdings. Put another way, the holdings of the funds that are relatively more growth-oriented are
almost twice the holdings of the value-oriented funds, even though the underlying investable pools
in the index have virtually the same amounts.
   The upshot from panel B is that very few funds took advantage of the profits that have histor-
ically been available from investing in value stocks. This finding is consistent with related research

on pension fund portfolios (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). Possibly, fund managers were
not aware of (or did not believe in) an association between book-to-market and stock returns. Tak-
ing extreme bets, either on value stocks or growth stocks, may yield an undiversified portfolio and
large errors in tracking a market benchmark. To avoid such errors funds may cluster around the
benchmark. Nonetheless, if there is any tilt in fund styles, panel B of Table II says that funds are
more aggressive in favor of growth stocks.


1.2.3.   Past   stock return

A close cousin of the investment strategy based on book-to-market is a strategy based on long-
horizon past returns (see, for example, DeBondt and Thaler (1985), Chopra, Lakonishok, and Ritter


                                                 11
 (1992)). Hence another characteristic which funds may be taking into account when selecting their
 portfolios is a stock's past rate of return. Some funds may target stocks which have had low past
 returns in hopes of capturing the subsequent reversals. Panel C of Table II reports the distribution
of funds classified by past three-year returns. Specifically the characteristic under consideration is
the weighted average (across all of a fund's holdings) of the return beginning fouryears and ending
one year ago.
    In panel C the superfund and the S&P500 index have the same weighted average rank on past
three-year return (0.63). The index is periodically revised, however, and stocks that have done well
are more likely to be introduced. Accordingly, the fact that the two portfolios share the same rank
is more impressive than may first seem, given that there are delays in turning over fund portfolios.
    When we compare funds' willingness to take relatively extreme bets, the results for past losers
(with low past returns) parallel those for deep-value stocks. The bottom four deciles contain roughly
27 percent of the value of the index. However, funds falling into these deciles account for only 3
percent of fund holdings. In short, there are few takers for strategies based on either deep-value or
long-term reversals.

    Strategies that focus on deep-value stocks and past losers share a common feature. They both
select stocks that appear to be very unattractive by many popular yardsticks. Value stocks, for
example, have relatively low past growth rates in earnings or sales, are generally concentrated in
unremarkable industries such as utilities, finance or steel, and are less likely to be recommended
by security analysts.11 Long-term past losers are more likely to be in financial distress. In other
words, a fund manager would be hard-pressed to provide a persuasive conventional rationale to
investors as justification for investing in such stocks. The evidence in Table II is consistent with
the conjecture that fund managers shun strategies based on such apparently unattractive stocks,
possibly due to personal career risks.
    From this perspective, stocks which have performed well in the past should be easier to justify,
  "Stickel (1.997) finds that analysts issue stronger buy recommendations for stocks with positive earnings and price

momentum and higher forecasts of long-term growth in earnings.


                                                        12
 and hence relatively more attractive to fund managers. The results in panel C confirm a sharp
disparity between funds' appetites for long-term past losers and past winners. The top two deciles
are comparable to the bottom four deciles in terms of percentages of the value of the index (the top
two deciles represent about 25 percent). This end of the distribution is more popular with funds.
Funds placed in these two deciles hold about 10 percent of total fund equity investments.
    More intriguingly, there is one set of past winners where the evidence on profitability and the
availability of an attractive story happily coincide. In particular, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993),
Chan, Jegadeesh and Lakonishok (1996) find price continuations over intermediate horizons. In
panel D we provide results based on the weighted average of the past year's return on a fund's
holdings. In the aggregate funds are more tilted toward past winners than the index. The weighted
average rank for the superfund is 0.62 compared to 0.60 for the index. Further, quite a few funds
position themselves in the upper deciles of the distribution. About 11 percent of the funds fall
in the top two deciles, and they make up roughly 9 percent of total fund holdings. Grinblatt,
Titman and Wermers (1995) also find that funds tend to follow profitable momentum strategies.
Our suggestion here is that the attractiveness of this strategy dovetails neatly with behavioral or
agency considerations as well.
   Since funds who invest in small firms may be more specialized, they may also tend to be
more aggressive in terms of their orientation either toward book-to-market or past return. Our
preliminary examination of this issue, however, indicates that this is not the case. Overall, there is
no strong evidence that small-cap funds take more aggressive styles on either end of the distribution
for book-to-market and for past return, compared to large-cap funds.

1.2.4.   Interpretation

To sum up, when we look at the distribution of fund styles, funds generally do not deviate notably
from a widely-followed benchmark such as the S&P500. While there are many small-capitalization
funds, the bulk of fund assets is invested in the largest stocks. While funds generally tend not to


                                                 13
 take extreme bets (relative to the S&P500 benchmark) in terms of either book-to-market ratios or
 past return, they have a relatively stronger tendency to favor glamour stocks and past winners.
 Put another way, funds seemed to be averse to investment strategies involving deep value stocks or
long-term past losers. Viewed in this light, it may not be a complete surprise that historically few
mutual funds consistently out-performed market benchmarks.
     What is even more striking is that similar findings have been made about the investment styles
of pension fund managers (Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). In the pension fund industry
multiple intermediary parties are involved in investment decision-making. Accordingly there is more
scope for money managers to follow their own self-interests, with adverse consequences for portfolio
performance. The key finding in this section is that in the mutual fund industry intermediaries
play a smaller role and yet the evidence for non-performance distortions persists.
    Several reasons may explain why both pension fund and mutual fund managers have some
preference for glamour stocks and past winners.12 Since glamour stocks generally have a record of
good past returns, a tilt toward glamour may appear to be safe from the standpoint of personal
career risk. To the extent that funds tend to herd, possibly as a result of the focus on relative
performance, selecting stocks that have done well in the past would also represent a prudent choice.
Fund managers' decisions may be swayed by analyst recommendations. Research reports from
brokerage firms are widely disseminated and there is some evidence that analysts are more likely
to favor glamour stocks and past winners (Stickel (1997)). Additionally, the fact that analysts
recommend such stocks may provide a convenient rationalization for a manager to tilt toward
such stocks. Another possibility is the perception that value strategies take a long time to become
profitable, whereas glamour stocks and past winners at least have price momentum working in their
  12 should be noted that some mutual ftmd managers also provide money management services to pension plans.
To maintain good relations with clients a manager generally seeks to avoid large variation across the performance
of the different accounts. In many cases this might mean that the same stocks are selected for different clients'
portfolios. As a result the non-performance considerations apparent in the pension plan accounts spill over to the
mutual fund accounts.



                                                       14
favor over the intermediate term. Finally there may be an element of hubris in fund managers'
disposition toward glamour stocks. Insofar as a relatively larger component of the valuations of
growth stocks is tied to intangible future prospects, there may be more room for superior analysis
to detect and take advantage of such opportunities.
    Another possible explanation for funds' tendency to bunch at the center is that fund managers
follow strategies that cannot be easily summarized by a single characteristic such as book-to-market
or past stock return. Instead they may focus on many other security characteristics so that the
end-result is a portfolio that does not deviate too much from a diversified benchmark index. It
is also possible that managers realize that superior long-term performance is unachievable in an
efficient market and hence are closet indexers. Finally, in the earlier part of the sample period,
fund managers may not have been aware of the existence of strategies based on deep value or
overreaction, and they may have been slow in adjusting their approaches.


2. Mutual fund factor exposures
In this section we check that our conclusions about fund styles are robust by taking another ap-
proach to the analysis of fund styles. Fama and French (1992,1993) find that three factors       the
market and mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market — can explain the cross-section of
average returns and the common variation in returns. The sensitivity of a fund's return to these fac-
tors can serve as indicators of the investment strategies it follows. A fund whose return is strongly
associated with the returns on value stocks, for instance, can be thought of as a value-oriented
fund. Accordingly, a fund's exposures to the three factors is another way to identify a fund's style.
   In particular, the style measures are taken as the estimated coefficients from three-factor model
regressions of the form

                      —
                          rft = a + I3ipftmt — rft] + /32SMB + i33HML + Et                        (1)

based on monthly returns. Here rt is the return in month t for fund p, rft is the return on a

                                                 15
 one-month Treasury bill, rmt is the return on the value-weighted portfolio of stocks thatappear on
 both the CRSP and Compustat databases, and SMB, HML are the returns on zero-investment
factor-mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market.13 In our context, the estimates of /32p
and !33p serve as measures of fund p's orientation toward firm size and book-to-market. A positive

 (negative) /2p coefficient would mean the fund is oriented toward small stocks or large stocks,
respectively. Similarly, a positive (negative) coefficient /33p indicates that the fund has a tilt toward
value (growth) stocks.

     Table III provides another perspective on the distribution of fund styles from the standpoint
of the three-factor model (equation (1)). Panel A of the table gives the distribution of funds'
loadings on the factors. At each calendar year-end, we estimate the three-factor model for all funds
with a complete history of returns over the prior three years. Based on the estimated coefficients,
funds are then assigned to deciles. Within each decile we calculate the equally-weighted average
of the coefficient estimates; the reported values are the weighted averages over all years of the
coefficients (each year's weight is the relative number of funds in the sample that year). As a basis
of comparison, panel B of the table reports estimates of the three-factor model applied to popular
market style indices including the Russell 1000 Growth Index (denoted RiG), the Russell 1000
Value Index (R1V), the Russell 2000 Growth and Value Indexes (R2G and R2V, respectively), and
the Standard & Poor's 500 index. The Russell indices are the most commonly used style-based
benchmarks for performance evaluation.14
    The results for funds' style for size based on sensitivities generally agree with our earlier findings
based on funds' holdings. In terms of the number of funds, a large fraction of fund portfolios loads
more heavily on small stocks than does the S&P500 index. The S&P500 index has an average
  '3We thank Gene Fama for supplying the data on returns for the market and the factor-mimicking portfolios.
  '4Whjle historical returns are available for all these composites, data on the historical composition of the indices
(required for calculating portfolio characteristics) is less readily available for the Russell indices. Accordingly the
comparisons based on portfolio characteristics in the previous section use only the S&P500 index. We defer a
discussion of the relative merits of each approach to style identification to a later section of the paper.



                                                           16
 sensitivity to the size factor of -0.215. On average 94 percent of funds have sensitivities above
 this value. Conversely not many funds have stronger sensitivities to returns on large stocks than
 the S&P500. Only about six percent of funds on average load more negatively on the size factor
 (that is, covary more strongly with large stocks) than does the S&P 500. This finding may be one
reason why a typical fund finds it difficult to keep up with the S&P500 even when large stocks
substantially outperform small stocks (as in 1998).
     Funds generally do not select portfolio exposures that are strongly tilted toward either value or
growth. The distribution of fund loadings on the book-to-market factor is roughly centered around
zero, close to the sensitivity of the S&P500. To evaluate the extent of departures away from
the market benchmarks, note that the bottom two deciles of funds have average HML loadings
less than the sensitivity of the Russell 1000 growth index, RiG (-0.405). At the other tail, the
sensitivity of the Russell 1000 value benchmark is 0.374, and only the top decile of funds has an
average HML sensitivity larger than this. As in panel B of Table 2, then, funds tend to cluster
around the benchmark and, insofar as they take extreme positions, they tilt toward growth rather
than value.

    To sharpen the last point, note that the Russell value and growth indexes do not represent
portfolios that are especially slanted toward extreme value or growth. For instance, effectively half
of the market capitalization of the Russell 1000 index (the thousand largest stocks) are assigned to
the value index and half to the growth index.'5 In this sense, a fund does not have to take a very
extreme position toward value or growth to appear more aggressive than the corresponding Russell
indexes. Even so, fund managers do not choose to depart very much from the benchmarks.
  15Specificaily, every stock in the Russell 1000 index receives a weight between zero and one in the growth and value
indexes, such that the stock's combined weight in the two indexes adds to one. Currently, stocks are ranked by a
composite measure of value based on the book-to-market ratio arid security analysts' forecasts of long-term growth
in earnings. Stocks ranked below the first quartile of the value measure receive a full weight of one in the value index
(hence zero weight in the growth index); stocks above the third quartile of the value measure get zero weight in the
value index (full weight in the growth index). A stock at the median is given a weight of 0.5 in each index.



                                                          17
2.1. Fund style and fund performance

The bulk of earlier research on fund styles has focused on how to adjust for style when evaluating
performance. However, the relation between a fund's style and its performance appears to have
received little prior attention. One commonly voiced belief, at least among practitioners in the
pension fund industry, is that growth-oriented managers are more likely to out-perform their style
benchmarks than are value-oriented managers.16 Although the issue of fund performance is not the
main focus of this paper, this section provides a bridge to the earlier literature by seeing if there is
any difference across styles with respect to mutual fund performance.
    In particular, Table IV checks whether funds with some styles tend to out-perform funds with
other styles, relative to either a three-factor model benchmark (panel A) or a four-factor model
with an extra momentum factor included (panel B).'7 The table provides estimates of aiphas and
loadings for portfolios of equity funds that are sorted by size and book-to-market characteristics.
Specifically, at the end of each year from 1984 to 1996 all funds are sorted by their value-weighted
average size rank characteristic and assigned to one of three portfolios. The first group comprises
funds ranked in the top 20 percent by their size characteristic; the second group includes funds
ranked in the middle 60 percent; the third group includes funds ranked in the bottom 20 percent by
size. Within each size classification all funds are also sorted by their value-weighted average book-
to-market rank characteristic and assigned to one of three portfolios. The first portfolio includes
funds ranked in the top 20 percent; the second portfolio includes funds ranked in the middle 60
percent; the third portfolio contains funds ranked in the bottom 20 percent. The categories are
chosen so that we can break out funds who take relatively extreme positions with respect to size and
book-to-market. For each of the resulting nine portfolios, equally-weighted returns are calculated
over the subsequent twelve months, and the process is repeated. At the end of the sample period
  '6See, for example, Coggin and Trzcinka (1997), who look at pension funds.
  '7The momentum factor is measured as the difference between the return on the top and bottom quintile portfolio
of stocks ranked by past one-year return. Equally-weighted portfolios are formed at the end of each calendar-year
from all domestic common stocks listed on the New York and American stock exchanges.


                                                      18
the three or four factor model is applied to the complete history of returns on each portfolio.
    The evidence in panel A provides some indication that growth managers do better than value
managers on a style-adjusted basis. The difference between the alphas of the growth and value
managers, for example, is positive in each of the three size categories, averaging 0.143 percent per
month (or 1.7 percent per year). In particular, the difference is largest for the small-cap funds and
amounts to 0.302 percent per month. One possible explanation for the performance differential
between the two groups is that growth funds buy stocks with good past performance and hence
benefit from momentum effects. On the other hand momentum effects work against value funds,
who are generally invested in past losers.

    Panel B confirms that growth and value funds' sensitivities to the momentum factor differ in the
hypothesized direction. For instance small-cap growth funds have an exposure to the momentum
factor of 0.084, and small-cap value funds have an exposure of -0.026. Adjusting for the momentum
factor using a four-factor model benchmark, as in panel B, reduces the performance differential
between the two groups. The annualized difference in the alphas, averaged across all three size
categories, is 1.2 percent in panel B. Nonetheless, the style-adjusted alphas still slightly favor growth
managers. Intriguingly, therefore, growth managers appear to generate stronger performance than
value managers. Growth stocks may predominantly represent companies with few tangible assets
and where expectations about the future are more important (such as science and technology
stocks). In such cases perhaps growth fund managers add value through specialized knowledge.
The gap between growth and value is particularly notable for small-cap funds: the difference is
0.235 percent per month. Possibly, inefficiencies may be more prevalent among smaller stocks
because they receive less coverage and attention, or because of limits to arbitrage, for example.


3. Consistency in fund style
The premise of an investment style is that a manager's style reflects the nature of the stocks
selected in the portfolio. The style dimensions that we use (and which are widely used in practice),

                                                  19
however, may not correspond to the criteria fund managers actually use. A manager selecting
stocks thought to be under-priced, for example, may wind up choosing value stocks in one period
and growth stocks in another. This apparent inconsistency would certainly create problems for
a pension plan administrator or individual investor wishing to build a structured portfolio. One
reason to check for style consistency, therefore, is to verify that our style categories are meaningful
ways to portray fund behavior.
    Additionally, shifts in fund style may reflect the personal career risks discussed in the earlier
section. Funds that are performing poorly face the prospect of losing clients. As a result there may
be pressures on a manager to adjust the fund's style when certain styles fall in or out of favor, or to
try a different approach after a period of poor performance for the fund. For this reason, we also
check to see whether past performance is associated with shifts in style. To ensure the robustness
of our results, we measure fund style in two ways: based on portfolio characteristics from fund
holdings, and based on estimated sensitivities to factors.


3.1.    Correlations between past and future styles

At the end of each year we rank funds by a style measure (using either the fund's most recently
measured portfolio characteristic or estimated loading) and scale them to fall between zero (the
lowest-ranked fund) and one (the highest-ranked fund). A high rank for a fund indicates that it is
relatively more extreme in its orientation toward large stocks or toward value stocks.'8
    Style consistency is measured by the correlation between a fund's past style rank, measured at
year-end, and its future style rank, measured at the end of the third subsequent year. We choose a
three-year gap so that the factor loadings can be estimated over non-overlapping periods. We also
  18Note that a fund investing in small stocks would have a relatively low average size and hence a low score under
the characteristics approach. A small-cap fund would tend to have a large positive loading on the size factor, since
the latter is measured as the difference between the return on small stocks and on large stocks. To preserve the
interpretation in both cases, we multiply the size loadings by minus one before ranking and rescaiing, so that a low
score means the fund is tilted toward small stocks.



                                                        20
calculate the mean absolute difference between the two periods' style ranks. Table V provides the
results, based on the pooled sample of fund-year observations.
    Regardless of the approach used to measure style, there appears to be some overall consistency
in funds' styles over time. For all funds, the correlations between current and future styles are about
seventy percent when styles are measured under the loadings-based approach (panel A) and about
eighty percent under the characteristics-based approach (panel B). However, the average absolute
differences in style ranks are fairly substantial. Based on loadings in the entire fund sample, for
example, the mean absolute deviation in style ranks for book-to-market is 0.16. Additionally, there
are numerous cases of large shifts in style: for example, the 75-th percentile of the distribution of
absolute deviations in book-to-market style ranks is 0.23.
    A comparison of the two panels offers some evidence on the relative performance of the two
approaches to style analysis. In general, the correlations between current and future styles are
higher under the characteristics-based approach than under the loadings-based approach. Further,
the average absolute differences between current and future style ranks are generally smaller when
portfolio characteristics are used. These findings are consistent with the argument that fund styles
are measured more precisely using a characteristics-based approach. Accordingly, we focus on the
characteristics-based approach in the remainder of this section.
   There is more consistency in funds' styles with respect to size than with respect to book-to-
market. The correlations are 0.85 and 0.77 for size and book-to-market, respectively, for the entire
fund sample. This finding is consistent with the casual observation that funds' specialization with
respect to size is taken more seriously: a small-cap fund generally sticks to small stocks and a
large-cap fund holds mostly larger stocks. Furthermore, the distinction between large- and small-
cap sectors had an earlier start in the investment management industry.
   The remaining rows in each panel of Table V correlate past and future styles for large-cap and
small-cap funds; and also for value and growth funds. Small-cap (large-cap) funds are defined to
include all funds in the bottom (top) thirty percent by their rank on size. Similarly growth (value)


                                                 21
funds are those in the bottom or top thirty percent based on ranks for book-to-market. There
is more consistency within each of these style classes than for the sample as a whole, suggesting
that the dimensions we use are informative about funds' investment approaches. For example, the
correlation between past and future styles with respect to size is 0.89 for large-cap funds, compared
to 0.85 for the overall sample.


3.2. Style consistency and past performance
While most funds may be consistent in following a particular style, there may be specific instances
where funds are more prone to switch styles. In particular, a fund manager with poor past per-
formance may be more likely to cave in to pressures to drop a style that has apparently been
unsuccessful and try something different. To test this conjecture, we sort funds into portfolios on
the basis of a two-way within-group classification. The first sort is by a fund's past performance
(the compound return on the fund over the past two years) while the second sort is by the fund's
portfolio characteristic (either size or book-to-market).
    In the classification by past fund return, there are four groups: group 1 (winners) comprises
the twenty percent of funds with the highest past return; group 2 comprises funds ranked in the
eighth to sixth deciles by past fund return; group 3 comprises funds ranked in the fifth to third
deciles of past return; group 4 (losers) includes the twenty percent of funds with the lowest past
return. The second sort by portfolio characteristic assigns a fund to one of three groups. Group 1
includes funds ranked in the top thirty percent on the relevant characteristic (either size or book-to-
market); group 2 includes the intermediate forty percent of the ranked funds; group 3 includes the
funds ranked in the bottom thirty percent by the characteristic. For each of the resulting twelve
portfolios, the simple average of the size or book-to-market characteristic across all component
funds is calculated at the portfolio formation year-end to give the portfolio's past style and at the
end of the subsequent year to give its future style. Each fund's characteristic is based on its most
recently reported holdings prior to the year-end. The average across all portfolio formation years


                                                 22
(weighted by the number of fund observations in each year) is reported in Table VI, as well as the
average absolute difference between the characteristics across all funds in each portfolio.
   Comparing the results for past winners and for past losers offers up evidence for shifts in
style. In panel A, for example, the mean absolute difference between past and future styles on size
averages 0.058 across all three groups of past winners and 0.069 across all past losers. Notably,
there are large shifts with respect to book-to-market in panel B. The average absolute difference
is 0.077 across all past winners and 0.1 across all past losers. Funds with poor returns are thus
altering their styles, particularly with respect to book-to-market. From an investor's standpoint,
the table suggests that a fund manager who has performed poorly is more prone to style drift,
thereby upsetting the structure of the investor's overall portfolio. Such instances thus represent
sources of style risk that deserve monitoring.
   Panel B indicates that the style shifts for poorly-performing funds is driven by the behavior
of value funds. Value funds with poor past performance have an average absolute difference of
0.12 for style with respect to book-to-market. Value funds with good past performance have a
corresponding mean absolute difference of only 0.06. Value strategies generally entail investing in
stocks which do not look attractive under conventional criteria and which are not highly touted
by analysts. When performance has been poor, the manager of a value fund may have even less
stomach for holding "ugly" stocks that, unlike more glamorous issues, do not come with appealing
stories to justify holding them.


4. Comparing approaches to style measurement
The analyses in the previous sections draw on two approaches to style analysis, based on either
portfolio characteristics or factor loadings. Each approach has its merits and drawbacks.
   Since a fund's holdings provide a snapshot of its investments at a given date, the characteristics
of its portfolio should yield an up-to-date indicator of its investment style. However, data on
fund holdings are not widely available. When available, the holdings data are sampled relatively

                                                 23
infrequently. Operationally, the need to cross-reference these data with information (such as the
book value of equity or earnings) from stocks' financial statements adds an additional layer of
complexity.
    The merit of the loadings-based approach is that it is grounded on the behavior of realized
returns on the fund. Data on fund returns are more readily accessible. On the other hand, a long
record of past returns is needed for the factor loadings to be estimated reliably. In this respect the
return earned on the fund several years ago may say little about its current style.
    In general we find that the two approaches give similar readings of a fund's investment style. For
the whole fund sample, for instance, the correlation between the characteristics-based style rank
and loadings-based rank is 83 percent for size and 76 percent for book-to-market. In specific cases,
however, the two approaches can give very different readings. These instances are all the more
interesting because they provide a natural arena to stress-test the two approaches and evaluate
their performance. With this in mind we examine instances where the two approaches are most at
odds with one another (for example, a fund is deeply value-oriented based on loadings but deeply
growth-oriented based on portfolio characteristics). The evidence in the previous section suggests
that funds display less persistence with respect to book-to-market, so we focus on this dimension
of fund style.

   First, at the end of each year in the sample period we break out those funds that display the
largest positive or negative differences between their style ranks under the two approaches. In
particular, in panel A of Table VII we examine funds that are classified as value-oriented under the
characteristics-based approach, but which are classified as growth-oriented under the loadings-based
approach (so they receive high ranks on their portfolios' book-to-market ratios, but low ranks on
their loadings on the book-to-market factor, HML). Similarly panel B looks at mis-classifications
where the characteristics-based approach indicates a growth fund while the loadings-based approach
indicates a value fund. The characteristics-based approach uses funds' most recently reported
portfolio holdings prior to the year-end, while the loadings-based approach uses estimates from a


                                                 24
three-factor model from the prior three-year period.
     We then see which approach does a better job in predicting the subsequent returns on these
two sets of funds. Again, to magnify potential contrasts we look at the forecasting performance in
those months where there is a large differential between the returns on value and growth stocks.
Specifically, out of the following two years we pick out the two months with the highest realized
returns, and the two months with the lowest realized returns, on HML, the Fama-French mimicking
portfolio for book-to-market (so we are looking at roughly the ten percent most extreme observations
in each tail of the distribution).19 The approach that gives the lower average forecast error would
be the one that does a better job in describing mutual fund styles. Returns are predicted in
our experiment as follows. In the characteristics-based approach, we match each stock in a fund's
portfolio with an equally-weighted portfolio of stocks falling in the same quintile of size and book-to-
market. The predicted return for the stock is the future return realized on the matching portfolio.20
In the loadings-based approach, the predicted return uses the fund's three-factor model loadings
estimated over the prior three years and the realized future returns on the mimicking portfolios.
Note that under either approach the relevant parameters (either characteristics or loadings) are
measured over a period that is disjoint from the prediction period.
    The characteristics-based approach yields smaller mean errors for the experiment in panel A.
The funds in panel A earn an average return of 5.19 percent in those subsequent two months where
growth stocks do best relative to value stocks.21 The fitted return under the characteristics-based
  19Since we focus on months with extreme returns, the behavior of the cash portion of funds' portfolios becomes
important. Accordingly, we limit our sample of funds to those which are holding less than five percent of their
portfolios in cash. Additionally, to mitigate the impact of the idiosyncratic component of fund returns, we only
consider funds with at least twenty five stocks in their portfolios.
  20Stocks eligible for the matching portfolios comprise all domestic equities listed on the NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq
markets. These are ranked independently by size and book-to-market each calendar year-end and assigned to quintiles,
where the quintile breakpoints use only NYSE issues.
 2tThe average style rank on book-to-market for the sample of funds in panel A is 0.68 based on holding character-
istics and 0.30 based on loadings.




                                                        25
approach is 5.12 percent with an average error of 0.07 percent. On the other hand the loadings-based
approach yields a fitted return of 6.14 percent and the error averages -0.95 percent. Conversely,
in those subsequent two months where value stocks do best relative to growth stocks, the funds'
actual returns average -2.38 percent. Given fitted returns of -1.89 percent and -3.39 percent for the
characteristics-based and loadings-based approaches, respectively, the average error is also lower
when characteristics are used.22 The average absolute errors in panel A also tend to be lower under
the characteristics-based approach (for example, 1.40 percent versus 1.70 percent in the two months
with the lowest average HML).23
    Panel B of the table also yields a favorable verdict for the characteristics-based approach.24
In particular, over the two months with the lowest values of HML, the average prediction error
under the characteristics-based approach is -0.62 percent, which is lower than the 0.94 percent
error under the loadings-based approach. In the two months with the highest values of HML, the
corresponding mean errors are -0.16 percent and -1.07 percent. In short, when the two approaches
give conflicting readings on a fund's style, the approach based on characteristics more closely
matches funds' subsequent actual performance.
  22As other studies (see, for example, Chan, Karceski and Lakonishok (1998)) have found, months with the largest
out-performance of value stocks relative to glamour stocks are generally down-market months. As a result the fund
returns for the two months with the highest values of HML are generally negative. As a further illustration of this
point, the average return on the Russell 1000 Growth index is -2.31 percent for these months while the average return
on the Russell 1000 Value index is -0.24 percent.
  23The noise component in monthly returns is large. Although this averages out across months when we work with
mean errors, this will not be the case when we work with the absolute errors. This helps explain why the differences
across the two approaches are smaller when we compare the average absolute errors.
  240n average, the funds in this panel have an average style rank of 0.29 on book-to-market based on fund holdings,
and an average style rank of 0.68 based on loadings.




                                                        26
5. Conclusion
Mutual funds represent a large and growing segment of the institutional investor community. Within
this segment, however, fund managers are by no means homogeneous in terms of their investment
choices. Recognizing that fund managers follow a wide variety of approaches, investors are in-
creasingly aware of the importance of a fund's investment style. The evaluation of an investment
manager's style is already widespread practice in the pension fund industry. Investment style anal-
ysis is important for evaluating fund performance and also for controlling the risk of the investor's
overall portfolio.

    This paper provides an exploratory investigation of mutual fund investment styles. Previous
empirical research on the sources of return covariation, as well as standard practice in the investment
management industry, give us some guidance in terms of which dimensions of style we consider,
and on our procedures for style identification. We concentrate on two style dimensions: size (equity
market capitalization), and book-to-market, although we also provide some results based on past
stock return. We employ two procedures for style identification: one is based on the characteristics
of fund portfolio holdings, while the other is based on estimated loadings from factor models. The
analysis uses an integrated dataset that reports a fund's return and identifies its equity holdings as
well.

    Beginning with the aggregate portfolio held by funds (the "superfund"), we find that the overall
portfolio has a lower rank on size compared to the S&P500 index. This is not surprising, given
the large number of smaller stocks that are not in the index. More notably, the superfund has a
general tilt toward growth. The superfund's weighted-average book-to-market rank is 0.35 while the
corresponding rank for the index is 0.38. Similarly, additional characteristics based on past stock
return indicate that the aggregate portfolio tends to favor stocks with superior past performance.
For example the superfund has a weighted-average rank with respect to past one-year return of
0.62, above the rank of 0.60 for the index.
   We also study the distribution of fund styles in order to judge the extent to which individual

                                                 27
funds deviate from the benchmark. We find that most mutual funds adopt styles that do not differ
markedly from an overall market index. For example, when we look at the distribution of funds
in terms of their book-to-market ratios, sixty percent of the funds are clustered within the two
deciles adjacent to where the S&P500 falls. These funds account for 67 percent of total fund equity

holdings.
   Few funds take extreme positions away from the index. Lack of diversification may be one
reason why funds stay away from the extremes. Moreover, an extreme position would produce
large deviations from the return on a broad benchmark. Since it is common practice to measure
fund performance against a benchmark, such deviations may be a source of personal career risk to
a fund manager. When funds deviate from the index, they are more likely to favor growth over
value and high past return over low past return. Using factor sensitivities to measure fund styles
yields similar conclusions. For example, only ten percent of funds on average have larger exposures
to the book-to-market factor than the Russell 1000 Value index, even though the latter index does
not represent an overly aggressive bet on value stocks. Roughly twice as many funds, on the other
hand, are more aggressive on the growth dimension than the Russell 1000 Growth index.
   Evidently a fund manager who chooses to be bold finds it safer to err on the side of growth.
Intriguingly, similar findings — bunching at the center and a tendency to favor glamour stocks —
have   been found for pension fund manager styles (see Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1997)).
These aspects of mutual fund behavior may be one reason why so few funds consistently beat pas-
sive benchmarks. We conjecture that the glamour bias may, at least in part, be due to agency as
well as behavioral considerations. Growth stocks generally have a favorable history of past returns
and hence may appear to be safe choices as far as managers' personal career risks are concerned.
Herding pressures, arising for example from the practice of relative performance evaluation, would
also motivate managers to select stocks that have done well in the past. Hubris may lead man-
agers to think that they have superior abilities to detect intangible growth opportunities thereby
predisposing them toward growth stocks.


                                                28
    There is generally consistency in fund styles across time, especially with respect to size. Corre-
lations between past and future fund styles are between seventy to eighty percent. The degree of
persistence provides some evidence that our style dimensions capture meaningful aspects of fund
behavior.

   Drifts in style show up more strongly in the case of funds with low past returns. Such funds
are more likely to alter their styles, and hence from the standpoint of an investor are a source
of style risk that deserves monitoring. In particular, the average absolute difference between past
and future style ranks on book-to-market for past winner funds is 0.077 while the corresponding
difference for past loser funds is 0.1. The manager of a poorly performing fund may face stronger
pressures to try something different, or to follow the crowd and adopt whichever style has been
more successful. There is some evidence that managers of value funds that have done poorly are
more prone to adjust their styles. Such managers drop the book-to-market ranks of their portfolios
from 0.648 to 0.572. Managers of growth funds with poor past performance, on the other hand,
barely move toward value.
   Our comparison of value and growth managers also uncovers some signs that value managers,
on a style-adjusted basis, on average do worse than growth managers. Under a three-factor model,
for example, the average difference between the aiphas of growth and value funds is 1.7 percent per
year. In part, managers of growth funds hold stocks with strong past returns and hence benefit from
the momentum effect. Adjusting for the momentum factor accounts for some of the performance
differential, but the results still tend to favor growth managers by about 1.2 percent per year on
average. The difference in alphas is particularly notable (2.82 percent per year under a four-factor
model) for small-capitalization funds.
   The two approaches to style identification (portfolio characteristics and factor sensitivities)
generally give similar readings of a fund's style (the correlation between the style ranks from the
two approaches is 83 percent for size and 76 percent for book-to-market). However when they
give different indications of fund style, the approach based on characteristics on average gives more


                                                 29
accurate predictions of future fund returns. Although the approach based on factor sensitivities is
directly based on the behavior of fund returns, it requires a relatively long time series (and hence
may not provide a sufficiently timely measure) and is subject to measurement error.
   In summary, the analysis of investment styles helps to sharpen our understanding of the behavior
and performance of mutual funds. Ultimately such analyses may also provide valuable clues for
understanding patterns in trading activity and the determination of stock prices.




                                                30
                                             References

Brown, Keith C., W. V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of tournaments and temptations: An
   analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 51, 85—110.

Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence, Journal of Finance
   50, 679—698.

Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1997, Mutual fund styles, Journal of Financial
   Economics 43, 373—399.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57—82.

Chan, Louis K. C., Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok, 1998, The risk and return from factors,

   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 159—188.

Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, Momentum strategies, Journal
   of Finance 51, 1681—1713.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives,
   Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167—1200.

Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok, and Jay R. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal performance: do
   stocks overreact?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235—268.

Coggin, T. Daniel, and Charles Trzcinka, 1997, Analyzing the performance of equity managers: A
   note on value versus growth, in T. Daniel Coggin, Frank J. Fabozzi, and Robert D. Arnott,
   eds.: The Handbook of Equity Style Management (Second edition, Frank J. Fabozzi Associates,
   New Hope, Penn.), 167—170.

Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional varia-
   tion in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1—33.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
   performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035—1058.

                                                31
DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?, Journal of
    Finance 40, 793—805.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 1996, The persistence of risk-adjusted
   mutual fund performance, Journal of Business 69, 133—157.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, Efficiency with costly
   information: A reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of Financial Stud-
   ies 6, 1—22.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross section of expected stock returns,
   Journal of Finance 47, 427—465.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
   bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.

Goetzmann, William N., and Nadav Peles, 1997, Cognitive dissonance and mutual fund investors,
   Journal of Financial Research 20, 145—158.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of quarterly
   portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393—416.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1992, The persistence of mutual fund performance, Journal
   of Finance 42, 1977—1984.

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies,
   portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American Economic
   Review 85, 1088—1105.

Hemmerick, Steve, 1998, Taking MPT to the masses: New Internet-based service aimed at 401(k)
   participants, Pensions & Investments, February 23 1998.

Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, Hot hands in mutual funds:
   Short-run persistence of performance, 1974—88, Journal of Finance 48, 93—130.


                                                32
Ippolito, Richard A., 1989, Efficiency with costly information: A study of mutual fund performance,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 1—24.

Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence from the
    mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45—70.

Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945—1964, Journal of
    Finance 23, 389—416.

Karceski, Jason, 1998, Return-chasing behavior, beta's death, and the book-to-market effect, work-
   ing paper, University of Florida.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Robert W. Vishny, 1991, Window dressing
   by pension fund managers, American Economic Review 81, 227—231.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, The structure and performance of
   of the money management industry, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconornics,
   339—39 1.


Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapo-
   lation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541—1578.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, What do money managers do?,
   working paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Malkiel, Burton C., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds, 1971—1991, Journal of
   Finance 50, 549—572.

Sharpe, William F., 1992, Asset allocation: Management style and performance measurement,
   Journal of Portfolio Management 18, 7—19.

Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal of Finance
   53, 1589—1622.

Stickel, Scott E., 1997, The financial characteristics of Wall Street darlings and dogs, working
   paper, La Salle University.

                                                33
</ref_section>
                                                             Table I
                                               of
                                    Description Sample of Mutual Funds and Aggregate Performaiice

At time end of each calendar year from 1976 to 1997 the number of domestic equity mutual funds with at least one observation on
                                                                                                                                        monthly
rate of return that year is reported. Monthly rates of return are calculated for the equally-weightedportfolio of funds with available
                                                                                                                                       data, and
are compoundedover the calendar year to obtain annual rates of return. Also reported are the annual returns for the CRSP
index (denoted CRSP), the Standard & Poor's Composite Index (S&P 500), the Russell 1000 index and the Russell 2000 index.value-weighted
                                                                                                                                   The last two
rows report the mean and standard deviation of returns (over the period 1979—97) on the portfolio of funds and the market. indices.


                                                                                          Return on:
                                             Total number    Equally-weighted
                     Year-end                  of funds      portfolio of funds CRSP       S&P500      Russell 1000   Russell 2000
                       1976                       270               26.36         26.52     23.85
                       1977                       284                2,25         -4.16     -7.18
                       1978                       294               11.54          7.81      6.57
                       1979                       300               27.12         23.58     18.44         22.32          43.09
                       1980                       310               32.21         32.74     32.42         31.88          38.60
                       1981                       325               -0.12         -4.27     -4.91         -5.09           2.05
                       1982                       352               26.30         20.18     21.41         20.32          24.95
                       1983                       398               21.02         23.06     22.51         22.12          29.12
                       1984                       452               -0.73          5.10      6.27          4.73          -7.30
                       1985                       519               27.27         31.16     32.16         32.26          31.05
                       1986                       623               14.14         16.89     18.47         17.86           5.68
                       1987                       737                1.95          2.81      5.23          2.93          -8.76
                       1988                       852               14.37         17.50     16.81         17.24           24.91
                       1989                       893               22.47         29.37     31.49         30.41            16.24
                       1990                       962               -5.14         -4.82     -3.17         -4.14          -19.52
                       1991                      1032              33.39          30.57     30.55         33.01           46.03
                       1992                      1177               8.68           8.00      7.67          9.04            18.42
                       1993                      1314              12.76          10.97      9.99         10.17            18.90
                       1994                      1998              -1.75          -0.63      1.31          0.37           -1.83
                       1995                      2440              31.22          35.73     37.43         37.78          28.45
                       1996                      2789              19.95          21.25     23.07         22.42           16.51
                       1997                      3336              24.97          30.46     33.36         32.83          22.37
                  Mean (1979-97)                                   16.32          17.36     17.92         17.81           17.31
            Standard deviation (1979-97)                           12.66          13.58     13.22         13.59           18.13
                                                                            Table 11
                                                           Portfolio Characteristics for Mutual Funds

The sample period is January 1984 to December 1997. At every calendar year-end for each fund, weighted average characteristics
                                                                                                                                  (expressed
as percentile rankings) are calculated across all stocks held in the fund's portfolio. The calculations are based on the fund's most
                                                                                                                                     recently
reported holdings as of the year-end. The characteristics are: size (equity market capitalization), book-to-market value of equity, past three-
year stock return beginning four years and ending one year ago, and the most recent past one-year stock return. Based on its portfolio
characteristic a fund is assigned to one of ten groups determined by the decile breakpoints of all domestic stocks in the Standard & Poor's
Composite Index. Total market value is calculated across all stocks in the index belonging to the decile and expressed relative to the total
value of stocks in the index. Total fund net assets is also calculcated across all funds assigned to the decile and           relative to the total
net assets of all funds. The percentage of fund observations in each decile is also calculated. To compute theexpressed
                                                                                                                    overall average characteristic
of the index and the aggregate fund portfolio, all domestic equity stocks are ranked by the relevant characteristic and
                                                                                                                            assigned a score from
zero (lowest) to one (highest). The portfolio average for the index is the capitalization-weighted
                                                                                                       average of these ranks across all stocks in
the index; the average for the fund portfolio is the weighted average across stocks in the aggregated portfolio of all funds, with weights given
by the value of all funds' holdings of the stock. All the reported statistics are weighted averages over all year-ends, where the weights are the
number of funds reporting holdings in that year.

                                 Panel A: Distribution (in percent) of fund net assets, by firm size
                               Portfolio                                               Firm size category
                 Sample        average         1   (Small)       2      3       4         5      6       7       8          9      10 (Large)
                 S&P500          0.98               0.66       1.53    2.40    3.26     4.49    5.76    7.56   10.62      16.70      47.01
                 Funds           0.94              10.71       6.59    6.80   10.60     9.53   12.46   13.90   24.81       4.27       0.32
                 % of funds                        26.12       9.73    8.10    8.62     9.85   11.03   11.93   10.91       3.17       0.54



                              Panel B: Distribution (in percent) of fund net assets, by book-to-market
                              Portfolio                                          Book-to-market category
               Sample         average      1   (Growth)          2         3       4         5       6        7     8        9     10   (Value)
                S&P 500         0.38               17.71       14.52     11.54   10.24     10.75   10.50    8.06   6.35     6.10        4.22
                Funds           0.35               3.19        11.65     14.39   25.63     27.31   11.33    4.64   1.41     0.44        0.02
               % of funds                          4.48        13.38     18.72   22.38     19.32   11.89    6.65   2.07     1.06        0.05
             Panel C: Distribution (in percent) of fund net assets, by past 3-year return
               Portfolio                                      Past return category
Sample         average     1   (Loser)    2      3      4       5       6       7      8        9     10   (Winner)
S&P 500          0.63           4.09     6.63   7.75   8.33    9.90   11.17   12.85   13.91   13.39        11.96
Funds            0.63           0.00     0.03   0.55   2.75   15.37   28.30   28.78   14.61    9.05         0.56
% of funds                      0.02     0.34   1.60   4.80   13.58   25.63   28.42   18.52    6.52         0.57


              Portfolio                                       Past return category
Sample         average     1   (Loser)     2     3      4       5       6       7       8       9     10   (Winner)
S&P 500          0.60           4.32     6.50   7.57   8.71   12.59   12.50   11.43   12.62   11.70        12.05
Funds            0.62           0.00     0.04   0.33   2.19   12.39   35.40   26.04   14.68    6.60         2.33
% of funds                      0.03     0.28   0.88   4.06   14.91   29.00   24.37   15.78    7.48         3.22
                                                                    Table III
                                           Distribution of estimated factor loadings for mutual funds

At the end of each year frorri 1978 to 1997 a three-factor regression model is estimated for
                                                                                             every fund with a complete history of moiithily
returns over the prior three years. Funds are assigned to decile portfolios based on the estimated coefficients from the three-factor iiiodel
and the equally-weighted average coefficient across funds within a decile is calculated. The numbers
                                                                                                        reported in panel A are the weighted
averages across years, where the weights are the number of fund observations available in that year. The factor model regression is also
applied each year to several market benchmarks; averages over the sample period of the           for the benchmarks are reported in panel B.
The benchmark portfolios are: the Russell 1000 Growth Index (RiG), the Russell 1000loadings
                                                                                         Value Index (R1V), the Russell 2000 Growth Index
(R2G), the Russell 2000 Value Index (R2V), and the Standard & Poor's 500 Index (S&P500).

                                        Panel A: Distribution of factor loadings for mutual funds
                  Loading on:       1   (Low)        2         3             4           5            6           7        8         9    10 (High)
                 Market                 0.510    0.714 0.798 0.860 0.909                             0.949 0.987         1.031    1.092     1.240
                 Size                -0.263     -0.140 -0,062 0.008 0.081                            0.173      0.293    0.440    0.624     0.935
                 Book-to-market      -0.706     -0.412 -0.267 -0.155 -0.065                          0.004 0.071         0.143    0.232     0.406


                                  Panel B: Distribution of factor loadings for benchmark indexes
                                           Loading on:          RiG           R1V         R2G             R2V     S&P500
                                         Market                 0.985            1.031       1.095        0.966    1.001
                                         Size                  -0.164        -0.103          0.989        0.837       -0.215
                                         Book-to-market -0.405                0.374      -0.316           0.336       -0.014

    A portfolio's factor loadings in a given year are estimated from a three-factor time series regression                       of the form
                                                     = cip + /3ip[i'mt   —
                                         rpt — Fft                rft) + /i2SMB + /33HML + er,t
estimated from monthly returns over the prior three years. Here      is the return in month t for portfolio p, r/t is the return on a one-month
Treasury bill, rmt is the return on the value-weighted portfolio of stocks listed on both the CRSP and Compustat databases, and SMB,
HML are the returns on zero-investment factor-mimickingportfolios for size and book-to-market, respectively.
                                                  Table IV
                     Mutual fund performance (percent per month) and loadings from
                     three-factor and four-factor models, classified by investment style
 At the end of each year from 1984 to 1996 all funds are sorted by the value-weighted average size rank from
 their portfolio holdings and assigned to one of three portfolios. The first portfolio comprises funds ranked
in the top 20 percent by size ranks; the second portfolio includes funds ranked in the middle 60 percent by
size ranks; the third portfolio includes funds ranked in the bottom 20 percent by size ranks. Within each
size classification all funds are also sorted by the value-weighted average book-to-market ranks from their
portfolio holdings and assigned to one of three portfolios. The first portfolio includes funds ranked in the top
20 percent by book-to-market ranks; the second portfolio includes funds ranked in the middle 60 percent;
the third portfolio contains funds ranked in the bottom 20 percent by book-to-market ranks. For each of the
resulting nine portfolios, equally-weighted returns are calculated over the subsequent twelve months. This
table reports estimated factor loadings from a three-factor model applied to the complete history of returns
of each portfolio. An asterisk indicates that the estimated coefficient is at least two standard errors away
from zero. Returns are expressed as percent per month.

                       Panel A: Fund performance under three-factor model
                                                             Rank on book-to-market
                    Rank on size       Loading on:      1 (Value)     2      3 (Growth)
                    1 (Large-cap)    Constant             0.000    -0.049       0.007
                                     Market               0.756      0.851*      0.897*
                                     Size                0.150*
                                     Book-to-market       0.118*    -0.027       0.306*
                    2 (Mid-cap)      Constant            -0.028      0.007       0.107
                                     Market               0.828*     0.894*      0.947*
                                     Size                 0.047*     0.080*      0.245*
                                     Book-to-market       0.176*                 0.525*
                    3 (Small-cap)    Constant             0.045     -0.005        9347*
                                     Market               0.871*     1.012*      1.063*
                                     Size                 0.618      0.659*      0.799*
                                     Book-to-market       0.219

                        Panel B: Fund performance under four-factor model
                                                             Rank on book-to-market
                    Rank on size       Loading on:      1 (Value)      2     3 (Growth)
                    1 (Large-cap)    Constant             0.018    -0.051      -0.005
                                     Market               0.754     0.851*      0.898*
                                     Size                -0.171                -0.156
                                     Book-to-market       0.107*   -0.026
                                     Past return         -0.031     0.002       0.020
                    2 (Mid-cap)      Constant            -0.024    -0.005       0.076
                                    Market                0.827     0.895*      0.949*
                                    Size                  0.042     0.094*      0.279*
                                    Book-to-market        0.173*    0.076*      0.506*
                                    Past return          -0.008      0.020*      0.051*
                    3 (Small-cap)   Constant              0.061     -0.023       0.296*
                                    Market               0.870*      1.013       1.067*
                                    Size                 0.600*      0.679*      0.855*
                                    Book-to-market       0.210*     -0.222      -0.636
                                    Past return          -0.026      0.030       0.084*
    In panel A, each portfolio's factor loadings are estimated from a three-factor time series regression of the
form
                           —
                               rft = + /3ip[rmt — rft] + I32SMB + 133HML +
using monthly returns over the sample period. Here rpt is the return in month t for portfolio p, rft is the
return on a one-month Treasury bill, rmt is the return on the value-weighted portfolio of stocks carried on
both the CRSP and Compustat databases, and SMB, HML are the returns on zero-investment factor-
mimicking portfolios for size and book-to-market. In panel B, each portfolio's factor loadings are estimated
from a four-factor time series regression of the form
                rpt —    =      + I3ip[rmt — rft]   + i32SMB + /3aHML + i34WML +
where WML is the return on a zero-investment factor-mimicking portfolio for price momentum (return over
the prior year).
                                                 Table V
                   Correlations and average absolute differences between past fund style
                   and future fund style, based on portfolio holdings or factor loadings

At the end of each year from 1984 to 1994 each fund's past style is compared to its future style. A fund's
past style is measured over the most recent prior three-year period while its future style is measured over the
subsequent three-year period. Style with respect to size and with respect to book-to-market is measured using
either its factor loadings (panel A) or the fund's portfolio characteristics (panel B). Under each procedure,
style measures (past or future) for all funds are ranked each year and rescaled from zero (the lowest-ranked
fund) to one (the highest-ranked fund). The table reports the simple correlation between past and future
style ranks under each procedure, pooled over funds and over years. Also reported in parentheses is the
average absolute difference between the past and future style ranks. Statistics are reported for: all funds;
large-capitalization funds (funds in the top thirty percent when sorted each year by style rank on size);
small-capitalization funds (funds in the bottom thirty percent when sorted by size style rank); value funds
(funds falling in the top thirty percent when sorted each year by style rank on book-to-market); growth
funds (funds ranked in the bottom thirty percent when sorted by style rank on book-to-market).

                                Panel A: Style based on factor loading
                                                        Future style for:
                                                     Size   Book-to-market
                                 All funds           0.73          0.71
                                                    (0.15)        (0.16)
                                 Large-cap funds     0.79          0.71
                                                    (0.15)        (0.14)
                                 Small-cap funds     0.88          0.71
                                                    (0.11)        (0.18)
                                 Value funds         0.73          0.77
                                                    (0.16)        (0.16)
                                 Growth funds        0.74          0.83
                                                    (0.16)        (0.14)


                          Panel B: Style based on portfolio characteristics
                                                        Future style for:
                                                     Size   Book-to-market
                                 All funds           0.85         0.77
                                                    (0.11)        (0.14)
                                 Large-cap funds     0.89          0.76
                                                    (0.11)        (0.13)
                                 Small-cap funds     0.93          0.81
                                                    (0.07)        (0.14)
                                 Value funds         0.85          0.86
                                                    (0.11)        (0.12)
                                 Growth funds        0.84          0.85
                                                    (0.11)        (0.13)

   The two procedures for measuring fund style with respect to either size or book-to-market are as follows.
The first procedure (the loadings approach) is based on the estimated coefficients for the size and book-to-
market factors from a three-factor model regression. The regression for a fund's past style uses the past three
years of monthly fund returns while the regression for future style uses the subsequent three years of returns
on the fund. The second procedure (the portfolio characteristics approach) is based on the fund portfolio's
weighted average firm size or book-to-market (where the weights are the proportion of fund net assets held
in each stock), using the most recent prior data on its holdings. A fund's future style under this procedure is
based on its most recent value-weighted average characteristic known at the end of the third year following
the evaluation year. Under either procedure, the measures (portfolio characteristics or estimated loadings)
for all funds are ranked at the evaluation year and rescaled from zero (the lowest-ranked fund) to one (the
highest-ranked fund). Simple correlations, and average absolute differences, between past and future styles
measured under each procedure are estimated using style measures pooled over funds and over years.
                                                                     Table VI
                                         Shifts in mutual fund style, classified by prior fund performance

At the end of each year from 1984 to 1994 every fund with available data is assigned to one of twelve
                                                                                                             portfolios on the basis of a two-way
within-group classification. Each portfolio's past style with respect to size or book-to-market is then compared with its future style. In panel
A, a fund is assigned to a portfolio on the basis of its past two-year compound return and its value-weighted average firm size characteristic.
In panel B the classification is by past two-year compound return and the fund's value-weighted
                                                                                                       average book-to-market characteristic. Iii
the classification by past return, there are four groups: group 1 (winners) comprises the twenty percent    of funds with the highest past return;
group 2 comprises funds ranked in the eighth to sixth deciles by past fund return; group 3 comprises funds ranked in the fifth to third deciles
of past return; group 4 (losers) includes the twenty percent of funds with the lowest past return. Within each of these four
                                                                                                                                 groups, funds are
sorted by their value-weighted average characteristic (size or book-to-market) and assigned to one of three groups. Group I includes funds
ranked in the top thirty percent on the relevant characteristic; group 2 includes the intermediate forty percent of the ranked
                                                                                                                                    funds; group 3
includes the funds ranked in the bottom thirty percent by the characteristic. For each of the resulting twelve               the simple average of
the size or book-to-market characteristic ranks across all member funds is calculated at the portfolio formationportfolios, to
                                                                                                                   year-end give the portfolio's
past style and at the end of the subsequent year to give its future style. Each fund's characteristic rank is based on its most recently reported
holdings prior to the year-end. The weighted average across all portfolio formation years is reported in the table, where the weights are the
number of fund observations in each year. Also reported is the weighted average over years of the mean absolute differences between the
                                                                                                                                              past
and future characteristic ranks across all funds within a portfolio.


                                                 Panel A: Fund style with respect to size
                                               Past    Past    Future     Mean            Past          Future        Mean
                      Rank on:                2-year   size     size    absolute     book-to-market book-to-market absolute
             Past return       Size           return   rank    rank     difference        rank           rank      difference
             1   (Winner)   1 (Large-cap)     34.38    0.730   0.708      0.065          0.581               0.596          0.073
                            2 (Mid-cap)       35.94    0.411   0.412      0.065          0.553               0.572          0.081
                            3 (Small-cap)     36.88    0.133   0.153      0.041          0.534               0.549          0.074
             2              1                 23.19    0.860   0.838      0.050          0.568               0.566          0.072
                            2                 23.21    0.567   0.566      0.074          0.553               0.558          0.095
                            3                 23.20    0.216   0.228      0.051          0.502               0.516          0.102
             3              1                 16.04    0.858   0.832      0.060          0.501               0.493          0.086
                            2                 15.92    0.566   0.581      0.089          0.522               0.508          0.091
                            3                 15.63    0.226   0.237      0.050          0.445               0.449          0.111
             4 (Loser)      1   (Large-cap)    6.99    0.755   0.734      0.091          0.415               0.386          0.103
                            2   (Mid-cap)      5,36    0.369   0.384      0.078          0.379               0.362          0.102
                            3   (Small-cap)    2.65    0.116   0.132      0.035          0.397               0.399          0.095
                              Panel B: Fund style with respect to book-to-market
                            Past         Past    Future     Mean            Past          Future         Mean
          Rank on:         2-year        size     size    absolute     book-to-market book-to-market   absolute
Past return Book-to-market return        rank    rank     difference        rank           rank        difference
1   (Winner)   1                 35.16   0.400   0.397       0.050         0.830
                 (Value)                                                                  0.821          0.060
               2 (Medium)        34.80   0.469   0.468      0.057          0.548          0.556          0.079
               3 (Growth)        37.52   0.405   0.407      0.066          0.277          0.331          0.092
2              1                 23.14   0.566   0.567      0.053          0.820          0.781          0.075
               2                 23.11   0,579   0.576      0.059          0.551          0.548          0.093
               3                 23.38   0.504   0.495      0.068          0.245          0.306          0.101
3              1                 15.69   0.565   0.572      0.071          0.765          0.705          0.094
               2                 16.09   0.597   0.591      0.067          0.488          0.481          0.094
               3                 15.76   0.490   0.494      0.067          0.215          0.265          0.098
4 (Loser)      1   (Value)        4.74   0.423   0.433      0.078          0.648          0.572          0.120
               2   (Medium)       5.03   0.449   0.455      0.074          0.381          0.386          0.105
               3   (Growth)       5.50   0.364   0.360      0.055          0.146          0.171          0.074
                                                                   Table VII
                                     Return prediction errors (percent per month) from style classification
                                            models based on characteristics and based on loadings

At the end of each year from 1984 to 1995 two approaches are used to measure styles and to predict returns of mutual funds. Each fund's
style with respect to book-to-market is measured using either the characteristics of its portfolio holdings (the characteristics approach) or its
past returns (the loadings approach). Based on the differences between the style measures under the two approaches, two sets of funds are
selected: the ten percent of funds with the largest discrepancies in their style classifications such that they are classified as value-oriented
based on characteristics but growth-oriented based on loadings (panel A); and the ten percent of funds with the
                                                                                                                      largest discrepancies such
that they are classified as growth-oriented based on characteristics but value-oriented based on loadings (panel B). To be eligible for this
analysis a fund must have at most five percent of its net assets held as cash. Subsequent returns on each set of funds are predicted using
the characteristics-based and loadings-based approaches. Results of the predictions (averaged over all test years) are
                                                                                                                          presented for the two
months with the lowest return and for the two months with the highest return (out of tIme twenty-four months
                                                                                                                    following the test year-end)
on HML, the mimicking portfolio for the book-to-market factor. Summary statistics are presented for the actual return on the funds
                                                                                                                                              (in
percent per month) and, for each prediction model, the predicted return, error (actual minus predicted return) and absolute error. Returns
and errors are measured as percent per month.

         Panel A: Funds classified as value-oriented based on characteristics but growth-oriented based on loadings
         Months sorted    Funds'                  Characterzstics-basedapproach                     Loadzngs-based approach
               by HML       actual return   Predicted return Error Absolute error          Predicted return    Error Absolute error
          I   (Lowest)          6.571             6.213          0.358        1.394              7.564         -0.993    1.693
          2                     3.806             4,025         -0.219        1.396              4.720         -0.914    1.711
          Average               5.189             5.119          0.070        1.395              6.142         -0.954        1.702
          3                    -4.157            -4.001         -0.156        1.614             -5.132          0.975        1.857
          4 (Highest)          -0.600             0.214         -0.814        1.345             -1.656          1.056        1.674
          Average              -2.379            -1.894         -0.485        1.480             -3.394          1.016        1.766



         Panel B: Funds classified as growth-orientedbased on characteristics but value-oriented based on loadings
          Months sorted       Funds'              Gharacteristics-based approach                    Loadings- based approach
           by HML          actual return    Predicted return Error Absolute error         Predicted return     Error    Absolute error-
          1   (Lowest)          6.624             7.219         -0.596        1.430              5.483          1.140       2.139
          2                     4.752             5.384         -0.633        1.304              4.013          0.739       1.140
          Average               5.688             6.302         -0.615        1.367              4.748          0.940       1.640
          3                    -4.453            -4.878          0.425        1.359             -3.822         -0.631       1.731
          4 (Highest)          -3.534            -2.791         -0.743        1.620             -2.036         -1.498       2.421
          Average              -3.994            -3.835        -0.159         1.490             -2.929         -1.065       2.076

    The two procedures for measuring fund style are as follows. The characteristics—based approach is based on the fund 1)ortfohlo's weighted
average size or book—to—market (where the weights are the proportion of fund net assets held um the stock). ('hme porl.fohio ('litractcris(iCs
are calculated at each calendar year--end based on the iiiost recent prior data oii its holdings. 'Ihie loadiiigs—loeed apptOa(li IS hitS('d oil t
estimated coefficients for the size and book-to-market factors from a three-factor model regression using the past three years of uioiithly fund
returns. Under either procedure, the measures (portfolio characteristics or estimated loadings) for all funds are ranked at the evaluation year
and rescaled from zero (the lowest-rankedfund) to one (the highest-ranked fund). Given a fund's style classification, future fund returns are
predicted under each approach. Under the holdings-based approach, each stock in a fund's portfolio is matched with a portfolio of stocks
having the same quintile rank on size and on book-to-market. 'i'he fund's predicted return is the value-weighted return on the matching
portfolio given the component stocks' realized future returns. Under the returns-based approach, a fund's predicted return is based on the
estimated loadings over the prior three-year period and the mimicking portfolios' realized future returns.
