NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT IS SOCIAL CAPITAL?
THE DETERMINANTS OF TRUST
AND TRUSTWORTHINESS
Edward L. Glaeser
David Laibson
Jose A. Scheinkman
Christine L. Soutter

Working Paper 7216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

The MacArthur Foundation has generously funded this research which is part of the MacArthur Foundation
Network on Norms and Preferences. Glaeser and Laibson also thank the National Science Foundation and the
Sloan Foundation. David Cutler, Lawrence Katz, George Loewenstein, Andrei Shleifer, and Steve Tadelis
provided helpful comments. Meghana Bhatt, Lars Nesheim, and Joseph Robbins provided excellent research
assistance. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 1999 by Edward L. Glaeser, David Laibson, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Christine L. Soutter. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What is Social Capital?
The Determinants of Trust and Trustworthiness
Edward L. Glaeser, David Laibson,
Jose A. Scheinkman, and Christine L. Soutter
NBER Working Paper No. 7216
July 1999
JEL No. C9, D7, J7
ABSTRACT
Using a sample of Harvard undergraduates, we analyze trust and social capital in two
experiments. Trusting behavior and trustworthiness rise with social connection; differences in race
and nationality reduce the level of trustworthiness. Certain individuals appear to be persistently more
trusting, but these people do not say they are more trusting in surveys. Survey questions about trust
predict trustworthiness not trust. Only children are less trustworthy. People behave in a more
trustworthy manner towards higher status individuals, and therefore status increases earnings in the
experiment. As such, high status persons can be said to have more social capital.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
327 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-14
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@harvard.edu

Jose A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
j-scheinkman@uchicago.edu

Christine L. Soutter
2687 Harvard Yard Mail Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
cls@wjh.harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

Following Jacobs (1961), Loury (1977), Coleman (1990), and Putnam (1993), researchers
have argued that "social capital" — which is often measured with questions about the level

of trust— influences a wide range of significant economic and political phenomena.
Arrow (1972) and Fukuyama (1995) suggest that the level of trust in a society strongly
influences its economic success. Knack and Keefer (1997) show that a one-standard
deviation increase in a measure of country-level trust increases economic growth by more

than one-half of a standard deviation. Putnam (1993) uses Italian cross-regional data to
show that local governments are more efficient where there is greater civic engagement.
LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silaries, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) find that across countries, a one-

standard deviation increase in the same measure of trust increases judicial efficiency by

0.7 of a standard deviation and reduces government corruption by 0.3 of a standard
deviation.

Usually social capital is described as a community level attribute.1 Jacobs (1961) defines

social capital as "neighborhood networks." According to Putnam (1995), social capital
represents "features of social life—networks, norms, and trust—that enable participants

to act together more effectively to pursue shared objectives." The theory and empirical

work on social capital generally focus on community-level aggregates and downplay
individual heterogeneity. Social capital is seen as a feature of the group, not the person.

However, even group-level social capital must be a function of individual-level actions
and attributes. Networks are not merely the result of historical accident, they come about
as individuals spend time and energy to connect with others.2 If economists are going to
understand social capital, then we must start with an analysis of the decision-makers who

actually invest in social connection. A micro-approach to social capital might sensibly
Individual-oriented definitions of social capital do exist. Loury (1979) thought social
capital captured

"the consequences of social position in facilitating acquisition of the standard human capital
characteristics." Shleifer and Summers (1988) emphasize individual heterogeneity in trustworthiness and
argue that firms promote managers who are known to be innately trustworthy (i.e. there is an economic
return to one particular form of social capital).
2 DiPasquale and Glaeser (1999) focus on the factors that influence the incentives to invest in social

2

capital.

begin with an individual-based definition of the concept: an individual's social capital is

that individual's social characteristics—including charisma, status and access to
networks—that enable that person to extract private returns from interactions with
others.3 The social capital of a set of individuals is the aggregate of those individuals'
social capital that takes into account all externalities across the members of the set.4

This paper makes the case for an individual-oriented approach to social capital in three

ways. First, we document the existence of stable, individual heterogeneity in social
capital, trust (trust is defined as the commitment of resources to an activity where the

outcome depends upon the cooperative behavior of others), and trustworthiness
(trustworthiness is defined as behavior that increases the returns to people who trust you).
Without significant individual heterogeneity, there would be little reason to eschew group

level analysis for individual-based analysis.

Second, we show that a simple

microeconomic model provides comparative statics that are generally vindicated in a
simple experiment involving trust. Third, we show that private returns to social capital
variables appear (at least in our particular case) to be quite different than social returns to

the same variables. Since investment in social capital is presumably driven by private,
not public, returns, this finding means that understanding investment in social capital
cannot be done with an approach that only thinks about public returns to social capital.

Much of the social capital research relies upon survey questions such as "Generally
speaking would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can't be too careful?"

While these survey questions are interesting, they are also vague, abstract and hard to
interpret. Putnam (1995), for example, laments this problem: "Since trust is so central to
the theory of social capital, it would be desirable to have strong behavioral indicators of

trends in social trust or misanthropy. I have discovered no such behavioral measures."
In this paper, we observe trust and trustworthiness in experiments involving monetary

rewards. To test whether social capital is a stable individual-level characteristic, we
3

.

..

.

.

.

.

.

..

As such, individual social capital is determined both by individual level characteristics (e.g. personal

skills) and group level characteristics (e.g. community cohesion).

3

examine whether survey questions and background characteristics predict trust,
trustworthiness and the ability to extract resources from a trust game (this ability is social
capital in this setting).

We first survey 258 Harvard undergraduates and then a subpopulation of 196
undergraduates plays two trust games. The limited size and unusual nature of our subject

population naturally means that there may be limits to the general applicability of our
results. First, individuals are paired and meet their partner. Then they are separated and
one member of the pair (the sender) has the opportunity to send between 0 and 15 dollars

to his or her partner (the recipient).5 The experimenter matches each dollar that is sent.

After the second player receives the transfer and the matching amount, he or she may
send money back to the first player.6 This stylized game (based on Berg, Dickhaut and
McCabe, 1995) is similar to many economically relevant settings such as investment with

imperfect contracts or producing a public good. In our second game, subjects report their

willingness to pay for an envelope containing 10 dollars that is addressed to them and
dropped in several different public places (e.g. Harvard Square) under various conditions
(e.g. sealed and stamped).

Overview of Results: The degree of social connection between the sender and recipient—

the number of friends they have in common, being members of the same race or
nationality and the duration of their acquaintanceship—generally predict the level of trust

and trustworthiness in the two-person trust game. These results might mean that higher

probabilities of repeated play in dense social network facilitate trust (as in Abreu, 1988,
Greif, 1993) or that inter-personal altruism supports trust.

These results vindicate the

importance ofjoint group membership for creating social capital.
"

This aggregation is complex and characteristics that increase an individual's social capital may actually

reduce the social capital of the group. For example, a particularly slick car salesman may have plenty of
individual social capital but he is likely to reduce the social capital of any group that he joins.
One-half of the sample of trustees (essentially chosen randomly) were given the opportunity to promise to
return at least as much money as they were sent by the trustor.
All of the rules of the game are common knowledge.
Fershtman and Gneezy (1998) also use a variant of this game to examine trust is Israel and finda similar
result. They document the importance of group membership by showing that males (notfemales) are less
trusting of Sephardic males. In their version of the game, players do not meet one another and theyare left
to deduce ethnic background from their opponents' last name.

'

4

We also find that individual characteristics predict trust, trustworthiness and social
capital. While most survey questions about trust do not predict trust in eithergame, two
relatively precise questions about trusting strangers do predict trust in the envelope drop
game and in the two-person trust game when the subjects are indeed strangers. Measures

of trusting behavior are better predictors of the individual's level of trust than abstract

survey questions; an index of past trusting behavior has a 22.4 percent correlation
coefficient with the amount sent in the trust game (significant at the 5 percent level). The

connection between trust in the envelope drop experiment and trust in the two-person

trust game is almost significant at the 10 percent level. There appear to be stable
individual specific characteristics that influence trust.

There are also stable, individual measures that predict trustworthiness. The basic survey
questions about how much you trust others, surprisingly, predict the extent to which you

yourself should be trusted. An index of an individual's response to General Social
Survey (GSS) attitudinal questions about others being trustworthy, fair and helpful has a

34 percent correlation with the amount of money that the individual himself gives back
(significant at the 0.1 percent level).8 While trust survey questions are bad at predicting

any individual's level of trust, they may be good at predicting the overall level of
trustworthiness in society.

Subjects who are only children are less trustworthy in our experiment than subjects with
siblings. The average respondent with siblings returns 98 percent of the amount sent over

(49 percent of the doubled amount). The average only child returns 46 percent of the
amount sent over.

8

The

lack of correlation between trusting behaviors and self-reported measures of trust is consistent with a
wide range of failures of attitudes to predict behavior in the social psychological literature (for a review,
see Ajzen and Fishbein, 1977). LaPierre (1934) finds that the self-reports willingness of restaurant or
motel owners to cross racial barriers and serve minority clientele is not correlated with later behaviors to
actual minorities. McClelland, Koestner and Weinberger (1989) find no correlation between self-reported
motivation to achieve and achievement-enhancing behavior. They explain this phenomenon by arguing
that self-reported motivation reflects expectations about society as a whole, not any individual attribute.
Banaji and Greenwald (1994) have begun a growing trend toward use of implicit cognitive measures to
determine unconscious values that do predict behavior rather than stated beliefs, which often do not.

5

Background characteristics capturing the level of status and organization membership—
variables meant to proxy for an individual's own social capital-- only weakly predict the

level of trust, but strongly predict the amount ofmoney that senders receive back from
recipients. As a result, these measures of social status positively predict financial returns

for subjects in the game who start in the sender position. People with better educated
parents, students who work fewer hours for pay, individuals with more friends, and
members of volunteer organizations all earn more money in the experiment.

We interpret these facts as meaning that, at least in this particular social setting,
individual variables meant to capture social capital really do produce individual financial

returns, just as one would expect of any form of "capital". However, these social capital
variables do not enhance everyone's welfare (at least not in this game). People who are
playing against these high status subjects end up with less earnings from the game. This

suggests that aggregation of social capital variables may be much more difficult than

aggregation of physical or human capital—some types of individual social capital
produce negative externalities.

II.

Discussion and Analysis of the Game

This section discusses the connections between trust, trustworthiness and social capital,
and we start with the determinants of trust.9 People differ in their willingness trust others

because of three factors: (1) different beliefs about the trustworthiness of others,
controlling for situational variation, (2) different preferences about giving to others and
(3) different abilities to elicit trustworthy behavior from others.o Beliefs, altruistic
preferences and the ability to elicit trustworthiness may all depend on both individual and

group characteristics. To test for the presence of stable, individual heterogeneity, we

examine different measures of trust: (1) the GSS survey question, (2) past trusting
Social capital may exist in situations without trust. For example, Ball, Eckel, Grossman and Zame (1998)
document that arbitrarily assigned status increases the economic returns to subjects in a classic market
setting with no scope for trust or trustworthiness.
10 We will not consider the extent to which trust in this game is driven by risk tolerance (which is possible).

6

behavior, (3) the level of trust in the two-person trust game and (4) the level of trust in

the envelope drop. All four measures are different and not every factor will influence
every measure. For example, trust in the envelope drop game will be a function of beliefs
and preferences towards giving but will not depend on the ability to elicit trustworthiness.

One test of individual heterogeneity is to examine the correlation between these different
measures of trust. A second test is to see whether individual variation in beliefs, altruistic

preferences and the ability to punish can explain differences across individuals in the
levels of trust. We will spend little time examining differences in beliefs, as most
standard economic models have difficulty explaining why these differences in beliefs
could persist across people, We will examine the connection between trust and measures
of altruism. Most importantly, in the two-person trust game, we will examine whether
trust is related to different abilities to elicit trustworthy behavior from others.
To understand the determinants of trustworthy behavior and its connection with trust, we

now formally analyze the game that will be used in our experiments. In the first round of

the game, the sender gives an amount S (the level of trust) between 0 and S (in our
experiment S equals $15). The experiment matches this amount so that the recipient
receives a total of
where 0>1 (in our experiment
In the second period, the
recipient may return some money to the sender and we denote this sum as R, where
o

R S. This structure is representative of a large range of trust situations, where
one person puts resources into the care of another person who might decide to keep
everything for himself.

In general, trustworthiness is the product of a calculation where the benefits of short-run

financial gain are outweighed by psychic costs from cheating and long run penalties
imposed on cheaters. To capture the possible role of long-run penalties and rewards due
to repeated play, we assume that after the game (when we no longer observe the
subjects), the subjects meet again with probability 8. This continuation payoff to one
player, say "player 1," depends on the extent to which the other player, 'j," wants to

punish or reward i, which is determined by player j 's altruism toward player i:
7

Altruism,1. We assume that playerj's altruism toward player i depends upon the net

transfers made from player ito player]: Altruism,(Nei Transfer,,). The continuation

payoff also depends on the power of player], 8, 0, which determines player i's
capacity to reward and punish player 1.

The total utility that player i receives when playing against player] is:

(1) Cash, + 8 * Altruism,,(Net Transfer,,)* 0, + Allruism,,(Net Tran.sfer,,)* Cash,.

We have already discussed the first two terms in this expression. Both of those terms
reflect external returns to the player: cash and continuation payoffs after the experiment.
The possibility of a continuation payoff gives player i an incentive to transfer more to

player] (i.e. to be both more trusting and trustworthy) because player] will reward I for
his good behavior afterwards.
The third term in the utility function reflects the internal costs and benefits of trust and

trustworthiness. Following Rabin (1993), we describe these psychic influences as
reciprocal altruism. For example, altruism— whether reciprocal or not— is a reasonable

description of Chicago's South Shore Bank lending to low income communities. More
generally, altruism may be a good description of the primary psychic forces that increase
the returns to trust.

Trustworthiness is also affected by reciprocal altruism. For example, individuals who
have been shown little trust may respond spitefully by betraying that trust. However,
there are many other internal costs and benefits related to cheating others. Individuals
may be endowed with psychic mechanisms that generate costs when they cheat others

(e.g. guilt). Alternatively, people might dislike inequality and want to see the returns
from the game shared equally across participants. These forces are not altruism as it is

usually perceived, but they will still increase the marginal utility to the recipient of
There might be other psychic gains from trusting, such as satisfying a norm requiring trusting others.
8

returning money to the sender. Furthermore, it is likely that this desire to transfer will be

higher if the sender behaved generously initially. As such, our algebra, as long as it is
interpreted broadly enough, captures a wide range of psychic mechanisms.

Formally, altruism will be Altruism,, (Net Transfer11) = a. + K + a(Net

Transftr11),
where a() is increasing and concave, and the altruism of the sender lies between 0 and
1.12

The altruism from person i to person j contains

reflects the generosity of person i, and

Ic, that

two constant terms: a., which

reflects the charisma and attractiveness of

person j (perhaps one measure of person j's social capital). When person i is the
recipient/trustee, then a. might also reflect any internal distaste for cheating.

The amount of trustworthiness (i.e. the amount that the recipient returns) is found so that

the marginal cost of returning a dollar is equal to the marginal benefits from altruism (or
fairness) (ar(.,p,e,j, + 'sender + a(S)) plus the marginal benefits from avoiding punishment

after the experiment, &i'(R — S)OS,,I(Ier. Holding the amount sent constant, the amount
returned will be rising with the (1) charisma of the sender, (2) the power of the sender to
punish and reward, (3) the altruism of the recipient (which can also be interpreted as the
psychic costs of cheating), and (4) the probability of the two individuals meeting again.

Empirically, we will have difficulty distinguishing between effects (1) and (2). We will

test them together by using measures of the social status and general sociability or the

sender. We will also have difficulty differentiating between effects (3) and (4). The
length of the friendship, the number of friends the sender and recipient have in common,

and differences in race or nationality might be proxies for either effect. As long as the
amount returned is strictly positive, the amount returned increases more than one-for-one
with amount sent, i.e. dR/dS>1, which is also an implication that we will examine.13
2

There are certainly some circumstances where altruism is greater than one, but we believe that it would
be unusual for two undergraduates to prefer dollar-for-dollar transfers to other undergraduates. There are
also circumstances where altruism is negative (i.e. spite exists). Ruling out negative altruism is sufficient,
but not necessary for most of our results.
This result stems from our assumption that net transfers drive reciprocal altruism, and is not general. The
other comparative statics are much more robust across permutations of the model.

9

In the first period, the sender chooses the amount to send (i.e. the level of trust) forming

an expectation of the amount that will be returned. The financial returns from trusting
may be either positive or negative. The other returns from trusting including the benefit
of pleasing the other person, which produces both psychic rewards from altruism and a

payoff from the other player after the experiment is over. These returns are always
positive. Since dR/dS>1, as long as S>O and R>O, then marginal increases S will always

increase financial returns and increasing S always makes sense. Thus the sender either

gives nothing, or gives something and expects nothing back or gives everything (i.e.
S = S). Using this logic, in the appendix we prove:
Proposition 1: Both S and R rise weakly with 6

0/?,pw,,/ .

,

'

and K

Thus trust is predicted to increase with the probability of repeated

contact, the power of
the sender to enforce trustworthy behavior, the extent to which the sender inspires more

altruism from the recipient, and the generosity of the recipient. These effects will
increase the direct financial returns from trust, because they increase the trustworthiness

of the recipient. We will test these hypotheses empirically by looking for effects of the
status of the sender and social connection between the sender and the recipient. We will
also look at measures of general altruism to test the implication regarding

Trust is also predicted to increase with the attractiveness and power of the recipient.
These effects raise the non-financial rewards from trusting behavior, and when these
forces are strong, senders will be willing to trust even when trusting is an activity with a

negative expected dollar payoff If the ability to punish the recipient actually declined
with °'d/)1t'?:l which it might, then these comparative statics could be reversed. As
such,
we will put less stock in these implications.

I0

Comparative statics on the total returns from the experiment are also straightforward
when returns are defined in, unfortunately unobservable, utility terms. Senders with
higher values of
and O.,,,er—our key private, social capital variables-- will receive
higher levels of utility from the experiment. For many regions of parameter values, these

variables will also increase financial payoffs, but that will not always be true. In some
instances, individuals with more social capital will use that social capital to satisfy their
altruism and to generate goodwill, which will generate returns in the continuation game.

As such, higher social capital may be associated with lower financial returns from the
game but greater overall returns. We will empirically test whether financial returns in the
game are higher for senders who come from a more successful family background or who
appear to be more charismatic or who are more socially connected.'4

III.

Basic Facts from the Trust Surveys

In this section, we revisit some of the basic findings that are by now well known in the
literature on trust and social capital. As described earlier the basic dependent variable is
the answer given by respondents to the question: "Generally speaking, would you say that

most people can be trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people?"
While the abstraction of this question makes interpretation difficult, we interpret this
question to ask about individual's expectations of trustworthiness averaged over a range

of situations. As discussed above, variation in answers to this question might occur
because of differences in beliefs about the trustworthiness of a common set of people or
because some people are better at eliciting trustworthy behavior from others.'5

Table I gives mean answers to this question in the National Opinion Research Center's
General Social Survey (the GSS). This survey is the primary source for U.S. evidence on

trust. Since its inception in 1972, the survey has been administered 20 times to a sample
4

We focus on financial returns for senders rather than recipients because for senders, payoffs in the
experiment (which are primarily determined by inducing trustworthiness) are Ukely to be positively
correlated with payoffs after the experiment. However, as recipients who do well are those who cheat the
senders, the model predicts them to do poorly after the experiment.

Ii

of between one and two thousand respondents. The sample of questions asked changes

from survey to survey, but the trust question has been asked almost continuously.
Definitions of variables appear in Appendix II. The last two rows compare the sample
that we will use for our trust experiment with the GSS sample. The responses of our
Harvard subjects closely resemble the responses of GSS subjects. particularly when we
focus on the GSS subjects who are young and college educated.

The first regression of Table 2 presents our benchmark results, where we run probit
regressions to estimate how different characteristics explain trust and report the marginal

effects of the variables. Trust is much lower for later cohorts. The gap in the level of
trust between individuals who were born before 1914 and those who are born after 1959

is 30.4 percent.' Supporting the prediction of the model that higher status persons are
better at eliciting trustworthiness, trust is much higher among richer and well-educated
individuals. College graduates are more than 35 percent more likely to answer yes to the

trust question than high school dropouts. Blacks are 27 percent less likely to say that
they are trusting than whites.'7 Men are slightly more trusting. Married persons are also
more trusting. City size has a slightly negative effect on the amount of trust.
Most of these results have multiple interpretations that emphasize both group-level social

capital and individual-level social capital. For example, the positive effect of education
on trust might be the result of groups of more educated people being more trustworthy.
Alternatively, education might create individual social capital by raising social skills or
because high status increases the ability to reward and punish others.

Regression (2) repeats regression (11) using membership in non-professional
organizations—a measure of observable, social behavior-- as the dependent variable.
The correlation of this variable with the trust measure is high, and many of the same
15

Variation in the answer to this question might also occur because there is heterogeneity in the definition
of "most people." It seems unlikely that differences in altruism, as discussed above, will drive answers to
this question (although certainly altruistic attitudes might correlate with this answers to this question).
'' We cannot separately identify age, cohort and time effects, due to multicollinearity. We identify
age and
cohort effects by assuming away time effects.
7 The
gap between the race diminishes in states where blacks are less of a minority.

12

patterns hold for this variable. For example, the basic cohort, education and income
effects remain. There are only two real differences with the trust question. The sign on
race flips, and membership in non-professional organizations peaks among individuals
between 35 and 4418

Regression

(3) returns to the trust survey question and examines the role of television.

Putnam (1995) argues that television may have played a major role in eliminating trust
and social capital. Individuals who watch dramatically large amounts of television trust
less. However including the number of hours spent watching television does not explain,

or even affect, the measured cohort effects. To evaluate the possible role of television in

explaining the decline of trust, consider the experiment of moving everyone from
watching zero television to watching 3 hours per day (the average in the GSS). This
would cause a 5.75 percentage point decline in trust, which is less than one-quarter of the
decline in trust between the pre-1940 and post-1959 cohorts.'9

Regression (4) examines the role of religion and finds that individuals who attend church

more are indeed more trusting. perhaps because they associate more with other
churchgoers (a group effect) or perhaps because they have individual characteristics
which both propel them to church and make them trusting. Denominations clearly matter,

but it is hard to find a clear pattern. Across denominations, Lutherans, Episcopalians and

Presbyterians are the more trusting groups. Baptists and Jews are the least trusting and

Catholics are in the middle (the omitted category is "Protestant—No Specific
Denomination"). 20 Goldin and Katz (1999) find that the proportion of residents in
an

area who are Lutheran in the early part of this century strongly predicts current measures

of social capital. We confirm this result and find that the proportion of Lutherans in
one's state is a strong predictor of trust.21
8

This finding is robust to controlling for the number of children in the household.
This calculation might be wrong if there are spillovers from television, so that the macro-elasticity of
watching television is much higher than our estimated micro-elasticity.
20 LaPorta et at. (1997) argue that hierarchical religions reduce social capital at the country level because
the operation of these religions entails less cooperative interaction between lay people. lannacone (1991)

argues that religion serves a large social purpose and we might expect to find significantly more trust
among members of particular religious groups (see also Glaeser and Glendon, 1997).
21 Indeed, percent
Lutheran can explain 30 percent of the variation in the mean level of trust across states.

13

This importance of Lutheranism at the state-level relative to the individual being
Lutheran himself suggests the importance of the group, rather than the individual, in
generating trust. However this impression is somewhat misleading. State-level variables

often have big coefficients, but they have little explanatory power. The additional RSquared created by including a complete set of state dummies in the regression (relative
to a regression with no state controls at all) is less than 1.5 percent. This suggests either
that states are too large to serve as meaningful proxies for social networks or that group-

level characteristics are not that important in explaining the variance in levels of trust
across people.

In regression (5), we find that indeed trust is higher in states where there are fewer high

school dropouts. However, trust is lower in states with more college graduates. If
education increased trust because more educated groups were better networked, then the
connection between college education and trust should occur at both the micro and the
macro level. However, if education increases trust by increasing the ability to punish

others then low human capital people might well be less trusting when they are
surrounded by high human capital people who can't be held accountable. As such, this
regression pushes us towards the view of social capital as an individual attribute.
Table 3 presents results from results from regressions across countries. These results are

from the World Values Survey taken in various years. The World Values Survey is
meant to be a random sample of between 500 and 3000 persons in each country. The first

column presents the mean answer to the GSS trust question in the country. Patterns
across countries do not always line up with our expectations (e.g. China).22 The table's
next column gives results on membership in organizations.

22

Fukuyama discusses China as a particularly low trust country, but we find high levels of trust there. One
explanation for this discrepancy is that in answering the trust question Chinese respondents may be heavily

weighting their trustfulness with respect to family members (which is said to be high), and placing
relatively little weight on their trustfulness to society at large (which is said to be low). This may be

another example of the difficulties with imprecise self-reported measures of trust.

14

In the next set of columns, we report results from ordinary least squares regressions
including year of birth (entered linearly) and two education dummies.23

Trust declines

significantly with birth year in several countries (13 out of 40), but in most countries the

relationship between birth year and trust is either insignificant or positive. The effect of
schooling is more pervasive. In 19 cases, continuing school until age 21 had a positive.
significant correlation with trust. In only three cases, none of which were significant, this

schooling variable had a negative effect on trust. In 20 out of 40 cases, finishing school
before age 18 had a negative and significant effect on trust. In only threes cases (one is
significant) did this lack of schooling variable increase trust.

The survey results present four stylized facts. Measured trust is declining significantly

for later cohorts in the U.S. (and 13 out of 39 other countries), but the relationship
between cohort and trust is insignificant in most nations. Trust is lower among racial
minorities, perhaps because they generally deal with people who are socially distant from

them, or they deal with people from different races that face weak psychic costs of
cheating them, or because they are less able to punish people who cheat them. Education

increases measured trust and organization membership. Religion also appears to impact

trust. As all of these results could represent either individual social capital or group
effects, we believe that our experiments are necessary to test whether social capital can
be a meaningful individual level variable.

IV.

Survey and Experimental Design

We recruited the subjects for our two experiments during the first week of class from

Harvard's introductory economics course (EdO).24 Approximately 2/3 of Harvard
undergraduates take EdO, suggesting that the population from which we recruited is

representative of Harvard undergraduates. During two short recruitment speeches,

subjects were asked to stay after class to sign-up for the experiment.

Out of

approximately 1000 Eel 0 students, 274 agreed to participate, of which 189 completed all

parts of the study. Our recruitment handout and all of our other subject materials (e.g.,
23
24

In general, the surveys occur in a single year so we cannot distinguish birth

year and age effects.

Hence, subjects had received no economics training before their participation in the study.

15

consent forms, instructions, and debriefing forms) are available upon request. Our
experimental procedure has three components. First, subjects are asked to fill out a
survey. Three to four weeks later, subjects participate in two experiments, the "Trust
Game" and the "Envelope Drop."

Part I, Survey: Subjects are asked to fill out an anonymous l37-question survey.
Subjects took between 20 and 30 minutes to complete the survey. The first half of the
survey contains demographic and behavioral questions (e.g., gender, parental education,

race, college activities etc...). The second half of the survey contains attitudinal
measures of subjects' self-perceived trustfulness and trustworthiness.
The trust questions are chosen from a wide range of sources, with particular emphasis on

the General Social Survey, and we invented several trust questions of our own. As none
of these standard GSS questions elicit information about past trusting behaviors, we ask

the following questions: 'How often do you lend money to your friends?"; "How often
do you lend personal possessions to your friends (e.g., CD's, clothes, bicycle, etc...)?"
and "How often do you intentionally leave your rooming group's hallway door unlocked
(when nobody is home)?" A complete copy of our survey is available upon request.

Part 2, The Trust Game: Three to four weeks after subjects fill out the survey, they
participate in the experimental component of our protocol. Each subject participates in
two experiments: the "Trust Game" and the "Envelope Drop." These titles are not used in

the actual experiment. When communicating with the subjects, we refer respectively to
the "Transfer Game" and the "Bonus Winnings Procedure." For clarity, we use the more
descriptive titles here.

In our "Trust Game" subjects arrive at the experiment site, sign in, fill out a consent
form, and are then paired with another subject. Those who arrive together and wish to
play together are allowed to do so, raising the likelihood that subjects who know each

other will be paired.25 Others are paired in order of arrival. After being paired, the
25

This procedure increases the variation in social connection across pairs of subjects.

16

subjects jointly fill out a social connection survey, which asks nine questions about how

well the two subjects are socially linked. For example, we ask the subjects to produce a
list of all personal acquaintances that they have in common. This measure of the number

of mutual acquaintances is an important variable for our analysis. Note that subjects
report to us the number of names on their joint list, but keep the actual list of names to
assure anonymity of the subjects (and their friends).

After filling out the social connection survey, the subjects are separated and told thatthey

will not see each other again during the course of the experiment. The rest of the game
(steps 1-5 below) is then explained to the separated subjects. Then the game is played.

In the experimental instructions we refer to the subjects as either RED or GREEN
players. Each pair of subjects contains one RED player and one GREEN player. In the

current summary, we use more meaningful labels: "sender" and "recipient." The five
steps of the game are as follows: (1) The sender is given $15; (2) The recipient sends the

sender a message/promise about the recipient 's intended future actions in the game; (3)

The sender chooses to send all, some, or none of his/her $15 to the recipient; (4) The
experimenters double whatever the sender chooses to send (for example, if the sender
sends $4, the recipient receives $8, and the sender keeps $1 I of the original $15); (5)
The recipient chooses to send all, some, or none of the received money back to the sender
(for example, if the recipient receives $8, and the recipient sends $1 back to the sender,

then the recipient gets to keep $7, and the sender gets to keep $1 +$ 11 r=$12). After this
point, the subjects no longer interact in the formal game setting.

To implement this procedure, subjects write their decisions on a record sheet, which is
placed in an envelope and collected by a subset of experimental assistants who never see

the contents of the envelope. The other subset of experimental assistants who actually

open the envelopes (in a different room) never see the subjects. Hence, subject
anonymity (vis-à-vis the experimenters) is assured.

17

We implement step (2) which allows subjects to make a promise by allowing the
recipient (GREEN) the opportunity to check one of two statements: (a) "I, person
GREEN, promise to repay RED at least as much as RED sends me. Forexample, if RED
sends me $4, which will be doubled by the experimenters to $8, then I will repay RED at
least $4," or (b) "I. person GREEN. make no promise to RED."26 Only half of our pairs
of subjects are given the opportunity to send such a message. The other subjects receive

no opportunity to send a message and no mention of a promise is made in their
experimental instructions.
Our procedure differs from the Berg et aI..(1995) experiment on which it is based in three

ways. First, the Berg et al procedure guarantees that individual subject decisions are
unobservable to all parties (i.e., both experimentalists and other subjects). Our game only

guarantees anonymity vis-à-vis the experimenters; the subjects know the identity of the
other subject in their pair. We want the paired subjects to know each others identity so

we can determine how variation in social connection influences trusting behavior.
Second, unlike Berg et al., some of our games include a promise condition. Third, our
experiment differs from Berg et al, because we only double --- rather than triple
the

money that the sender sends to the recipient. We made this change to ensure that there
would be some senders who don't send over everything.

26

As we intended, all but one of the 47 subjects who were given the chance to make the scripted promise
did so. Our investigation differentiates

between people randomly given the opportunity to promise, not
between people who did promise vs. people could have promised and didn't.

18

Part 3, The Envelope Drop. After completing the trust game, subjects participate in a
second experimental procedure that provides an additional behavioral measure of trust. In

the envelope drop experiment, our subjects report their valuation of having an addressed

envelope which contains $10 dropped in a public place (e.g., Harvard Square). The
subjects self-address the envelope which is later intentionally "dropped" by the

experimenters. We believe that the subject's valuation of such an envelope drop
primarily measures confidence that a random pedestrian will return the envelope to the
subject (say by putting it into a mailbox). The procedure may also measure the subject's
trust of the experimenter.

To elicit truthful reporting we randomly generate valuations and pay the subject the
random valuation if their reported willingness to pay is below the randomly generated
valuation. We implement the envelope drop if the subject's reported valuation is above
the randomly generated valuation. Finally, we vary properties of the envelope drop (e.g.,

location, time of day, stamp on envelope, envelope sealed). Each subject provides
valuations for 15 different envelope drop conditions. These manipulations lead to
sensible variations in the measured willingness-to-pay across various conditions (see

Appendix Table 3). We average each subject's responses across the 15 different
conditions, and use this mean reservation value as our second measure of trust.
V.

Results

Appendix Tables I and 2 give the means and correlations from the survey and the two
experiments.

Figure 1 shows our basic results and documents the connection between

the amount sent and the amount returned. Figure 2 shows the distribution of mean
reservation values from the envelope drop. Obviously, there is substantial heterogeneity
in trust and trustworthiness, but this heterogeneity does not mean that social capital is an

individual characteristic. This heterogeneity could be the result of partnership specific
attributes (in the trust game) or random situational factors.

19

To show that social capital is an individual characteristic, we must document that pre-

experiment individual attributes are systematically related to trust and trustworthy
behavior in the experiment. We estimate three basic types of regressions. First, we
estimate the determinants of trust:

(2)

Amount Sent = f(Sender, Recipient and Match Characteristics)

using ordinary least squares.27 We next estimate the determinants of trustworthiness:

(3)

Amount Returned
.
Amount Available to Return

.
= g/ Sender,Recipient
and Match Characteristics

using ordinary least squares.28 Finally, using results from the envelope drop experiment,
we regress:

(4) Mean Reservation Value = h( Subject Characteristics)

The mean reservation value is the average reservation value across all of the different
envelope drop conditions.
Table 4— Social Connection

Before examining individual level attributes, in Table 4 we begin by estimating the

importance of both subjects sharing membership in the same social groups. These
variables are meant to test the implication of the model that people who will meet again
are more likely to be both trusting and trustworthy. In all of our regressions, we include a

dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the sender was given the opportunity to

27

Since more than 50 percent of our sample is at the upper limit (see Figure 1), we have also estimated all

of our results with a Tobit specification. Our results are robust to this alternative specification, and a
reproduction of all tables using this specification is available upon request.
28 Again, the results are robust to all of the alternative functional forms (e.g. Tobits) that we tried.

20

make a promise. We also include a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the
subjects are of different sexes. Neither of these variables is statistically significant.

In the first regression, we include the logarithm of one plus the number of months that the

sender and the recipient have known one another. We also include a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one if the two individuals had met before the experiment. The amount
of trust rises significantly (at the 10 percent level) with the number of months that the two

individuals have known one another. Controlling for the amount of time that the
individuals have known one another, there is no positive impact of having met before the
experiment.29 In the second regression, we examine the logarithm of one plus the number

of friends that they have in common. There is a positive, insignificant effect of this
variable on the amount of trust. In the third and fourth regressions, we test whether
individuals from different countries or different races trust each other less,controlling for

the number of friends they have in common. People from different national and racial
groups trust each other less, but these effects are not significant.3°

Regressions (5)-(8) examine the impact of these same four social connection variables on

the level of trustworthiness. In these regressions, we include the amount sent over in the

first stage as an added control variable, and this variable positively predicts the fraction

of money sent back. One natural interpretation is that recipients' who get sent little
initially respond spitefully by returning a lower fraction of the income that they have
available to send. The fact that the amount returned rises more than one-for-one with the

amount sent is consistent with the presence of reciprocal altruism discussed in the
model.31

29

If we drop the time since met variable, this dummy variable becomes positive.
3 These results support those of Fershtman and Gneezy (1998), but differ in important ways. First, they

examine trust of all people towards a low status minority and find that there is less trust. Second, their
subjects have no possibility of repeated interaction after the game. Third, they allow no personal contact
between subjects who must infer ethnicity from the last name of their partners.
31 The slope of amount returned on amount sent is 1.18 when amount sent is greater than zero. This strong

positive correlation may also be the result omitted variables (perhaps relating to the ability topunish or
non-reciprocal altruism) that induce a positive correlation between trust and trustworthiness.

21

The effects of the duration of friendship are sizable. People who have never met return

82 percent of the amount sent over. Pairs who met at least one year earlier return an

average of 124 percent of the amount sent over. The racial effects are also big.
Individuals of the same race return 106 percent of the amount sent over on average.
Individuals of different races return 80 percent of the amount sent over on average. 90
percent of the cases where the recipient sent back nothing occurred when the individuals

were of different races (only 50 percent of the pairings were of different races). The
different country effects are even larger. These effects occur primarily because whites
(or Americans) returning small amounts to Asians (or non-Americans).32

The negative effect of different races may occur because people from different races or
countries have a lower probability of interacting in the future, but our results control for

the number of friends that the two groups have in common. Alternately, lower levels of
trustworthiness between the races may instead reflect lower levels of reciprocal altruism.
\Vhatever the interpretation, these results suggest that heterogeneity may decrease trust in
social groups.33

Tables 5 and 6— Is Trust an Individual Specf IcAttribute?

In Table 5, we examine whether survey questions and other individual background
characteristics predict the level of trust in the two-person game. In all regressions, we
include the two previous control variables (different genders and the promise condition)

and four sender characteristics which will be included in all subsequent regressions:
gender, race (white or non-white), year at Harvard (freshman or older) and family size
(only child or not).34 In most of our regressions, these control variables are insignificant
and their inclusion or exclusion does not affect any of our other results.

32

Fershtman and Gneezy (1998) find no ethnic effects on amounts returned, but they look only at the effect

of the sender being Sephardic not at any effects of sender-recipient ethnic similarity on the amount
returned.

LaPorta et al. (1999) argue that ethnic heterogeneity may decrease the quality of government by limiting
the formation of aggregate social capital.

22

In the first column, we show results for the basic trust question. Individuals who answer

yes to this question send 22 cents more over than individuals who answer no to this
question. This effect is not statistically distinguishable from zero. In the next regression,

we replace the basic GSS trust question with an index based on three GSS questions
(GSS Trust, GSS Fair and GSS Helpful—all defined in Appendix II) which is formed by

adding the three variables after they are demeaned and normalized by their standard
deviations. In this case, increases in this measure of trust reduce the actual level of trust
insignificantly. As Appendix Table 2 shows, all but 2 survey questions about trust have
no effect on the actual amount of trust.

The two survey questions that do predict trust specifically ask about trust ofstrangers. In

column (3), we find that subjects who disagree with the statement "you can't trust
strangers anymore" are actually more trusting. Individuals who say no to this question
send over an average of $2.20 more than comparable individuals who answer yes to this

question. A similar question (the individual's response to the statement "when dealing
with strangers, one is better off using caution before trusting them") is also negatively
correlated with the amount of trust.

There are two plausible interpretations of this finding. First, among so many trust
questions it is unsurprising to find one that is significant. Second, the questions regarding

strangers are more precise and relevant and therefore we should have predicted that they

have particularly high explanatory power. To further test whether the connection
between this variable and the amount sent is the result of spurious correlation or a true

relationship, we examine separately sender-recipient pairs that are strangers and those

that are friends. We find that the question about strangers only predicts the amount of
trust between strangers, which supports its validity as a real measure. If the connection

between this survey question and trust is real then it is our first piece of evidence that
suggests that trust is any sense a stable, individual characteristic.

The dummy variables where chosen so that approximately 50 percent of the sample had a value of one
for the variable.

23

In the fourth and fifth regressions, we examine the connection between trust outside of
the experiment and trust in the experiment. The fourth regression shows the connection
between an index of past trusting behavior and the mean reservation value. This index is

an average of having lent possessions, having lent money and leaving your door
unlocked.3 A one standard deviation increase in this variable (2.22) increases the dollar

amount sent over by 89 cents (one-fifth of a standard deviation). In the fifth regression,
we show a positive, but insignificant, correlation between the mean reservation value and

the amount sent over (without other controls, this relationship is significant at the 12.5

percent level). The results on the questions about trusting strangers, past trusting
behavior and the reservation value together suggest that there is a stable individualspecific characteristic that predicts the levels of trusting behavior in different situations.

There are at least three classes of individual specific attributes that could generate this
stable level of trust. First, some individuals might be more trusting because they have a
greater ability to enforce trustworthy behavior (this would be the variable 0 in the model).

This factor, though, cannot explain anything about trust in the envelope drop game.
Second, some individuals might have more altruism towards others (this would be the
variable ct in the model). Third, some individuals might be more trusting because they

have different assessments of the trustworthiness of others, perhaps based on past
experiences. The next two regressions tests two of these hypotheses.

In the sixth regression, we examine two proxies for altruism (1) the logarithm ofone plus

the number of hours spent in volunteer activities and (2) the individual's attitude to the

statement "a person's income shouldn't be determined by work." Neither variable
predicts the level of trust, perhaps because they are both bad proxies for altruism.

In the seventh regression, we examine the hypothesis of whether past positive experience

influences trust by looking at the impact of subject's response to the question "have you

ever spontaneously benefited from the generosity of someone you never knew before?"

This question also had no predictive power. Other proxies for past experiences that
The index is formed by demeaning these three variables and dividing by their standard deviations.

24

might have led to a cynical outlook (parental divorce, childhood violence, etc.) also had

no effect on trust or on the coefficient on past trusting behavior. As such, we do not
believe that trust should be seen as a cognitive bias induced by past experiences.

In Table 6, we examine the determinants of the level of trust in the envelope dropgame.
We include an extra control variable described as "Lost mail" refers to the recency with
which the respondent lost an item in the mail. The answer takes on a value between one

(never) and four (within the last six months). A one-standard deviation increase in this
variable (.98) causes the willingness to pay for a dropped envelope to fall by -.22, or one-

seventh of a standard deviation. The impact of this variable suggests the importance of

past experiences working presumably through beliefs, but this variable is somewhat
tainted because it was asked after the envelope drop experiment (as part of a debriefing)
rather than before the experiment.

In the first regression of Table 6, we include the basic GSS trust question. Individuals

who answer yes to this question are willing to pay 20 cents more for the ten dollar

envelope drop. This effect goes in the right direction but it is not significant. In
regression (2), we also include the three variable survey question index. A one standard

deviation increase in this index (2.22) causes an insignificant ten cent increase in
willingness to pay for the dropped envelope. Almost all of the other trust variables (and

other trust survey questions and indices not reported in the table) are not significantly
correlated with the mean reservation value.

Again the two survey questions that specifically ask about trusting strangers positively
predict trust.

As regression 3 illustrates, individuals who believe that you can trust

strangers are willing to pay 68 cents more for the envelope. Again, this result may be
spurious, but if it is real it suggests the presence of stable individuals attributes which
create trust.

The fourth regression shows the connection between our index of past trusting behavior
and the mean reservation value. This index also has a modest, significant effect on the

25

mean reservation value. A one standard deviation increase in this index raises the level
of mean reservation value by 27 cents. In Appendix Table 2, we show that the strongest
connection occurs between lending possessions and the mean reservation value. There is

a borderline-significant connection between leaving your door unlocked and the mean
reservation value.

In the fifth regression, we examine whether altruism might lie behind the correlation
between past levels of trust and current trust in the envelope drop game. We find that
attitudes towards redistribution are a strong predictor of trust in this game. In Appendix
2, we show that another measure of pro-redistribution opinions (labeled pro-charity) also

predicts more trust. Behavioral measures of altruism (hours spent on volunteer work or
dollars given to charity) are orthogonal to this trust measure.

To see if the correlation with the pro-transfer question is spurious, we examined the
influence of being pro-transfers on trust in low income areas (e.g. Central Square) and an

average income area (i.e the Post Office). The strongest connection between pro-transfer

opinions and trust in this game occurred in lowest income areas and that there was no
connection between pro-transfer opinions and trust for the envelopes dropped in the Post

Office. This finding suggests that the connection between some altruistic attitudes and

trust in this particular circumstance is real and that altruism might be one factor that
induces some people to be trusting across a variety of settings.
Table 7—Is Trustworthiness an Individual SpecUIc Attribute?

In Table 7, we examine the effect of individual, recipient characteristics on the fraction of

total income available returned by the recipient. We add the amount of money sent over

in the first round as a control variable and find that this variable has a positive effect on
the ratio of money returned. As Figure 1 shows, people generally return exactly as much

26

as they are sent. This might reflect exactly the form of reciprocal altruism in the model,
but it might also reflect prevailing norms about fair play.36

These norms do appear to be influenced by the promise condition, as shown in Figure 3.

Individuals in the promise condition were significantly more likely to send back exactly

the same amount that they were sent. However, the promise condition does not in any
sense deter cheating (i.e. returning less than you were sent), and the promise condition
actually has a negative effect on the total ratio returned. The main effect of the promise
condition is that there are fewer individuals who send back more than they were sent and
more who send back exactly what they were sent.

By examining the effect of individual characteristics on the level of trustworthiness, we

are testing whether trustworthiness is also a stable characteristic. In the first regression.

we find that our controls actually have some impact. Being non-white and being a
freshman slightly depress trustworthiness.37 More significantly, only children are much

less likely to return money. Being an only child reduces the percent sent back by 22
percent.

We also find a significant correlation between the GSS trust question and the ratio of
money returned. In regression (2), we find an even stronger relationship between the
level of trustworthiness and the index of trust-related questions (GSS Helpful, Fair and
Trust).

The strongest subcomponent of that index is the question about whether you

think other people are fair. Appendix Table 2 shows a relatively reliable correlation
between many of the trust measures and the measure of trustworthiness.

This finding suggests that the standard trust questions may be picking up trustworthiness

rather than trust. Tables 2 and 3 take on a substantially different meaning when viewed
in that light. When aggregated up to the country or region level, presumably a measure
16

This finding is harder to reconcile with inequality aversion which would generally imply that individuals
who receive 5 dollars or less should not return anything.

27

of trustworthiness is as good (or better) a measure of social capital than a measure of
trust. This finding (as well as the only child results) suggests that trustworthiness may
be an individual level characteristic.
In regression (3), we show that there is a negative, insignificant connection between self-

reported trustworthiness and actual trustworthiness. We are not surprised that those
people who are willing to admit to being untrustworthy are not the least trustworthy of

our subjects. The combination of this result with the previous section suggests that
subjects may reveal more about themselves in their answers to questions about other
people than in their answers to questions directly about themselves. The final regression
in this table presents an index of past deception. This is a normalized average of subjects

answers to four questions about the frequency of lying to parents, roommates,
acquaintances and close friends. This behavioral measure of deception weakly predicts
the level of untrustworthiness. The important components of the index relate to lying to

acquaintances and lying to close friends. Again, it appears that asking about actions is
more successful than asking about opinions.
Table 8— The Role of Status and Individual Social Capital

In Table 8, we test the hypotheses of the model that high status (or high social capital)
people, who may be either more effective at punishing others or at eliciting altruism, trust

more and elicit more trustworthy behavior.

In our first regression, we examine two

measures of family status: (1) hours spent working for pay and (2) whether one's father
has a college degree. Hours spent working for pay is strongly correlated with low family
income (44 percent) and we believe it is significantly better measure than the categorical
family income variable that we have. In the first regression, we find that working for pay

has a close to negative effect on the amount of trust that is significant at the 10 percent
level. The effect of father's education is insignificant.

This is the type of effect that shows how blurry the distinction between individual social capital and
group social capital can be. If individuals acquire social capital over their time at Harvard by joining
groups, is it individual social capital or group social capital?

28

In regressions (5)-(8), we ask how the trustor's attributes predict the trustworthiness of

the trustee. These are qualitatively different regressions than those that have come
before, because we are now regressing the return ratio on the attributes of the trustor. In
regression (5), we find that working for pay negatively significantly predicts the amount

that senders receive back from the trustee. Father's education positively predicts the
amount received back. This latter effect becomes significant if the other family status
control is dropped (see Appendix Table 2, for example). People who say that they are in

the lowest income categories (average or below) receive about 18 percent less than
people who are in the higher income categories (this effect is significant only at the 15
percent level).
In regressions (2) and (6), we examine beer drinking (defined as the logarithm of the beer

servings per week, which may be related to collegiate social status) and whether the

individual has a sexual partner.38 We use having a sexual partner as a proxy for
attractiveness and find that it positively predicts trust and the amount of money received

in the second stage. Beer drinking may be a correlate of "coolness" among some
undergraduates. It weakly predicts the amount of trust and more strongly predicts the
amount returned in the second period.

In the third and seventh regressions, we examine organization membership. We find

little significant connection between membership and trust. However, members of
organizations generally elicit more trustworthy behavior (with the exception of members

of religious organizations). We are puzzled that trustors with attributes that increase the
trustworthiness of trustees, do not exhibit high levels of trust. One explanation of this is

that the novelty of the game may have made it difficult for the trustors to use backward
induction to figure out the optimal level of trust.

Finally in the fourth and eighth regressions, we examine four other social connection
variables. In these regressions, we also control for the amount of time that the trustor and
38

This variable takes on a value of one if the individual has a current girlfriend or boyfriend and if the

individual has had sex with at least one other person in the past 5 years.

29

the trustee have known one another—the other results are not sensitive to this variable.

We examine the logarithm of one plus the value of four variables: (1) hours per week
spent watching television, (2) the number of the individual's close friends, (3) the number

of hours per week spent alone studying and (4) the hours per week that the individual
spends performing volunteer work. The only variable that predicts trust is the number of
hours per week spent alone studying. This variable, which has a negative effect on trust,
may be best interpreted as a proxy for individual-level trust.

Individuals who spend more time volunteering and have more close friends are much
better at eliciting trustworthy behavior in the second period. A one standard deviation

increase in the close friends variable (.597) increases the percent received back by 8
percent. Again, it is surprising that these variables which increase the individual's ability
to elicit trustworthy behavior don't increase trust.

In this table, we have received our sharpest evidence so far that individual characteristics

predict their level of trust and in particular their ability to elicit trustworthiness from
others. Natural social status variables, some of which are predetermined by others (i.e.

parent's education) and some of which are choice variables (time spent volunteering)

predict both trust and the ability to induce others to behave in a trustworthy manner.
These variables can naturally be described as individual social capital and they appear to

have important effects on social interactions. In the next section, we will actually
quantify the financial returns to different forms of social capital.

Table 9— The Returns to Social Capital

Ideally, we might be interested in the extent to which social capital measures predict

outcomes in more important settings (school, work, etc.), but the game does offer a
relatively controlled atmosphere with real money and we can investigate what personal
characteristics lead to greater financial returns in the experiment. The experiment is one

particular social setting and we can directly examine what acts as social capital in this
setting by examining the following regression:

30

(5)

Financial Returns = R(Personal Characieri,s'iics)

We perform this regression separately for individuals in the sender and the recipient
position in Table 9. All returns are measured in dollars.

In the first regression, we show the effect of parental college status, which is significant

and positive for individuals who are in the trustor position. The average return for
individuals in the trustor position whose fathers have graduated from college is 14.75
dollars. The average return for these individuals whose fathers did not graduate is 9.29
dollars. Individuals coming from lower human capital families would have been better

off financially if they hadn't trusted at all. Comparing persons from low and highincome families also demonstrates these effects. The average returns for people from low

income families was more than 2 dollars less than the average returns for people from

high income families. These higher returns come from the ability to elicit trustworthy
behavior, so it seems that high family status appears to provide social capital.

In the second regression, we examine whether more trusting people generate higher rents

in the experiment and we find that they do not. This is true with the GSS trust index, the

GSS trust question (not in the table), the stranger question (not in the table) and the
behavioral trust index. This suggests that a tendency to trust may reflect social capital at
the region or country level, but not at an individual level.

The third regression includes social status variables from Table 8. Individuals who work

for pay receive less from the social interaction. Individuals with sexual partners take
home more over 4 dollars more than their celibate classmates. Individuals who drink

beer earn more in this setting. A one standard deviation increase in the volunteering
variable raise financial returns from the game by over a dollar. Surprisingly, hours spent

studying alone also increases the returns from the game. However, this result is very
fragile and does not appear in most specifications (including univariate ordinary least

31

squares).39

The R-squared from the appropriate standard ordinary least squares

regression is over 30 percent (the adjusted R-squared is 27.5 percent), so these variables
are in fact explaining a significant amount of the variation in private returns.

However, the step from individual social capital to group level social capital requires us

to understand if our measures of individual social capital have positive or negative

externalities. In this particular game, we will measure this by asking whether our
measure of the sender's social capital raise the returns for the recipient. A particularly

group-oriented view of social capital might emphasize that social capital improves
everyone's lot (except the experimenter). Alternatively, the returns to social capital
might just lead to redistribution from one player to another. In regressions (4)-(6), we
find that all of the social capital variables that increase the financial returns for the sender

decrease the returns to the recipient. As such, these social capital variables appear to

generate private, not group, returns, and emphasize the importance of distinguishing
between individual and group-level social capital.

We would stress that these results may not generalize. The only way in which social
capital could increase everyone's returns in this game was to increase the level of trust in

the first period, but a large share of our sample trusted as much as it could already. As
such, there may not have been enough of a chance for the positive effects of social capital

on social returns to operate. Naturally, the earlier warnings about the possibility that a
study on a modest sample of Harvard undergraduates in a very particular pair of games
also apply here as well.

VI. Conclusion
Using two experiments, we investigated whether trust, trustworthiness and social capital
are characteristics of individuals, as well as groups. Past trusting behavior correlates with

trusting behavior in our experiments; the levels of trust in the two experiments are

Every single other variable that is significant in this specification is also significant when there are no
other controls in the regression.

32

correlated with each other. We also found that two of our survey questions about trusting

strangers both predict trust. Trustworthiness also seems to be stable and is strongly
predicted by survey questions about trust (not trustworthiness) and by having siblings.

A simple economic model did well at predicting behavior in the games. Individuals with

greater social connection trusted each other more. People from different races or
nationalities behaved in a less trustworthy manner towards one another. Individuals from

more successful families, individuals with more friends, individuals who volunteer and

individuals with sexual partners all elicit more trustworthy behavior.

For other

predictions of the model, results went generally in the right direction but were statistically

insignificant. We hope that future research will be able to test these findings with larger
samples and more diverse subject populations.

There are three major implications of this paper for future research. First, social capital is

a meaningful, individual-level variable that can be studied with the tools of price theory,
once it is understood that aggregation will be much more difficult than for other forms of

capital. Our evidence supports the idea that human capital includes cognitive and
physical abilities and also social capital, e.g. interpersonal skills, status and access to
networks (as in Bowles and Gintis, 1976).

Second, standard survey questions about trust do not appear to measure trust. However,

they do measure trustworthiness, which is one ingredient of social capital. This means

that most work using these survey questions needs to be somewhat reinterpreted. If
future surveys mean to measure trust, then other instruments, including questions about

past trusting behavior, should be developed and used when they predict trust in
experiments or in the field.4°

Finally, we believe that this paper shows the value of using experiments and surveys
together. Experiments can measure personal attributes much more convincingly than
40

Indirect psychological measures of attitudes have been shown to be more effective that direct measures
(McCIelIand, Koestner, and Weinberger, 1989).

33

surveys. By connecting the two forms of evidence, we can determine the socioeconomic
correlates of hard-to-measure personal attributes, and test the validity of survey measures
of these attributes.

34

References

Abreu, D. (1988) "On the Theory of Infinitely Repeated Games with Discounting,"
Econometrica.56(2): 383-96.

Ajzen I., and Fishbein M. (1977), "Attitude-behavior relations: A theoretical analysis and
review of empirical research," Psychological Bulletin 84: 999-918.

Arrow, K. (1972) "Gifts and Exchanges," Philosophy and Public Affairs 1: 343-362.

Ball, C., Eckel, C., Grossman, P. and W. Zame (1998) "Status in Markets,"
mimeographed.

Banaji M. R., and A. G. Greenwald (1994) "Implicit Stereotyping and Prejudice," pages

55-76 in M.P. Zanna and J. M. Olson (Eds.). The Psychology of Prejudice: The
Ontario Symposium, 7, Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Berg J., J. Dickhaut, and K. McCabe (1995) "Trust, Reciprocity, and Social History,"
Games and Economic Behavior 10: 122-42.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976) Schooling in capitalist America.• educational reform and
the contradictions of economic life. New York: Basic Books.

Coleman, J. (1990) Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press.

DiPasquale, D. and E. Glaeser (1999) "Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners
better Citizens?" Journal of Urban Economics 45(2): 354-384.
Fershtman, C. and U. Gneezy (1998) "Trust and Discrimination in a Segmented Society:
An Experimental Approach," mimeographed.

Fukuyama, F. (1995) Trust. New York: Free Press.
Glaeser, E. and S. Glendon (1998) "The Demand for Religion," mimeograph.

Goldin, C. and L. Katz (1999) "Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of
Secondary Schooling in America, 1910-1940," Journal of Interdisciplinary History
29: 683-723.
Greif, A. (1993) "Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: the
Maghribi Traders' Coalition," American Economic Review 83(3): 525-48.

lannaccone, L. (1991) "Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes,
and Other Collectives," Journal of Political Economy 100(2): 271-91.

35

References Continued
Jacobs, J. (1961) The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Vintage.

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1997) "Does Social Capital Have an Economy Payoff? A
Cross-Country Investigation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 1251-1288.

La Pierre, R. (1934) "Attitude and actions," Social Forces 13: 230-237.

La Porta, R .,

F.

Lopez-de-Salanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997) "Trust in Large

Organizations," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 87: 333-338.

La Porta, R ., Lopez-de-Salanes, F.. Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1999) "The Quality of
Government," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15(1): 222-279.

Loury, G. (1977) "A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences," in Women,
Minorities and Employment Discrimination, P. Wallace and A. LeMund eds.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

McClelland, D. C., R. Koestner, and J. Weinberger (1989), "How do self-attributed and
implicit motives differ?" Psychological Review 96: 690-702.

Putnam, R. (1995) 'The Case of the Missing Social Capital," mimeographed.

Putnam, R. (1993) Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rabin, M. (1993) "Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics," American
Economic Review 83(5): 1281-1302.

Shleifer, A. and L. Summers (1988) "Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers," in A.

Auerbach, Ed. Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences.
University of Chicago Press.

36

Chicago:

</ref_section>

Table 1: Average Levels of Trust

Q. "Generally Speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people?"

"Most people can be trusted"
US (1972-96):
US (White):
US (Black):
US (other races):

US(1911-l9l5birthyear):
US (1961-1965 birthyear):
US (no high school diploma):
US (high school diploma):
US (college diploma):
US (college diploma, 1996):
US (college diploma and birthyear after 1965):
Harvard Undergraduates (1997):
Sources: GSS for US data and authors' survey for Harvard Data.

42.5%
46.3%
17.6%
30.0%
45.1%
3 1.4%

28.5%
43.0%
61.8%
53.1%
45.5%
44.4%

Table 2: General Social Survey Results
Dependent Variable:

Age between 18 and 24
Age between 25 and 34

Organization
GSS Trust Membership GSS Trust
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.0029
0.0701
-0.0 142
(0.0184)
(0.0724)
(0.026 1)
-0.0 193
0.0435
-0.0242
(0.0150)
(0.0604)
(0.02 16)

GSS Trust
(4)

-0.0076
(0.0206)
-0.0298
(0.0200)
-0.0022

GSS Trust
(5)
-0.0060
(0.0201)
-0.0261
(0.0 186)
-0.003 1

Age between 35 and 44

0.008 1

0. 1933

-0.022 1

(0.05 19)

(0.0188)

(0.0 172)

(0.0 168)

Age Between 55 and 64

(0.0135)
-0.0495

-0.0638
(0.0524)
0.0029
(0.0659)
0.4534
(0.0983)
0.5018
(0.0826)
0.2874
(0.0647)

-0.065 1

-0.0431
(0.0 140)
-0.0486

(0.0299)

0.2630
(0.0275)
0.2045
(0.0252)

-0.0433
(0.0141)
-0.0490
(0.0 144)
0.2805
(0.0251)
0.2174
(0.0233)

0. 1495

0. 1563

0. 1642

(0.0235)
0.0884

(0.02 16)

(0.0210)

-0.053 8

0.0873

0.09 10

(0.0479)
-0.6371

(0.0 172)
-0. 1753

(0.0 140)
-0. 1616

(0.0135)

(0.03 17)
0.7 154

(0.0132)

(0.0111)

0.163 9

0. 1706

(0.0098)
0.0017
(0.0002)
-0.2679

(0.0354)
0.0079
(0.0006)

(0.0135)
0.0015
(0.0002)

0. 18 15

-0.23 67

(0.0102)
0.0017
(0.0002)
-0.2492

(0.0 102)
0.1781
(0.0 106)

(0.0 129)
0.0308
(0.0072)
0.0067

(0.0186)
0.0437
(0.0100)
0.0131
(0.01 12)

(0.0 172)

(0.0080)

(0.0424)
0.1514
(0.0257)
0.0606
(0.0284)

-0.0 123

-0.0 197

0.009 1

0.008 1

(0.0114)

(0.0398)

(0.0 160)

(0.01 19)

Small City2

-0.0073
(0.0142)

-0.0743
(0.0500)

-0.0026
(0.0198)

0.0 155

Big City3

-0.0181

-0.2157
(0.0533)

-0.0113

(0.0 14 1)

Age Between 65 and 99
Born before 1914

Born before 1929
Born before 44

-0.0640
(0.0 173)
0.3038
(0.0247)
0.2369
(0.0207)
0. 1670
(0.0 162)

Born before 59

0.0884
(0.0126)

Dropout

-0. 1753

(0.0092)
College education
Log (Real income)
Black
Male

Married
Townt

0. 1755

(0.0 150)

City size data is missing

(0.0202)
-0.0680
(0.0256)
0.2796
(0.0367)
0.2 137

(0.02 17)

(0.0 13 1)

0.0322
(0.0098)
0.0015
(0.0068)

(0.0180)
-0.0055
(0.0193)
0.0229

-0. 1632

0.0017
(0.0002)
-0.2524
(0.0168)
0.0286
(0.0093)
0.0042
(0.0070)

-0.0207
(0.0137)
-0.0202
(0.0178)
-0.0500
(0.0 186)

0.0294
0.26 10
0.0493
0.0308
(0.0224)
(0.0858)
(0.0314)
(0.0243)
(0.0239)
Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. Data is from the General Social Survey, 1972-1994.
In regressions (1), (3), (4) and (5), we have run probits and reported derivatives at sample
means. Regression (2) is ordinary least squares. 1. Population is between 2,000 and 100,000.
2. Population is between 100,000 and 500,000
3. Population is above 500,000

Table 2: General Social Survey Results (Continued)

Dependent Variable:
One hour of TV daily

Organization
GSS Trust Membership GSS Trust GSS Trust
(1)
(2)
(4)
(3)

GSS Trust
(5)

-0.0423

Two hours of TV

(0.0248)
-0.0448
(0.0241)

Three hours of TV

-0.05 80

(0.0249)

Four hours of TV

-0. 0834

(0.0261)
-0.0699
(0.0295)
-0.0979
(0.0281)

Five hours of TV
Six hours of TV
Attendance

0.0439
(0.0115)
-0.0113

Catholic

(0.0 15 3)

Jew

-0.0254
(0.0293)

No religion

0.0284
(0.0 120)

Baptist

-0.0534

Methodist

(0.0117)
0.0220
(0.0 125)

Lutheran

0.0282
(0.0229)
0.05 70
(0.0207)
0.0785
(0.0244)

Presbyterian
Episcopalian
Percent Lutheran in state

0. 5775

(0.0681)
Average dropout rate
in state.

-0. 8422

Average college
graduation rate in state
Constant

-0.4 118

R-Squared
Observations

(0.1561)
(0.2362)
-0.2024

1.1348

-0. 1730

-0.269 8

0.1166

(0.02 17)

(0.0849)
0.1068
17345

(0.0376)

(0.0353)

(0.0934)

0.0845

0.0958

0.0923

10621

19447

19624

0.0857

21077

Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. Data is from the General Social Survey, 1972-1994.

In regressions (1), (3), (4) and (5), we have run probits and reported derivatives at
sample means. Regression (2) is ordinary least squares. R-squared is adjusted
r-squared for regression (2) and pseudo r-squared for regressions (1), (3), (4) and (5).

Table 3: World Values Survey Results on Trust

Country

Country Averages
GSS
Number of

Trust

Memberships

Results from Country-Specific Trust Regressions
Birth Year
Continued
R2
Finished
Observations
divided by School Until School Before
1000
Age 18
Age2l
0.49
0.11
-0.02
0.02
859
(1.12)
(0.04)
(0.05)
1.95
0.10
-0.09
0.04
1111
(0.92)
(0.04)
(0.04)
-1.56
0.13
-0.04
0.03
555
(1.54)
(0.06)
(0.06)
-2.14
0.07
-0.06
0.01
886
(1.26)
(0.04)
(0.04)
2.73
0.13
-0.05
0.04
972
(0.92)
(0.04)
(0.04)
3.61
0.09
-0.10
0.05
959
(1.02)
(0.04)
(0.04)
-3.76
0.13
-0.17
0.06
1628
(0.77)
(0.03)
(0.03)
-3.43
0.12
-0.11
0.04
1569
(0.73)
(0.03)
(0.03)
-2.54
0.13
-0.10
0.02
985
(0.96)
(0.06)
(0.04)
-2.39
0.11
-0.14
0.03
1418
(0.72)
(0.06)
(0.05)
-0.76
0.07
-0.09
0.01
297
(1.66)
(0.12)
(0.08)
-2.89
0.08
-0.10
0.03
649
(1.27)
(0.05)
(0.05)

0.66
1.94
(0.02)
(0.05)
0.65
1.79
Norway
(0.01)
(0.04)
Finland
0.63
1.64
(0.02)
(0.07)
China
0.60
0.73
(0.02)
(0.03)
Denmark
0.58
1.63
(0.02)
(0.04)
Holland
0.53
2.56
(0.02)
(0.07)
Canada
0.53
1.53
(0.01)
(0.04)
UnitedStates
0.51
1.81
(0.01)
(0.05)
Ireland
0.47
0.93
(0.02)
(0.04)
Britain
0.44
1.02
(0.01)
(0.04)
Northern Ireland 0.44
1.10
(0.03)
(0.08)
Iceland
0.44
2.27
(0.02)
(0.06)
Switzerland
0.43
0.59
.
.
.
.
.
(0.02)
(0.03)
0.42
0.45
-0.38
Japan
0.11
-0.17
0.04
883
(0.02)
(0.03)
(1.30)
(0.04)
(0.04)
0.38
West Germany
1.28
0.20
0.01
-0.14
0.02
1699
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.67)
(0.05)
(0.03)
Russia
0.37
0.98
-2.46
0.00
0.00
0.01
1677
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.78)
(0.03)
(0.03)
India
0.35
.
-1.22
0.06
0.07
0.00
2136
.
(0.01)
(0.81)
(0.03)
(0.03)
0.35
0.57
1.26
Italy
0.04
-0.08
0.01
1908
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.69)
(0.08)
(0.04)
Poland
0.35
-3.62
-0.07
-0.15
0.02
824
.
(0.01)
(1.14)
(0.05)
(0.04)
0.34
0.36
-1.04
Spain
0.08
-0.06
0.01
3478
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.52)
(0.03)
(0.02)
South Korea
0.34
1.34
.
.
.
.
.
(0.01)
(0.04)
Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Columns four through six are results from probits.
We have reported derivatives at sample means and the pseudo r-squared. Each regression was done
seperately in each country. Data comes from the World Values Survey, various years 1980-1994.
Sweden

.

.

.

.

Promise

Different Sex

(I)
-0.053

(0.053)

-0.043

(0.052)

-0.030

(0.056)

-0.058

Return Ratio

(0.054)

(4)
-0.282

Table 4: Social Connections
Amount Sent
(3)
(1.003)

-0.005

(0.960)
0.044

(2)
-0.03 5
(0.947)
-0.401

0.055
(0.057)

0.009
(0.965)
-0.335

(0.056)

0.059

-0.368
(1.049)

0.080

-0.768
(1.013)

(0.059)

(0.999)

(0.056)

(0.987)

(0.034)

0.05 8

(0.6 10)

I .150

Months Since First
Meeting

0.448

0.002

0.024

0.023
(0.02 1)

-1.256

0.02 8

(0.020)

(0.077)
0.4 10

(0.02 I)

-0.3 87

0.087

(0.106)

0.235

0.0 16
(0.007)

0.063

(0.111)

0.181

(0.007)

0.0 18

0.131

0.2 15
(0.107)

(0.007)

0.0 17

(1.0 13)

11.934
(1.3 77)
-0.024

91

91

91

90

0.275
(0.122)
0.095

0.0 16
(0.007)

-0.115
(0.057)

(0.389)

(1.344)

of
(0.3 77)

11.707

-0.177

11.659

-0.022

(1.186)

-0.281

12. 549

-0.011

(1.163)

(0.064)

0.003

95
95
95
All regressions are ordinary least squares.

(0.868)

(1.175)

0.441
(0.380)

Pre-Experiment
Acquaintanceship
Number

Common Friends
Different Nationality

Different Race

Amount Sent

Constant
Adj./Pseudo R-Squared
Observations
Note. Standard Errors in parentheses.

Table 5: Amount Sent as a function of Sender Characteristics
(1)

(2)

(3)

Di fterent

-0.670

-0.128

-1.043

-0.358

-0.643

-0.455

Sexes

0.145

(1.130)

(1.112)

(1.120)

(1.106)

(1.082)

(1.130)

(1.123)

0.043

-0.097

0.440

-0.03 8

-0.153

-0.103

-0.052

(1.024)

(1.0 15)

(1.040)

(.992)

(0.995)

(1.005)

(1.003)

0.147

0.623

-0.028

0.457

-0.0 13

0.403

0.353

(1.197)

(1.174)

(1.148)

(1.149)

(1.138)

(1.170)

(1.150)

Promise

Male

White

Freshman

Only Child

GSS Trust

(4)

-0.330

-0.640

0.055

-0.227

-0.329

-0.087

-0.121

(1.030)

(1.02 5)

(1.03 1)

(1.003)

(1.006)

(1.03 3)

(1.040)

-0.205

-0.434

-0.254

-0.970

-0.3 05

0.030

0.383

(1.136)

(1.125)

(1.092)

(1.081)

(1.086)

(1.108)

(1.076)

-1.775
(1.530)

-1.569

-1.74 1

-2.004

(1.492)

(1.555)

(1.522)

0.389
(0.2 19)

0.455
(0.224)

-1.620

-1.724

-1.555

(1.53)

(1.474)

(1.496)

0.220
(1.022)

Trust Index

-0.094
(0.222)

Trust

2.209

Strangers

(1.060)

Trusting

0.403

Behavior Index

(0.214)
Mean
Reservation
Value

0.417
(0.3 12)

Hours Spent
Volunteering

0.264

(0.629)

Pro-Transfer

0.367

(0.579)
Past Windfall

-0.183
(1.0 14)

Constant
Adjusted RSquared
Observations

13 .361

13 .009

9.836

(2.448)

(1.73 5)

-0.059
93

-0.050
90

13 .33 6

11.675

12 .664

(2.272)

12.707
(1.648)

(1.639)

(2.172)

(2.068)

-0.009
92

-0.007
93

-0.034
95

-0.025

-0.008
86

Note. Standard Errors are in parentheses. All regressions are ordinary least squares.

93

Table 6: Mean Reservation Value
Male

White

Freshman

Lost Mail

Only Child

GSS Trust

(1)

(2)

0.168
(0.281)

0.097

0.147

(0.289)

(0.282)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.192

0.137

(0.285)

(0.283)

0.172
(0.287)

0.160

0.159

0.203

0.154

0.217

0.187

(0.274)

(0.28 1)

(0.276)

(0.278)

(0.276)

(0.286)

-0.086

-0.092

-0.063

-0.006

0.062

0.179

(0.288)

(0.299)

(0.288)

(0.291)

(0.286)

(0.293)

-0.234

-0.249

-0.212

-0.249

-0.226

-0.256

(0.137)

(0.139)

(0.137)

(0.138)

(0.135)

(0.138)
-0.143

0.024

0.020

-0.248

0.205

(0.438)

(0.440)

(0.433)

(0.442)

-0.147
(0.433)

0.135
(0.064)

0.128
(0.063)

(0.429)

0.202
(0.262)

Trust Index

0.040
(0.061)

Trust Strangers

0.677
(0.274)

Trusting
Behavior Index

Pro-Transfer

0.455
(0.145)

Hours spent
volunteering

0.050

0.132

(0.065)

(0.164)

Past Windfall

-0.878
(.272)

Constant
Adj. R-Squared

0.724

0.519

(0.636)

(0.524)

-0.544
(0.668)

(0.518)

-0.684
(0.639)

-0.004

-0.005

0.029

(.629)

'0.022

0.065

0.076

0.449

Observations
182
177
183
183
183
Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. All regressions are ordinary least squares.

1.614

166

Table 7: Return Ratio as a function of Recinient Characteristics
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.018
(0.007)

0.018
(0.006)

0.019
(0.007)

0.0 14

(0.008)

Different Sexes

0.003
(0.053)

-0.007
(0.052)

0.006
(0.055)

0.001
(0.065)

Promise

-0.043
(0.051)

-0.007
(0.051)

-0.031
(0.052)

0.017
(0.063)

Male

0.027
(0.059)

0.048
(0.058)

0.013

(0.061)

-0.015
(0.073)

0.075
(0.054)

0.072
(0.052)

0.074
(0.055)

(0.065)

Freshman

-0.072
(0.055)

-0.052
(0.055)

-0.083
(0.056)

-0.009
(0.071)

Only Child

-0.217
(0.092)

-0.242
(0.089)

-0.218
(0.088)

-0.191
(0.112)

GSS Trust

0.106
(0.051)

Amount Sent

White

Trust Index

0.061

0.043
(0.0 12)

-0.026
(0.026)

Self-Reported
Trustworthiness

Honesty Index

0.0 10

(0.008)
Constant
______________________
Adj.R-Squared
Observations

0.414
(0.149)
0.161

0.212
(0.120)
0.232

0.386
(0.185)
0.138

90

88

91

Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. All regressions are ordinary least squares.

0.246
(0.147)
0.036
64

Table 8: Social Capital and Status

(1)

Amount Sent

White

Male

Promise

Freshman

Different Sex

Only Child

Amount Sent as a function of
Sender Clr--acterjstics
(2)
(3)

Return Ration as a function of
Sender Characteristics
(4)

(5)
0.015
(0.007)

0.0 14

0.0 16

(.007)

(.007)

0.016
(0.057)

0.081

0.01 4

(0.057)

(0.056)

0.07
(0.063)

0.067
(0.064)

(0.063)

-0.016
(0.055)

(0.059)

0.0 IS
(0.007)

(1.023)

-0.318
(1.050)

0.159
(1.064)

0.038
(1.021)

(0.055)

-0.090
(1.141)

0.240
(1.150)

-0.03 0
(1.2 18)

0.209
(1.158)

(0.062)

0.151
(0.994)

0.023
(0.994)

(1.029)

1.052
(1.055)

(0.054)

-0.023
(0.055)

-0.497
(1.098)

-0.273
(1.135)

-0.400
(1.096)

-0.104
(0.060)

-0.03 0

-0.063

(1.199)

(0.066)

(0.060)

0.003
(0.060)

-0.579
(1.085)

-1.03 3

-0.604

(1.110)

(1.121)

0.022
(1.079)

0.081
(0.059)

0,068
(0.061)

0.056
(0.059)

0.041
(0.058)

-1.541
(1.499)

0.059
(0.085)

0.066
(0.088)

0.040
(0.084)

0.047
(0.084)

-0.03 2

0.76 1

0.223

-1.989

-2.1 22

—1.711

(1.5 13)

(1.561)

(1.548)

Hours Worked
For Pay

-0.726
(0.43 7)

Father with a
College Degree

-0.965
(2.050)

0.03 5

0.05 7

-0.008

0.100

-0.05 8

-0.048

(.024)
0.149
(.1 tO)

Beer Servings

0.166
(0.603)

0.065
(0.034)

Sexual Paraser

2.984
(1.485)

(0.082)

Member of a
Political Group

0.1 33

-0.821

(1148)

0.095
(0.060)

1.143

0.000

Journalism Group

(1.174)

(0.061)

Member of a
Sports Team

1.0 14

(1.043)

0.079
(0.056)

Member of a
Service Group

1.159
(1.097)

0.161
(0.058)

Member of a
Religious Group

-0.924
(1.226)

-0.054
(0.064)

Member of a

Time Since Met

0.656
(0.486)

0.036
(0.026)

TV Hours
Watched

-0.859
(0.676)

(0.03 7)

Number of Close
Friends

(0.8 17)

0.132
(0.045)

Hours Studying
Alone

-3.444
(0.979)

0.057
(0.058)

Hours Spent
Volunteering

0.139
(0.642)

0.087
(0.036)

Constant

Adjusted
R-Squared
Observattons

0.026

-0.705

14.872
(2.641)

11.929

12 .252

22 .993

(1.754)

(1.93 8)

(3.407)

0.157
(0.174)

0.157
(0.128)

0.089
(0.133)

(0.23 5)

-0.0342

-0.0172

-0.0622

0.0923

0.1057

0.1028

0.1366

0.1813

95

93

95

91

91

89

91

87

Note: Standard Errors parenthesized. All regressions arc ordinary least squares.,

-0.3 50

Table 9: The Returns to Social Capital

White

Male

Freshman

Only Child

Father with College
Degree

Financial Returns to Sender as a
function of Sender Characteristics
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.764
0.929
0.620
(1.379)
(1.486)
(1.308)

Financial Returns to Recipient as a
function of Sender Characteristics
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.027
-1.541
-0.547
(1.629)
(1.725)
(1.626)

1.523

1.647

(1.389)

(1.509)

2.427
(1.323)

-1.160
(1.641)

(1.752)

-0.893
(1.480)

-0.752
(1.620)

1.304
(1.447)

0.642
(1.748)

(1.88 1)

(2.568)

-0.57 1

0.446

1.45 8

1.060

1.270

(2.064)

(2.2 12)

(1.920)

-3.164
(2.439)

4.952

4.8 18

-5.735

(2.740)

2.934
(2.466)

-5.3 12

(2.578)

(3.045)

(3.18 1)

-3.05 3

Trusting Behavior
Index

0.113
(0.308)

0.373
(0.358)

Trust Index

-0.339
(0.320)

0.206
(0.37 1)

Hours Worked For Pay

-1.4 15

Flours Studying Alone

Number of Close
Friends

Sexual Partner

Beer Servings

Adjusted R-Squared
Observations

-3.399
(2.387)
-3.432
(3.065)

0.847
(0.659)

2.124
(1.142)

(1.4 19)

-4.704

(1.03 7)

-3.048
(1.289)

2.483
(0.789)

(0.98 1)

4.184
(1.789)

(2.223)

-2.299

-2.05 7

1.954

-1.978
(0.955)

(0.768)

Constant

-1.299
(1.799)

(0.530)

2.575

Hours spent volunteering

-2.153
(1.645)

8.807
(2.846)

8.684

-4.464

(3.041)

(4.868)

0.0 143

97

19.252
(3.362)

19.8 18

40386

(3.532)

(6.051)

0.0035

0.0042

-0.0046

0.1928

91

97

91

93

0.2749
93
Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. All regressions are ordinary least squares.

Appendix Table I
Mean

Standard Deviation

Mean Reservation Value

0.003

1.771

Amount Sent

12.412

4.540

Return Ratio

0.455

0.267

GSS Trust

-1.552

0.498

GSS Help

-1.609

0.489

GSS Fair

1.569

0.496

GSS Index

o.ooo

2.225

Scale Trust

2.656

1.169

A Lot of Trust

2.856

1.230

A Little Trust

4.411

0.964

Others Honest

4.157

1.039

Cheat

4.130

1.252

Stranger

1.387

0.488

Caution

1.935

0.946

Lend Possessions

2.382

1151

Lend Money

2.851

1.143

Door Unlocked

4.287

1.077

Behavioral Index

0.009

2.093

Trustworthy

5309

0.935

Don't lie

o.ooo

3.585

Pro Charity

2.403

0.960

Pro Transfer

2.171

0.890

Hours Volunteering

0.792

0 836

Dollars Donated

2.023

2.209

Past Windfall

1.434

0497

Lost Mail

2.542

0.990

White

0.605

0.490

Male

0.663

0.474

Freshman

0.669

0.471

Only Child

0.121

0.327

___________________________________

Variable

Appendix Table I (continued)
Mean

Standard Deviation

Eldest Child

0.561

0.497

Father v/BA

0.892

0.305

Hours Worked For Pay

i .037

1.175

Male * Girlfriends

0.177

0.382

Female * Boyfriends

0.079

0.270

Beer Servings

0.559

0.867

Membership in Service Group

0.460

0.499

Membership in Political Group

0.303

0.460

Membership in Joumalism Group

0.280

0 450

Membership in Sports Group

0.444

0.498

Membership in Religious Group

0.3 52

0.479

Number of Close Friends

1.940

0.597

Hours Studying Alone

2.634

0.555

Hours Watched TV

0.926

0.773

Promise

0.361

0.481

Different Sex

0.421

0.495

Different Country

0.221

0.416

Different Race

0.544

0.499

Time Since Met

0.383

0.902

Number of Common Friends

1.403

1.418

Variable

-0.156
(0.139)

0.070
(0.5 13)

0.32 1
(0.002)

0.205
(0.054)

0.19
(0.072)

0.246
(0/018)

0.405
(0.000)

0.259
(0.000)

1.000

0.001
(0.993)

Return Ratio as a Return Ratio as a GSS Trust
function of
function of
Sender
Recipient
Characteristics
Characteristics
0.009
0.086
0.064
(0.935)
(0.427)
(0.390)

Amount Sent
0.158
(0.122)

-0.127

0.75 1
(0.000)

Appendix Table 2
Mean Reservation Amount Sent as a
Amount
Sent as a
Value
function
of
function
of Sender
Characteristics
Recipient
Characteristics
I .000
0.158
-0.006
(0.122)
(0.953)

Return Ratio

-0.006
(0.954)

-0.031
(0.770)

(0.234)

0.337
(0.00 1)

0.5 14
(0.000)

Mean Reservation
Value

GSS Trust
0.064
(0.390)
-0.064
(0.536)
0.016
(0.882)

-0.093
(0.384)

0.143
(0.176)

0.253
(0.000)

1.000

GSS Help
0.0 10
(0.889)
-0.103
(0.325)

-0.018
(0.865)

-0.058
(0.586)

0.272
(0.009)

0.383
(0.000)
0.349
(0.000)

0.0 12
(0.9 10)

GSS Fair

0.072
(0.335)
-0.058
(0.582)

0.0 17
(0.869)

-0.156
(0.138)

0.013
(0.902)
0.000
(0.999)

0.246
(0.0 18)

GSS Index
0.066
(0.377)
0.131
(0.204)

-0.002
(0.956)

1.000

Scale Trust

0.054
(0.463)

0.0 18
(0.859)

-0.036
(0.733)
-0.143
(0.175)

1

A Lot of Trust
0.056
(0.442)

A Little Trust
0.050
0.0 16
0.180
(0.495)
(0.876)
(0.081)
Others
Honest
0.006
-0.128
-0.057
(0.938)
(0.284)
(0.580)
Notes: Entries are correlation coefficients. Numbers in parentheses are p-values.

Lend Possessions

Caution

Stranger

0.034
(0.645)

0.143
(0.051)

0.135
(0.065)

0.187
(0.010)

(0.575)

0.231
(0.024)

0.089
(0.391)

0.165
(0.109)

0.033
(0.748)

0.188
(1.067)

Amount Sent as a
function of Recipient
Characteristics
-0.088
(0.392)

-0.021
(0.839)

0.068
(0.5 15)

-0.072
(0.490)

-0.068
(0.5 13)

-0.061
(0.558)

-0.035
(0.740)

0.138
(0.193)

-0.0 15
(0.087)

0.190
(0.072)

0.137
(0.209)

-0.168
(0.109)

0.079
(0.458)

-0.095
(0.373)

0.067
(0.350)

0.165
(0.121)

-0.103
(0.332)

0.034
(0.75 1)

0.158
(0.135)

0.047
(0.660)

Return Ratio as a
function of Sender
Characteristics
0.109
(0.302)

0.011
(0.877)

0.026
(0.674)

0.204
(0.001)

0.128
(0.040)

0.160
(0.0 10)

0.129
(0.039)

0.427
(0.000)

0.317
(0.000)

0.229
(0.000)

0.142
(0.023)
0.165
(0.008)
0.047
(0.456)
0.126
(0.043)
0.127
(0.101)
-0.062

-0.054
(0.6 10)
0.069
(0.5 15)
0.2 18)
(0.036)
-0.113
(0.279)
-0.0 12
(0.911)
0.031

(0.402)

(0.769)

-0.012
(0.911)
-0.029
(0.786)
0.106
(0.3 11)
0.085
(0.4 16)
-0.077
(0.500)
-0.002
(0.987)

'trust

Lend Money

0.114
(0.120)
0.224
(0.029)

-0.056
(0.594)

0.196
(0.120)

Mean Reservation
Value

Door Unlocked

0.146
(0.047)

0.099
(0.342)

-0.132
(0.274)

Cheat

Behavioral Index

0.122
(0.237)

-0.199
(0.109)

Appendix Table 2 (page 2)
Amount Sent as a
Return Ratio
function ofSender function of Recipient
Characteristics
Characteristics
-0.093
-0.072
(0.37 1)
(0.494)

Trustworthy

-0.002
(0.975)

0.129
(0.271)

-0.041

Don't Lie
0.008
(0.924)

Pro Charity
0.144
0.072
-0.026
(0.049)
(0.487)
(0.801)
Pro Transfer
0.230
0.082
-0.114
(0.002)
(0.426)
(0.27 1)
I tours Volunteering
0.022
0.093
-0.016
(0.767)
(0.703)
(0.88 1)
Dollars Donated
-0.036
-0.103
-0.067
(0.717)
(0.3 16)
(0.5 15)
Past Windfall
0.242
0.081
0.049
(0.00 1)
(0.446)
(0.662)
Lost Mail
-0.156
-0.149
0.144
(0.330)
(0.150)
(0.172)
Notes: Entries are correlation coefficients. Numbers in parenttieses are p-values.

0.081
(0.269)

Value

(1048
(0.642)

-0.003
(0.976)

Amount Sent as a
function of Recipient
Characteristics

-0.010

-0.031
(0.765)

-(1079
(0.450)

-0.033
(0.746)

-0.066

-0.002
(0.985)

-0.127
(0.227)

0.118
(0.260)

0.110
(0.296)

-0.012
(0.907)

-0.302
(0.004)

-0.129
(0.216)

(0865)

(0093)

0.001
(0.981)

0.025
(0.686)

0.003
(0.965)

-0.056
(0.369)

0.072
(0.246)

Female * Boyfriends

0.269
(0.009)
0.229
(0.027)

0.182
(0.081)
0.095
(0.372)

0.051
(0.410)
-0.055
(0.381)

-0.018

GSS Trust

White

0.046
(.527)
-0.057
(0.577)

(0.926)

(0.533)

0.086
(0.414)

0.081
(0.184)

Appendix Table 2 (page 3)

Male

-0.026
(0.722)
-0.129
(0.207)

0.062
(0.550)

0.248
(0.017)

-0.002
(0.982)

0.028
(0.649)

Mean
Reservation

Freshman

-0.489
(0.508)
-0.139
(0.176)

-0.015
(0.885)

-0.283
(0.006)

-0.070
(0.448)

-0.115
(0.064)

Return Ratio as a
function of Sender
Characteristics

Only Child

-0.119
(0.103)
-0.002
(0.984)

0.108
(0.295)

0.075
(0.476)

-0.064
(0.545)
-0.025
(0.811)
0.258
(0.012)
are p-values.

Amount Sent as a
Return Ratio as a
function of Sender function of Recipient
Characteristics
Characteristics

EldestChild

-0.107
(0.140)
-0.137
(0.182)

0.229
(0.024)

0.164
(0.115)

0.175

Father w/BA

-0.002
(0.984)

0.170
(0.096)

-0.111
(0.281)

0.043
(0.494)

Hours Worked For Pay

-0.004
(0.952)

0.010
(0.922)

Male * Girlfriends

-0.180
(0.803)

Beer Servings
0.036
0.097
(0.626)
(0.346)
Service
-0.042
0.060
Group
Membership
(0.563)
(0.561)
Notes: Entries are correlation coefficients. Numbers in parentheses

Sports Group
Membership

Journalism Group
Membership

Political Group
Membership

(0.750)

0.023

(0.153)

0.104

(0.303)

-0.075

(0.934)

-0.006

Mean Reservation
Value

(0.544)

-0.062

(0.321)

0.102

0.069
(0.501)

(0.553)

0.061

Amount Sent as a
function of Recipient
Characteristics

(0.764)

0.031

-0.089
(0.393)

(0.908)

0.012

-0.088
(0.396)

Amount Sent as a
function of Sender
Characteristics
-0.129
(0.214)

0.034
(0.747)

(0.0 10)

0.2 17

-0.162
(0.122)

0.136
(0.194)

(0.811)

0.025

Return Ratio as a
function of Recipient
Chracteristjcs
0.169
(0.104)

(0.231)

-0.177
(0.100)

0.054
(0.6 12)

(0.4 14)

-0.087

(0.4 16)

-0.085

(0.806)

0.026

0.048
(0.653)

Return Ratio as a
function of Sender

(0.546)

0.231
(0.000)

(0.543)

0.038

(0.988)

-0.00 1

-0.064
(0.307)

0.094
(0.133)

GSS Trust

Appendix Table 2 (paze 4)

Religious Group
Membership
-0.070
(0.498)

0.088
(0.402)

0.038
(0.724)

Friends

Number ofClose
-0.066
(0.371)

(0.001)

0.004
(0.968)

-0.097
(0.355)

0.037

(0.355)

0.059
(0.356)

0.038

-0.052
(0.483)
-0.045
(0.669)

-0.008
(0.937)

0.037

(0.731)

-0.332

Hours Studying
Alone
0.052
(0.489)
-0.008

(0.73 1)

0.193
(0.064)

-0.235
(0.029)
0.267

-0.097
(0.937)

-0.076
(0.463)

-0.285

-0.131

Hours Watching
Television
Promise

-0.076
(0.463)

-0.285

Different Sex

-0.047

Different

(0.006)

(0.649)

-0.055

(0.006)

Nationality

-0.055

(0.610)
0.172

-0.047
(0.649)

Different Race

(0.610)
0.172

(0.092)

(0.0 10)

(0.092)

(0.064

0.193

-0.235
(0.029)
0.267
(0.0 10)

Months Since
First Meeting

Number of
0.123
0.123
Common Friends
(0.230)
(0.230)
__________________
Notes: Entries are correlation coefficients. Numbers in parentheses are p-values.

Appendix Table 3
The Effect of Different Scenarios on Reservation Price
Reservation Value

Constant

5.82
(0.109)

Post Office

2.29
(0.128)

No Postage

-2.5

(0.116)

Unsealed

-2.03
(0.116)

Night

-0.983
(0.128)

Porter Square

-0.357
(0.116)

Central Square

-0.486
(0.116)
0.279
2850

Adjusted R-Squared
Observations

Notes: Standard Errors in parentheses. Results are from
ordinary least squares regressions where each personcondition reservation value is an observation.

Appendix I.

This appendix analyzes the model described in section II. Recall that the preferences of the sender are represented by:
[S — S + R] +6. a(S) °Recipient + kSender + Recipient + a(R — S)]

[q5S —

R]

and the preferences of the recipient are represented by:

[S — R] + 6 a(R — S) °Sender + [Recipient + kSender + a(s)] .

[

—

S + R].

See section II for motivation and variable definitions. We make the following assuxnptions:

• >1.
• & 9Sender, °Recipient

0

• a(.) increasing and strictly concave

•0

[CSender + 'Ftecipient + a(R — S)]

<

1.

• When multiple equilibria exist, the sender always selects the equilibrium with
the highest value of S. This assumption is not practically restrictive, as multiplicity only arises in a measure zero subset of the parameter space.

Lemma 1. If the constraint R 0 is not binding, then

>

1.

Proof: Assume the constraint R > 0 is not binding. If the constraint R qS
1. If the constraint R < qS does not bind, then the recipient's
binds, then

choice of R must satisfy the first-order-condition:
—1 + 6. a'(R — 5) 0Sender + [cRecipient + frtSender + a(s)] = 0.

Totally differentiating this condition yields,

55
since, a"(R — S)

—
—

5•a"(R—S)•OSender—a'(S)
5 a"(R — S) °Sender

>1

<0 and a'(S) > o.

Lemma 2. If the constraint R 0 is not binding, then the constraint S < will
bind.

Proof: Assume the constraint R 0 is not binding. The derivative of the
sender's objective function is given by:

[_i +

—

+6a'(S).ORjpjent+a'(R—S).

i] [5—R1

+[LSender + kRecipient + a(R — S)]. [c —

].

(1)

If — 0, then by application of Lemma 1, the derivative of the sender's objective
function is strictly positive. If — <0, then the derivative of the sender's objective
function is greater than or equal to
SR

+

SR

which is strictly positive.U

Proposition

The equilibrium values of S and R rise weakly with 6, 0Sender, 0Recipient,

Sender, Recipient, kSender, K Recipient.

Proof: Consider the following three mutually exclusive regions of the parameter
space:

Region I: Constraint S 0 binds.
Region II: Neither constraint on S binds.

Region III: Constraint S S binds.
Let X represent a fixed parameter of the problem (e.g., (5). In the interior of
=0
0, since R = 0. In the interior of Region II, the constraint
Region I,

and =

= 0. In the
R 0 will bind (by application of Lemma 2). So jj =
and
= 0 and =
interior of Region III,
Using these intermediate results, it is

-j•

straightforward to show that in the interior each of the three regions, both S and R
rise weakly with (5, °Sender, °Recipient, Sender, aRecipient, KSender, kRecipient. This follows

from total differentiation of the first-order conditions of the sender and recipient
(setting S and R fixed when required).
It only remains to show that these comparative statics results continue to hold
when shifts occur between regions I, II, and III. Specifically, it is sufficient to rule
out the following three types of shifts: shifts from Region II to I (as X rises); shifts
from Region III to I (as X rises); shifts from Region III to II (as X rises).
Suppose that as X rises, a shift occurs from Region II to Region I at X = X. Let

S represent the limiting equilibrium value of S in Region II (as X rises to .k). By
Lemma 2, the constraint R 0 will bind. Let V(S, R, X), represent the value of the
sender's objective function. To justify a shift from Region II to I, it is necessary to
show that Vx(S, 0, X) < Vx(0, 0, k), since by assumption V(, 0, T) V(0, 0, X). It
is straightforward to confirm that Vx(, 0, k) > Vx(0, 0, ) for all of the parameters
of interest: X E {6, 0Sender, °Recipient, aSender, aRecipient, kSender, KRecipient}. Hence, a shift

from Region II to Region I can not exist (unless S = 0, which would not contradict
the Proposition in the first place).

Suppose that as X rises, a shift occurs from Region III to Region I at X =
will be the equilibrium value of S in Region III. To justify a shift from
Region III to I, it is necessary to show that
I, k) + VR(,

Vx(O,O,t), since by assiunption V(,,k) V(O,O,k). It is straightforward to
confirm that Vx(, I?, k) + VR(, , k).
Vx(O, 0, k), for all of the parameters
of interest: X E {o, °Sender, °Recipient, aSender, Recipient, kSender, kRecipient}. Hence, a shift
from Region III to Region I can not exist.

Suppose that as X rises, a shift occurs from Region III to Region II at X = k.
Let S < represent the limiting equilibrium value of S in Region II (as X falls to
X). In Region II, the constraint R 0 will bind (by Lemma 2). To justify a shift
from Region III to II, it is necessary to show that
k) + VR(, '
<

0, k),

since

by assumption V(, ,

)

confirm that V(S, R, X) + VR(S, ' fi

,

) 8X1S

V(, 0, k). It is straightforward to
0, k), for all of the parameters

of interest: X E {o,°Sender, 0Recipient, aSender, aaecipient, KSender, kRecipjent}. Hence, a shift

from Region III to Region II can not exist.

APPENDIX II: DEFINITIi OF VARIABLES
Variable Name

Amount Sent

Question/Description
Amount Sent from the Sender to the
Recipient in the Trust Game.

Answer Range
U - 15

Attendence

"How often do you attend religious services?"

Never - 0
Less than once a year -1
About once or twice a year - 2
Several times a year - 3
About once a month - 4
2-3 times a month - 5
Nearly every week - 6
Every week - 7
Several times a week - 8
Don't know, No Answer - 9

Beer Servings

Log of one plus the number of beers
consumed per week.

Positive Real Numbers

Caution

"When dealing with strangers, one is better
off using caution before trusting them."

Cheat

Most students do not cheat on exams."

Number of Close
Friends

Log of one plus the number of close friends
listed by the subject.
Log of one plus the number of friends the two
Number of
participants of the trust game have in
Common Friends
common.
Different
Are the participants in the trust game from
different countries?
Nationality
Are the participants in the trust game of
Different Sex
opposite sex?
Are the participants in the trust game of
Different Race
different races?
Log of one plus the amount of money
Dollars Donated

Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Mildly - 2
Agree and Disagree equally - 3

Agree Mildly -4
Agree Strongly - 5
Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Somewhat - 2
Disagree Slightly - 3

Agree Slightly -4
Agree Somewhat - 5
Agree Strongly - 6
Positive Real Numbers
Positive Real Numbers
0 - No, 1 - Yes

o - No, 1 - Yes
o - No, 1 - Yes
Positive Real Numbers

donated_in_the_past_year.

"How often do you leave your door
unlocked?"

Very Often - 1
Often - 2
Sometimes - 3

Eldest Child
Father w/BA
Freshman

Eldest Child
Father with a College degree
Freshman

0- No, 1 - Yes
0 - No, 1 - Yes
0 - No, 1 - Yes

GSS Fair

"Do you think most people would try to take
advantage of you if they got a chance, or
would they try to be fair?"

Would take advantage of you - 1
Would try to be fair - 2
Depends - 3
Don't know - 8
No Answer 9

Door Unlocked

Rarely -4
Never - 5

APPENDIX II (page 2)
Variable Name

Question/Description

GSS Help

"Would you say that most of the time people
try to be helpful, or that they are mostly just
looking out for themselves?"

GSS Index
(Trust Index)

Normalized Average of GSS Fair, GSS Trust
and GSS Help.

GSS Trust

"Generally speaking, would you say that most
people can be trusted or that you can't be too
carefull in dealing with people?"

Honesty Index

Average of five lying variables asking people
to rate how often they lie to their: parents,
roommates, acquaintances, close friends and
partners on a scale of ito 5. 1 being very
often and 5 being never.

Log of one plus the number of hours spent
studying alone per week.
Hours Watched Log of one plus the number of hours spend
TV
watching television.
Hours Worked for Log of one plus the number of hours worked
Pay
for pay per week.
Hours
Log of one plus the number of hours spent
Volunteering
volunteering per week.
Hours Studying
Alone

Lend Money

"How often do you lend money to to friends?"

Lend Possession

"How often do you lend personal possessions
to friends?"

A Little Trust
A Lot of Trust

"How much do you tend to trust others when
you don't have a lot at stake?"
"How much do you tend to trust others when
you have a lot at stake?"

Answer Range
Try to be helpful - 1
Just look out for themselves - 2
Depends - 3
Don't know - 8
No answer - 9

Most people can be trusted - 1
Can't be too careful - 2
Other, depends - 3
Don't know - 8
No answer - 9

[1,5]

Positive Real Numbers
Positive Real Numbers
Positive Real Numbers

Positive Real Numbers
More than once a week - 1
About once a week - 2
About once a month - 3
Once a year or less - 4
More than once a week About once a week - 2
About once a month - 3
Once a year or less - 4
1 to 6, 1 denoting no trust and 6
denoting complete trust
ito 6, 1 denoting no trust and 6
denoting complete trust
Never - 1

Lost Mail

"Have you or someone close to you recently
lost something in the mail?"

Not in several years - 2
Within 1-2 years - 3
Within the last 6 months - 4

Male

Male

O-No,1-Yes

Mean

Average of reservation values over all the
Reservation
conditions
for the envelope drop experiment.
Value
Met prior to
Had the participants in the trust game met
prior to the experiment?
experiment
Membership in a
Political
Members of Political Clubs
Organization

0- 10
yes or no
0 - No, 1 - Yes

APPENDIX II (page 3)
Variable Name

Question/Description

Answer Range

Member of a
Journalism Group

Members of Newspaper or Magazine

0 - No, 1 - Yes

Member of a
Service Group

Members of Service Organization

0 - No, 1 - Yes

Member of a
Sports Team

Members of Sports Organizations

0 - No, 1 - Yes

Member of a
Religious Group

Members of Religious Organizations

0 - No, 1 - Yes

Only Child

Only Child

Others Honest

"Most people are basically honest."

0 - No, 1 - Yes
Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Somewhat - 2
Disagree Slightly - 3
Agree Slightly - 4
Agree Somewhat - 5
Agree Strongly - 6

Past Windfall

"Have you ever spontaneously benefited from
the generosity of someone you never knew
before?

Pro-Charity

"I don't mind giving money to others if they
need the money more than I do."

Pro-Transfer

"Personal Income shouldn't be determined by
work."

Promise
Return Ration

Promise to return at least as much to the
sender as he sent.
(Amount returned to Sender)/(Amount
Recipient_received)
"Rate your willingness to trust others on a

yes - 1 or no - 2
Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Somewhat - 2
Agree Somewhat -3
Agree Strongly - 4
Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Somewhat - 2
Agree Somewhat -3
Agree Strongly - 4

0 - agreed, 1 - didn't agree
[0,1]

Scale Trust

scale of 1-6 where us always trusting and 6
is never trusting."

ito 6

Sexual Partner

Does the participant have a sexual partner?

Stranger
(Trust Stranger)

"You can't count on strangers anymore."

0 - No, 1 - Yes
More or less agree More or less disagree - 2

Time since Met

Log of one plus the number of months the
sender and recipient have known eachother.

Positive Real Numbers

Trustworthy (SelfReported
Trustworthiness)

"I am trustworthy."

White

Disagree Strongly - 1
Disagree Somewhat - 2
Disagree Slightly - 3
Agree Slightly - 4
Agree Somewhat - 5
Agree Strongly - 6

White

0- No, 1 - Yes

