NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROSPECT THEORY AND
ASSET PRICES
Nicholas Barberis
Ming Huang
Tano Santos

Working Paper 7220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7220
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

We thank many of our colleagues for helpful discussions. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Nicholas Barberis, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Prospect Theory and Asset Prices
Nicholas Barberis, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos
NBER Working Paper No. 7220
July 1999
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We propose a new framework for pricing assets, derived in part from the traditional
consumption-based approach, but which also incorporates two long-standing ideas in psychology:
prospect theory, and evidence on how prior outcomes affect risky choice.
Consistent with prospect theory, the investor in our model derives utility not only from
consumption levels but also from changes in the value of his financial wealth. He is much more
sensitive to reductions in wealth than to increases, the ``loss-aversion'' feature of prospect utility.
Moreover, consistent with experimental evidence, the utility he receives from gains and losses in
wealth depends on his prior investment outcomes; prior gains cushion subsequent losses -- the socalled “house-money'' effect -- while prior losses intensify the pain of subsequent shortfalls.
We study asset prices in the presence of agents with preferences of this type, and find that our
model reproduces the high mean, volatility, and predictability of stock returns. The key to our results
is that the agent's risk-aversion changes over time as a function of his investment performance. This
makes prices much more volatile than underlying dividends and together with the investor’s lossaversion, leads to large equity premia. Our results obtain with reasonable values for all parameters.

Nicholas Barberis
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
nick.barberis@gsb.uchicago.edu
Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
jesus.santos@gsb.uchicago.edu

Ming Huang
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
mhuang@leland.stanford.edu

1 Introduction
For many years now, the standard framework for pricing assets has been
the consumption-based approach. Its shortcomings are well-known. With
standard utility specications and parameter values, it does not come close
to capturing the stock market's high historical average returns and volatility, nor the striking variation in equity risk premia over time.1 Over the
past decade researchers have used more complicated specications for utility over consumption in an attempt to approximate the data more closely.2
However, even the most state-of-the-art approaches typically require controversial values for important parameters such as the investor's risk-aversion
over consumption shocks.
In this paper, we argue that the puzzling empirical features of stock returns can be understood by extending the traditional framework in a way
that captures two long-standing ideas in psychology: the prospect theory
of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and the evidence of Thaler and Johnson
(1990) and others on the inuence of prior outcomes.
The psychology literature has for some time now promoted prospect theory as a descriptive model of decision making under risk. This theory has
proved helpful in explaining the numerous violations of the expected utility
framework documented over the years. Its central feature is that the carriers
of value are changes in wealth rather than absolute levels or nal outcomes.
It also emphasizes loss aversion, which stipulates that individuals are much
more sensitive to reductions in wealth than to increases.
In our paper, we incorporate prospect theory into the standard consumptionbased pricing framework: the agent in our model derives utility not only from
consumption levels, but also from changes in the value of his nancial wealth
from year to year, in a way motivated by prospect utility; in particular, he
is loss-averse over these wealth changes.
Our model specication is also guided by a second strand of research
in psychology which nds that prior outcomes inuence the way subsequent
See for example, Hansen and Singleton (1983), Mehra and Prescott (1985), and Hansen
and Jagannathan (1991).
2 Recent papers in this line of research include Abel (1990), Campbell and Cochrane
(1999), Constantinides (1990), Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991), and Sundaresan (1989).
Another strand of the literature emphasizes market incompleteness due to uninsurable
income shocks; see for example Heaton and Lucas (1996) and Constantinides and Due
(1996). Cochrane (1998) and Kocherlakota (1996) provide excellent surveys.
1

3

gains and losses in wealth are experienced. Put dierently, this work suggests
that the utility derived from a specic wealth change is not the same in all
circumstances. Thaler and Johnson (1990) nd that a loss is less painful
to people when it comes after substantial earlier increases in wealth: those
earlier gains cushion the subsequent loss, making it more bearable. The
analogy in nancial markets is that investors may not care much about a
stock market dip that follows substantial prior gains because they can still
say that they are up, relative to a year ago, say. Thaler and Johnson
(1990) argue that this idea explains another of their ndings, namely that
people with recent gains act in a less risk-averse manner, taking on bets they
would otherwise nd unattractive. This result has been labelled the house
money eect, reecting gamblers' increased willingness to bet when ahead.
Conversely, there is evidence that after a loss, people tend to shy away
from risky bets that they might otherwise take. Thaler and Johnson (1990)
argue that this is because losses that come on the heels of other losses are
more painful to investors than on average. An informal interpretation is
that in the aftermath of a painful loss, while the investor is still reeling from
the shock, he is particularly sensitive to additional setbacks, increasing his
risk-aversion.
We incorporate this evidence on prior outcomes into our model: while
our investor cares about yearly gains and losses in the value of his nancial
wealth, the pain of a loss is not the same in all circumstances but rather
depends on his prior investment performance.
By modifying the traditional asset-pricing framework to capture both
prospect theory and the eect of prior outcomes, we nd that we are able
to understand many of the hitherto perplexing features of aggregate data.
In particular, starting from an underlying consumption growth process with
low variance, our model can generate stock returns with a high mean, high
volatility and signicant predictability, while maintaining a riskless interest
rate with low mean and volatility. More importantly, we achieve all this
using reasonable values for all the model parameters.
In essence, our story is one of changing risk-aversion. After a run-up in
stock prices, our agent is less risk-averse because those gains will cushion
any subsequent loss. After a fall in stock prices, he becomes more wary of
further losses and hence more risk-averse. This variation in risk-aversion
allows returns in our model to be much more volatile than the underlying
dividends: an unusually good dividend raises prices, but this price increase
also makes the investor less risk-averse, driving prices still higher. We also
4

generate predictability in returns much like that observed in the data: following a signicant rise in prices, the investor is less risk-averse and subsequent
returns are therefore on average lower.
Our framework also delivers a substantial equity premium without the
high risk-aversion over consumption uncertainty that other models inevitably
appeal to. The high volatility of returns in our model leads to frequent
losses for stocks and those losses cause our loss averse investor considerable
discomfort. A high equity premium is therefore required to convince him to
hold stocks.
In an early application of prospect theory, Benartzi and Thaler (1995)
examine single period portfolio choice for an investor with prospect-type
utility. They nd that loss aversion makes investors reluctant to invest in
stocks, even in the face of a sizeable equity premium. This suggests that
bringing prospect theory into a formal pricing model may help us understand
the level of average returns. While our work conrms this, we nd that loss
aversion cannot by itself explain the equity premium; incorporating the eect
of prior outcomes is a critical ingredient as well. To see this, we also examine
a simpler model where prior outcomes are ignored and hence where the utility
of gains and losses is the same, regardless of past history. The investor's riskaversion is then constant over time and stock prices lose an important source
of volatility. With less volatile returns and hence less risk, we are no longer
able to produce a substantial equity premium. The intuition Benartzi and
Thaler (1995) develop in partial equilibrium is therefore not immediately
transferable to equilibrium pricing models. The additional evidence on the
inuence of prior outcomes on risky choice is also required.3
Our framework oers a distinct alternative to consumption-based models
that attempt to understand the empirically observed high mean, high volatility, and signicant predictability of equity returns. Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) explain these empirical features using an external subsistence level
for consumption which generates time-varying risk aversion. Although our
model is also based on changing risk aversion, we generate it by introducing loss aversion over wealth uctuations and incorporating evidence on how
investors' loss aversion is aected by their prior returns.
Our treatment of loss aversion is also reminiscent of the study by Epstein
and Zin (1990) which oers an explanation for the high equity premium by
Shumway (1997) uses prospect theory to think about the cross-section of asset returns,
as opposed to the time series of aggregate returns that we focus on here.
3

5

introducing rst order risk aversion in a recursive utility specication (see
also Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Segal and Spivak (1990)). A model
with rst-order risk aversion is similar to a model of loss aversion that ignores
the eect of prior outcomes. However, this literature has not yet attempted
to address the excess volatility or predictability of equity returns.4
Shefrin and Statman (1985) and Odean (1998) have used prospect theory
to try to understand the so-called disposition eect, the tendency of investors
to sell winning rather than losing stocks. A premise of these papers is that
the investor only experiences utility from investment gains or losses when
they are realized through a sale of stock. This is reasonable for thinking
about short-term trading behavior, but is less attractive in the longer-term:
an investor is likely to feel the pain of a substantial long-term decrease in
a stock's value even before he sells it. Since our focus is understanding low
frequency stock market behavior, we do not distinguish between unrealized
and realized gains and losses.
Another set of papers, including Barberis, Shleifer, Vishny (1998) and
Daniel, Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam (1998) explain some empirical features
of asset returns by assuming that investors exhibit irrationality when making forecasts of quantities such as cashows. Other papers, including Hong
and Stein (1999), suppose that investors are only able to process subsets of
available information. In this paper, we take a dierent approach. While we
do modify the investor's preferences to reect experimental evidence about
the sources of utility, the investor remains fully rational and dynamically
consistent throughout.5
Rather than introduce both prospect theory and the eect of prior outcomes at once, we develop them one at a time. In Section 2, we show how
to bring prospect theory into an asset pricing framework, while ignoring the
issue of prior outcomes. We investigate the model's ability to explain aggregate data, and nd that it is at best an incomplete description of the facts. In
Section 3, we argue that the missing ingredient may be the evidence on prior
outcomes, and support this claim by extending our model to account for this
evidence and presenting a detailed numerical analysis of the equilibrium in
this case. Section 4 concludes.
See also Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) for a study of the foreign exchange,
equity, and bond markets of the US and Japan using a model based on rst-order risk
aversion.
5 See Shleifer (1999) for a recent treatment of irrationality in nancial markets.
4

6

2 A Preliminary Model with Prospect Utility
Prospect theory was rst proposed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979) as
a descriptive model of decision making under risk. Its key feature is that
the carriers of value are not absolute levels or nal outcomes, but rather
gains and losses in wealth. These gains and losses are measured relative to a
reference point, typically taken to be the status quo. In a nancial context,
we interpret this as saying that people care not only about consumption
levels, but also about uctuations in the value of their nancial wealth.6 In
this section, we show how this natural source of utility can be incorporated
into asset pricing models.7
Our starting point is the traditional consumption-based asset pricing
model proposed by Lucas (1978). In this economy, there are a continuum of
identical innitely-lived agents, with a total mass of one, and two assets: a
riskfree asset in zero net supply, paying a gross interest rate of Rf;t between
time t and t + 1; and a risky asset with a total supply of one unit. In the
usual way, the risky asset (stock) is a claim to a stream of perishable output represented by the dividend sequence fDtg. We use Rt to denote its
gross return between time t and time t + 1.
Each agent is endowed with a unit of the risky asset at time 0. In equilibrium, he holds this amount of the risky asset at all times and consumes
the dividend stream, so that each period, the dividend Dt equals aggregate
consumption C t .8 Dividend growth, or equivalently aggregate consumption
growth, follows an i.i.d. lognormal process,
+1

log C t
Ct

+1

!

= g + t ;
+1

(1)

It is important for our story that the investor worry about uctuations in nancial
rather than total wealth. In the simple model we present below, there is no distinction
between the two. In a more general model where total wealth has many components, we
would also require some form of mental accounting, namely that the investor compartmentalize dierent types of wealth and worry about uctuations in each one separately.
7 Other papers that extend the standard intertemporal consumption utility specication
to allow for investment value as a direct source of utility include Bakshi and Chen (1996)
and Zou (1994). These two studies assume that wealth can provide investors direct utility
in the form of, say, social status, in addition to its implied consumption. However, the
framework used in these papers and the economic issues studied are quite dierent from
those here.
8 We use the notation C for aggregate per-capita consumption to distinguish it from
t
an individual's consumption, which is simply Ct .
6

7

where t  i.i.d. N (0; 1). We keep this process simple for two reasons.
First, simple though it is, it approximates reality well. Second, it serves to
emphasize that one can generate interesting features of asset returns without
specifying an intricate model for consumption growth.
Up to this point, our framework is entirely standard. We depart from the
usual setup in the way we model investors' preferences. In particular, our
agents maximize
+1

E

"1
X
t=0

#

,
t Ct
( 1 , + bt t v(Xt )) :
1

+1

(2)

+1

The rst term in this preference specication, utility over consumption Ct ,
is a standard feature of asset pricing models. Although our framework does
not require it, we specialize to power utility, the benchmark case studied in
the literature. The parameter  is the time discount factor, and > 0 is
relative risk aversion over consumption shocks.9
The second term is an attempt to capture the idea that the investor cares
about uctuations in his nancial wealth. The variable Xt is the gain or
loss the agent experiences on his investments between time t and t + 1, a
positive value indicating a gain and a negative value, a loss; the utility the
investor receives from this gain or loss is v(Xt ). Finally, bt is an exogeneous
scaling factor that we specify later.
It is important to note that even if the second term were not present, the
investor would still care about wealth uctuations, simply because of what
those wealth changes mean for consumption. By including the additional
term, we are taking the view that wealth uctuations generate utility over
and above the indirect utility that comes through consumption: people feel
upset when an asset they have invested in does poorly, and this may be due
to more than just the fact that they now need to lower consumption. In our
simple setting where the investor worries about uctuations in total wealth,
it is conceivable that the asset prices we generate may also result from a
more complex utility function dened over consumption alone. We don't
interpret (2) this way, but prefer to think of it as capturing concern about
wealth uctuations for their own sake. This distinction becomes much more
9 For = 1, we replace C 1, =(1 , ) with log(C ).
t
t
+1

+1

8

important in more general settings than the one we have here.10 ,11
Introducing utility over gains and losses in wealth raises two important
issues: (i) how does the investor measure his gains and losses; and (ii) how
does utility v depend on those gains and losses? We tackle each of these
questions in turn.

Measuring Gains and Losses

We interpret the gains and losses of prospect theory as referring to
changes in the value of the agent's risky asset holdings. Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) suggest that before people evaluate a gamble, they simplify
it as much as possible in what is known as the editing phase. An important
form of editing is segregation, where any riskless component of a gamble
is stripped away. In the context of our model, the investor separates o the
known return on his riskless asset holdings, allowing him to focus directly on
his investment in the risky asset.
Next, we need to specify the horizon over which gains and losses are
measured. Put dierently, how often does the agent seriously evaluate his
investment performance? We follow the suggestion of Benartzi and Thaler
(1995) that the most natural evaluation period is a year. As they point out,
we le taxes once a year and receive our most comprehensive mutual fund
reports once a year; moreover, institutional investors scrutinize their money
managers' performance most carefully on an annual basis. We discuss the
sensitivity of our results to this assumption later in the paper.
Our investor therefore monitors year-to-year uctuations in the value of
his stock portfolio and gets utility from those uctuations. To x ideas,
suppose that St , the time t value of the investor's holdings of the risky asset,
is $100. Imagine that by time t +1, this value has gone up to StRt = $120.
The exact way the investor measures this gain depends on the reference level
to which 120 is compared. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) propose that the
primary reference level is the status quo, which in our case is the initial value
+1

For example, consider a more general setup where the investor also receives risky labor
income but still cares about uctuations in his nancial wealth alone. In this model, every
little bit of dividend volatility is priced. In a pure consumption-based model, though, only
that part of dividend uctuations correlated with consumption is priced  a dramatically
dierent conclusion.
11 It is also worth noting that we do not take an explicitly axiomatic approach to constructing the investor's preferences, but simply posit a parsimonious framework that captures our intuition.
10

9

St = $100: The gain would then be measured as $20, or more generally as
Xt = StRt , St .
+1

+1

This is essentially our approach, but for one modication which we think
is realistic in our context: we take the reference level to be the status quo
scaled up by the riskfree rate, St Rf;t . In our example, and with a riskfree rate
of say 5%, this means a reference level of 105. An end-of-period risky asset
value of 106 would then lead the investor to code a gain of 1, while a value
of 104 would generate a loss of -1. In general terms, the investor will code a
gain or loss of
Xt = StRt , St Rf :
(3)
The idea here is that in an economy oering a riskless return of 5%, the
investor is likely to be disappointed if his stock market investment returns
only 4%. The riskless return may not be the investor's only point of comparison, although we suggest that it is the most obvious. Our framework can
easily accomodate alternative specications and our results do not depend in
any special way on the particular choice of St Rf;t as the reference level.
+1

+1

Form of the Prospect Theory Term

The form of v, motivated by the work of Kahneman and Tversky (1979),

is

(

Xt  0
t
v(Xt ) = X
(Xt ) for Xt < 0 :
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

(4)

This is a piecewise linear function, shown in Figure 1. It is kinked at the
origin, where the gain equals zero. The parameter  helps us capture the
important feature of prospect theory known as loss aversion, the tendency
of individuals to be more sensitive to reductions in wealth than to increases.
Any  greater than one makes the investor loss averse. When we calibrate
our model, we follow Tversky and Kahneman (1992) in setting  = 2:25, a
gure based on experimental ndings.
One attractive feature of this utility specication is that it captures individuals' documented aversion to wealth bets over modest stakes. By contrast,
the smooth utility functions typically employed in the literature imply that
people are close to risk neutral over modest gambles.12
Indeed, when smooth utility functions are calibrated to match individuals' risk aversion
over small bets, they lead to absurd predictions for preferences over larger gambles. For
example, Rabin (1999) shows that an expected utility maximizer who turns down a 50-50
bet of losing $100 and gaining $110 would also turn down a 50-50 bet of losing $1000 and
gaining any amount of money!
12

10

Our formulation follows the prescription of prospect theory by dening
utility over gains and losses, and by introducing loss aversion. Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) also propose that v should be mildly concave over gains and
convex over losses. This curvature is most relevant when choosing between
prospects that involve only gains or between prospects that involve only
losses.13 For gambles that can lead to both gains and losses  such as the
one year investment in stocks that our agent is evaluating  loss aversion at
the kink is far more important than the degree of curvature away from the
kink. For simplicity then, we make v linear over both gains and losses.14
In our framework, the prospective utility the investor receives from
gains and losses is computed by taking the expected value of v, in other
words by weighting the value of gains and losses by their probabilities. As a
way of understanding Allais-type violations of the expected utility paradigm,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) suggest weighting the value of gains and losses
not with the probabilities themselves but with a nonlinear transformation of
those probabilities. Again, for simplicity, we abstract from this feature of
prospect theory, and have no reason to believe that our results are sensitive
to this simplication.
Given the assumed linearity of the prospect theory function, we can write
v(Xt ) = v(StRt , St Rf;t )
(5)
= St v(Rt , Rf;t );
which means we can think of gains and losses in terms of returns instead of
dollar amounts. If we also dene
vb(Rt ) = v(Rt , Rf;t );
(6)
we can nally rewrite the agent's objective function as
+1

+1

+1

+1

E

"1
X
t=0

+1

#

,
C
t
+ bt t St vb(Rt )) ;
(
1,
t

1

+1

+1

(7)

Indeed, it is by oering subjects gambles over only losses or only gains that Kahneman
and Tversky (1979) deduce the shape of the value function. They propose concavity over
gains because subjects prefer a gamble that oers $2000 w.p. 14 , $4000 w.p. 41 , and $0
w.p. 12 to the mean-preserving spread oering $6000 w.p. 41 and $0 otherwise. Preferences
switch when the signs are ipped, suggesting convexity over losses.
14 The reader may rightly be concerned that curvature away from the reference point
does assume greater importance when prior outcomes are taken into account, as they are
in Section 3. We therefore return to this issue in that section.
13

11

where

(

, Rf;t
Rt  Rf;t
t
vb(Rt ) = R
(Rt , Rf;t ) for Rt < Rf;t :
+1

+1

(8)

+1

+1

+1

The Scaling Term bt

We scale the prospect theory term in the utility function to ensure that
quantities like the price-dividend ratio and risky asset premium remain stationary even as aggregate wealth increases over time. Without a scaling
factor, this will not be the case because the second term of the objective
function will come to dominate the rst as aggregate wealth grows. One
reasonable specication of the scaling term is

bt = b C ,t ;

(9)

0

where C t is the aggregate per-capita consumption at time t, and hence exogeneous to the investor. By using an exogeneous variable, we ensure that
bt simply acts as a neutral scaling factor, without aecting the economic
intuition of the previous paragraphs.15
The parameter b is a positive constant that allows us to control the
overall importance of utility from gains and losses in wealth relative to utility
from consumption. Setting b = 0 reduces our framework to the much studied
consumption-based model with power utility.
0

0

2.1 Equilibrium Conditions

In order to investigate the model's ability to explain the data, we derive
equations that govern equilibrium prices. Our investor chooses (Ct ; St) for
all t to maximize (7), subject to the standard budget constraint. We now
show that there is an equilibrium in which the riskfree rate and the stock's
price-dividend ratio are both constant and stock returns are i.i.d.
That returns are i.i.d. is a direct consequence of the fact that the pricedividend ratio is constant. To see this, note that the stock return is related
to the stock's price-dividend ratio, denoted by ft  Pt =Dt, as follows:

Dt = 1 + Pt =Dt Dt = 1 + ft Dt :
Rt = Pt +
Pt
Pt=Dt
Dt
ft Dt
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

(10)

Using aggregate per-capita wealth as a scaling factor works just as well, and does not
aect our basic results.
15

12

Given the assumption that the dividend growth is i.i.d. (see (1)), a constant
price-dividend ratio ft = f implies that stock returns are i.i.d.
In equilibrium, and under rational expectations about stock returns and
aggregate consumption levels, the agents in our economy must nd it optimal
to consume the dividend stream and to hold the market supply of zero units
of the riskfree asset and one unit of stock at all times.16 The next proposition
characterizes the equilibrium.

Proposition 1 For the preferences given by (7)-(8), there exists an equilibrium in which the gross riskfree interest rate is constant at

Rf = , e g, 22 = ;
1

(11)

2

and the stock's price-dividend ratio, ft , is constant at f and given by
h
1 =  1 + f Et e ,

f

(1

)(g +t

+1 )

i

"

+ b Et vb 1 +f f eg
0

+1

+t

!#

:

(12)

We prove this formally in the Appendix. At a less formal level, our results
follow directly from the agent's Euler equations for optimality, derived using
standard perturbation arguments:
2
!, 3
C
1 = Rf Et 4 t+1 5 ;

(13)

2
!, 3
C
1 = Et 4Rt+1 t+1 5 + b0 Et [vb(Rt+1 )] :

(14)

Ct

Ct

Readers may nd it helpful to compare these equations with those derived
from standard asset pricing models with time-additive utility functions. The
Euler equation for the riskfree rate is the usual one: consuming a little less
today and investing the savings in the riskfree rate does not change the
investor's exposure to losses on the risky asset. The Euler equation for the
risky asset, however, now contains an additional term. Consuming less today
and investing the proceeds in the risky asset increases the investor's exposure
to risky asset losses.
We need to impose rational expectations about aggregate consumption because the
agent's utility includes aggregate consumption as a scaling term.
16

13

2.2 Numerical Results

With the equilibrium conditions (11) and (12) in hand, we now test the
usefulness of our model by checking whether it can match the moments of
both consumption growth and asset returns for reasonable values of the parameters. Earlier research suggests that prospect theory may be helpful in
explaining at least one perplexing feature of stock returns, namely their high
average level. Benartzi and Thaler (1995) analyze the one-period portfolio problem of a loss averse investor. They nd that even when confronted
with the large historical equity premium, their investor is reluctant to allocate heavily to stocks: the sharp pain experienced when stocks do poorly
makes them unattractive. Benartzi and Thaler's partial equilibrium framework does not allow them to address the equity premium puzzle directly;
however, their analysis suggests that incorporating prospect theory into a
standard equilbrium model may prove fruitful.
Table 1 summarizes our choices of parameter values. For g and , the
mean and standard deviation of log consumption growth, we follow Ceccheti,
Lam, and Mark (1990) who obtain g = 1:84% and  = 3:79% from a time
series of annual data from 1889 to 1985. These numbers are very similar to
those used by Mehra and Prescott (1985) and Constantinides (1990). Campbell and Cochrane (1999) place more emphasis on post-war data which gives
g = 1:89%, and  = 1:22%. Since  varies somewhat by subperiod, we
present results for a range of values of .
The investor's preference parameters are ; , , and b . We set = 0:9,
which makes the investor's risk-aversion over consumption shocks close to
that of a log utility investor. It is well known that equilibrium models typically require much higher levels of risk-aversion over consumption to match
stock return moments. We are therefore making things particularly dicult
for ourselves by using a as low as 0.9. However, our goal is to explain
the data with reasonable parameter values ; a value of that is much higher
would be hard to defend as reasonable.
Given the values of g, , and , we use (11) to choose a rate of time
preference  that produces a sensibly low level of the riskfree rate. Setting
 = 0:98 brings the riskfree interest rate, Rf , 1, close to 3.5%.
The value of  determines how keenly losses are felt, relative to gains.
As mentioned earlier, we follow Tversky and Kahneman (1992) in setting
 = 2:25:
The nal parameter, b , determines the relative importance of the prospect
0

0

14

utility term in the investor's preferences. We do not have strong priors about
what constitutes a reasonable value for b . For the time being, we perform
the calculations for a range of values of b .
Figure 2 presents the implied values of the price-dividend ratio, mean
log excess return (equity premium), and riskfree rate for the above parameter values. Each quantity is plotted against , the standard deviation of
log consumption growth. There are four lines within each graph, each one
corresponding to a dierent level of b .
Look rst at the results for the equity premium. The solid line corresponds to the case of b = 0, where the investor's preferences reduce to the
familiar case of power utility over consumption originally analyzed by Mehra
and Prescott (1985). The infamous equity premium puzzle is clearly visible in
the graph: when b = 0, the empirically measured volatility of consumption
growth of 3:79% corresponds to a miniscule premium of only 0.06%!
The remarkable nding in this graph is that incorporating loss aversion
into the investor's preferences does not lead to an immediate resolution of
the equity premium puzzle. Table 2 reports the unconditional moments of
returns when b = 2. The equity premium corresponding to  = 3:79% is a
mere 0:91%. In fact there is no value of b that can generate the empirical
premium of 6% from a consumption growth volatility of 3:79%! As b ! 1,
the equity premium we can generate tends to an upper limit, the dotted line
in the graph. For a 3.79% consumption growth volatility, the highest possible
equity premium is only 1.2%.17
This result is surprising in light of Benartzi and Thaler's (1995) suggestion
that loss aversion may be helpful in explaining the equity premium. After
all, when b = 1, the investor's utility is driven entirely by loss aversion
and our framework eectively reduces to a multiperiod version of Benartzi
and Thaler's setup. Even for this b however, we can only generate a puny
equity premium. Our results therefore point to an unexpected conclusion:
loss-aversion by itself cannot explain the equity premium.
This conclusion is not sensitive to the length of the investor's evaluation
period. It is true that if the investor evaluates his portfolio more frequently
than once a year, he is more likely to see losses and hence will be more
inclined to charge a higher premium. This eect is not nearly large enough
to rescue the model; in any case, one year remains the most natural length
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

The stock return data in this and other tables is based on the annual returns of the
value-weighted NYSE portfolio from 1926 to 1995.
17

15

of time between portfolio evaluations.
The diculty we face in matching the equity premium turns out to be a
symptom of a deeper problem that the model of this section shares with all
consumption-based models with constant discount rates.18 It concerns the
implications for stock return volatility. Since
R = Pt + Dt = 1 + ft Dt = 1 + f eg " +1 ;
(15)
t+1

+1

Pt

+1

ft

+1

+1

Dt

f

+

t

the volatility of log returns in this model is equal to the volatility of log
consumption growth, namely 3.79%. Our model therefore does not come close
to matching the empirically observed return standard deviation of 20%! Of
course, this is partly due to the fact that models in the Lucas (1978) tradition
equate consumption and dividends. However, even using the more generous
dividend growth volatility of 11% does not solve this problem satisfactorily.
The unrealistically low stock return volatility generated by the model explains why our conclusion diers from that of Benartzi and Thaler (1995).
Even though our investor is loss averse, the losses on the stock are not large
enough to scare the investor into demanding a high equity premium as compensation. In their portfolio calculations, Benartzi and Thaler can treat
volatility as an exogeneous parameter and set it at its high historical level.
In our equilibrium model, we face the more dicult task of generating that
volatility endogeneously. Our inability to do so with the current specication
also hampers our ability to explain the equity premium.
In Section 3, we draw on recent ndings in the psychology literature to
modify our model in a simple way, and nd that our ability to understand
the empirical features of aggregate stock returns is signicantly enhanced. In
particular, we incorporate evidence on how prior outcomes inuence agents'
desire to take risk. This leads to a model of changing risk-aversion, and
hence time-varying expected returns. We nd that this predictability can
make stock returns much more volatile than consumption growth, in turn
making the equity premium easier to understand.
This category includes papers that use rst-order risk-aversion, such as Epstein and
Zin (1990). See Campbell (1996) for a discussion of this issue.
18

16

3 The Inuence of Prior Outcomes
In the model of the previous section, the utility vb(Rt ) the investor receives
from a specic return Rt is the same, whatever the investor's previous gains
or losses. Put dierently, the investor evaluates this period's gain or loss with
no memory of earlier occurences.
A number of recent papers in the psychology literature suggest that prior
outcomes do in fact inuence the way subsequent gains and losses are experienced, and hence also willingness to take risk. In a pioneering paper,
Thaler and Johnson (1990) present evidence on this, using a large sample of
Cornell undergraduate and MBA students. Here are some examples of the
results they obtained; the percentage of students choosing each option is in
parentheses.
1. You have just won $30. Choose between:
(a) A 50% chance to gain $9 and a 50% chance to lose $9 [82]
(b) No further gain or loss [18]
2. You have just lost $30. Choose between:
(a) A 50% chance to gain $9 and a 50% chance to lose $9 [36]
(b) No further gain or loss [64]
These results suggest that prior outcomes inuence risky choice. Following a gain, people appear to be more risk-seeking than usual, taking on bets
that they would not normally accept. The opposite is true after a loss: the
subjects displayed considerable reluctance to accept risky bets.
Thaler and Johnson (1990) oer a natural interpretation of these results.
They argue that people's increasing willingness to gamble after a prior gain
reects the fact that a loss is less painful than usual in these circumstances.
The earlier gain cushions any subsequent losses, making them easier to bear.
In a nancial context, an investor does not care much about a loss that comes
after substantial gains because he is able to tell himself that he is still up,
relative to a year ago. Thaler and Johnson call this the house money
eect, because it is reminiscent of the expression playing with the house
money used to describe gamblers' increased willingness to bet when ahead.
The reason for higher risk aversion following prior losses, according to
Thaler and Johnson, is that people are particularly fearful of additional losses
when they have just recently experienced a loss. An informal interpretation is
that the shock of the initial loss makes people unusually sensitive to further
setbacks. Linville and Fisher (1991) oer a more formal way of thinking
+1

+1

17

about this, based on a renewable resources model. They argue that people
possess limited loss-buering resources that are used up when coping with
a bad outcome. These resources renew over time, but only slowly, which
means that people are particularly vulnerable and hence sensitive to losses
that occur immediately after other losses.
Thaler and Johnson present further evidence on this point by asking subjects more directly about the discomfort caused by losses in various circumstances. These results clearly support the notion that a loss is less painful
after a prior gain and more painful if it comes on the heels of another loss.
Typical results are illustrated by the following questions; once again, the
percentage of respondents choosing each option is in parentheses.
3.
(a) You lose $9.
(b) You lose $9 after having gained $30
The loss of $9 hurts more in (a) [84] (b) [10] (no dierence) [6].
4.
(a) You lose $9
(b) You lose $9 after having lost $30
The loss of $9 hurts more in (a) [22] (b) [75] (no dierence) [3].
Linville and Fisher (1991) use a dierent approach that also points to
losses after prior losses being more painful. They ask subjects if they would
prefer two unpleasant events to occur close together in time, or far apart. The
vast majority of respondents prefer to separate the events, suggesting that
having them occur close by would be too overwhelming. Moreover, Linville
and Fisher nd that when one event is pleasant and the other unpleasant,
subjects prefer to have them occur close together in time, the rationale being
that the good event cushions the bad one.
One objection to Thaler and Johnson's evidence is that the amounts at
stake are too small to elicit serious introspection on the part of subjects.
However, similar results were obtained by Gertner (1993) in a clever study
involving much larger stakes. He studies the risk-taking behavior of participants in the television game show Card Sharks, where contestants place
bets on whether a card to be drawn at random from a deck will be higher
or lower than a card currently showing. He nds that the amount bet is a
strongly increasing function of the contestant's winnings up to that point in
the show. Once again, this is evidence of more aggressive risk-taking behavior
following substantial gains.
18

The evidence we have presented suggests that in the context of a sequence
of gains and losses, people are less risk-averse following prior gains and more
risk-averse after prior losses. This may initially appear at odds with Kahneman and Tversky's original value function, which is concave in the region
of gains and convex in the region of losses. In particular, the convexity over
losses is occasionally interpreted to mean that after a loss, people take on
more risk in an attempt to break-even, contrary to our claim.
In fact, the two claims are completely consistent and it is important to
understand the distinction between them. An example may be helpful here.
Suppose you are spending the day at the horse-races or at a casino. While you
may place many individual bets over the course of the day, it is reasonable
to suppose that you care primarily about where you stand at the end of the
day, a natural evaluation point. Put dierently, you view your entire day
at the casino as a one-shot gamble and apply the prospect value function to
your gain or loss at the end of the day.
In this context, the right way to interpret the convex portion of the value
function in the domain of losses is the following: it says that if you are nearing
the end of the day with losses, you will take on more risk in an attempt to
break-even  and this is indeed observed behavior. However, this is not the
eect that we are concerned with in our paper. We are interested in what
happens after the gain or loss at the end of the day is experienced, not
before. To continue with our example, suppose that the day ends and that
your attempts to break-even have failed, forcing you to acknowledge a painful
loss. Our claim, derived from evidence in Thaler and Johnson (1990), is that
if you go to the casino again the following day, you will be more risk-averse.
It is important to note that the claim that risk aversion increases after
a loss is not derived from prospect theory; indeed it cannot be derived from
prospect theory. Tversky and Kahneman (1981) themselves emphasize that
their theory was developed for elementary, one-shot gambles and that any
application to a dynamic context must await further evidence on how people
think about sequences of gains and losses. A number of papers, including
Thaler and Johnson (1990) and Linville and Fisher (1991) have taken up this
challenge, and it is there that we need to look for guidance when implementing a dynamic version of prospect theory.

19

3.1 Extending the Model to Account for Prior Outcomes

The model of Section 2.1., summarized in (7) and (8), makes the prospect
theory term vb a function of Rt alone, implying that investors evaluate
current gains and losses with no memory of earlier outcomes. The experimental evidence strongly contradicts this. Rather, it suggests that the utility
impact of a 10% decline, say, in the value of a stock from $100 to $90 depends
on the stock's prior returns, on the path by which it arrived at $100 in the
rst place.
To capture the inuence of prior outcomes, we introduce the concept of
a historical benchmark level Zt for the value of the risky asset.19 We propose
that when judging the recent performance of a stock, investors compare St ;
the value of their stock holdings today, to some value Zt based on the stock's
previous price history. Dierent investors will form this benchmark in different ways. For some investors, it may represent an average of recent stock
prices. For others, it may be the specic stock price at salient moments, such
as the turn of the year. Whichever way the benchmark level is formed, the
dierence St , Zt , when positive, is the investor's personal measure of how
much he is up on his investment and conversely, when negative, how much
he is down.
Introducing Zt is helpful in modelling the inuence of prior outcomes on
the way subsequent gains and losses are experienced. When St > Zt ; subsequent losses are less painful because they are cushioned by the investor's
prior gains, St , Zt . This makes the investor less risk-averse than usual. Conversely, when St < Zt, the investor is down on his investment. Subsequent
losses are more painful, and the investor is more risk-averse than usual.
It is clear from this discussion that the way subsequent gains and losses
are experienced depends primarily on the relative values of St and Zt , rather
than their absolute levels. A simple way of capturing the eect of prior
outcomes is therefore to write the prospect theory term as vb(Rt ; zt ), a
function not only of Rt but also of the ratio zt = ZS .20
+1

+1

t

+1

t

We use the term benchmark level to distinguish Zt from the reference level St Rf;t . The
reference level determines the size of the gain or loss. The benchmark level Zt determines
the magnitude of the utility received from that gain or loss, in a way that we soon make
precise. While we are careful to stick to this terminology, some readers may nd it helpful
to think of Zt as a secondary reference level that also aects the investor's decisions.
20 It is clearly an abuse of notation to use the same notation v
b now that we have intro19

20

Case of Prior Gains

We now describe how gains and losses are treated where we take account
of prior outcomes. In doing so, we try to be as faithful as possible to the
spirit of the experimental evidence. An example may be helpful here; for
simplicity, we take the riskfree rate to be 0%, so that Rf;t = 1.
Suppose that the value of the risky asset has gone up recently, so that its
current value of St = $100 is higher than the historical benchmark level the
investor has in mind, Zt = $90, say. As discussed above, we can think of $90
as the value of the stock one year ago, which the investor still remembers.
The investor will be less risk-averse than usual since he has built up a reserve
of prior gains, measured by St , Zt = 10, that will cushion subsequent losses.
Now suppose that over the next year, the value of the stock falls by 20%,
from $100 down to $80. In Section 2, we measured the pain of this loss as
(80 , 100)(2:25) = ,45:
Since the investor has built up some prior gains, this calculation probably
overestimates actual discomfort. We propose a more realistic measure of the
pain caused: since the rst $10 drop, from $100 down to $90; is completely
cushioned by the reserve of prior gains, we penalize it at a rate of only 1,
rather than 2.25. The second part of the loss, from $90 down to $80 will be
more painful since all prior gains have already been depleted, and we penalize
it at the usual rate of 2.25. The overall disutility of the $20 loss is then
(90 , 100)(1) + (80 , 90)(2:25) = ,32:5
We can now restate this argument more formally in terms of returns,
while still keeping the riskless rate at 0% for now. Suppose that the investor
experiences a particularly poor return Rt after accumulating prior gains.
If the investor has no memory of prior outcomes, equation (8) shows that he
will code a loss of Rt , 1 and penalize the entire loss at a rate . However,
if the investor takes his prior gains into account, we suggest that he will
separate the loss Rt , 1 into two components: one component will be that
part of the loss that is cushioned by the prior gain, and hence is not very
painful; and the other component will be that part of the loss that remains
once the cushion is depleted, and which is therefore more painful. The worst
return that can be entirely cushioned by prior gains is that return which
+1

+1

+1

duced a new argument, but hopefully this will not cause confusion.

21

brings the stock value down from St to its historical benchmark level Zt, a
return of ZS = zt . We therefore measure the pain caused by a poor return
Rt by breaking the total loss Rt , 1 into two parts, as
t

t

+1

+1

Rt , 1 = (Rt , zt ) + (zt , 1)
+1

(16)

+1

and penalizing each component separately as
()(Rt , zt ) + (1)(zt , 1).

(17)

+1

In summary, then, we give vb(Rt ; zt) the following form for the case of
prior gains, or zt  1:
+1

(

,1
Rt  zt
t
vb(Rt ; zt ) = R
for
(zt , 1) + (Rt , zt )
Rt < zt
For the more relevant case of a nonzero riskless rate Rf;t, we scale both
the reference level St and the benchmark level Zt up by the riskfree rate, so
+1

+1

that

+1

+1

+1

(

, Rf;t
Rt  zt Rf;t :
t
vb(Rt ; zt ) = R
for
(zt Rf;t , Rf;t ) + (Rt , zt Rf;t)
Rt < zt Rf;t
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

(18)
Figure 3 illustrates the form of this function for several values of zt . Low
values of zt represent cases where the investor has built up substantial prior
gains. It therefore takes an especially bad return to inict any substantial
pain on the investor.

Case of Prior Losses

The discussion of the last few paragraphs relates to the case when the
investor's recent returns were good, enabling him to build up a reserve of
prior gains. Suppose now that the value of the risky asset has fallen in recent
periods. How are subsequent losses treated in this case? Once again, an
example may be helpful. Suppose that the current stock value is St = $100,
and that the investor's benchmark level is Zt = $110, higher than $100 since
the stock has been falling. In this example, we take an interest rate of 5%.
Suppose now that over the next year, the value of the stock falls 10%,
from $100 down to $90. In Section 2, we measured the pain of this loss as
(90 , 105)(2:25) = ,33:75:
22

However, this is probably too conservative an estimate: experimental evidence suggests any further losses that come on the heels of the initial setbacks will be even more painful than on average. We propose the simplest
possible modication: we penalize further losses at a rate higher than 2.25.
More formally, then, we dene vb(Rt ; zt ) for the case of prior losses, or
zt > 1; as
+1

(

, Rf;t
Rt  Rf;t
t
vb(Rt ; zt) = R
for
(zt )(Rt , Rf;t )
Rt < Rf;t
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

(19)

In other words, the intensity (zt ) with which losses are penalized depends
on the size of earlier losses, measured by zt. The evidence dictates (zt) >
2:25. We also make (:) an increasing function of zt : the larger the prior
loss, the higher zt , and the greater the pain of a further loss. A very simple
formulation is
(zt ) =  + k(zt , 1), zt  1.
(20)
Our results do not depend crucially on the particular functional form used
for ().

Dynamics of the Benchmark Level

To complete our description of the model, we need to specify how zt moves
over time, or equivalently how the historical benchmark level Zt reacts to
changes in the stock value St . The only requirement we impose on Zt is
that it respond sluggishly to changes in the value of the risky asset. By this
we mean that when the stock price moves up by a lot, the benchmark level
also moves up, but by less. Conversely, if the stock price falls sharply, the
benchmark level does not adjust downwards by as much.
Sluggishness turns out to be a very intuitive requirement to impose. To
see this, recall that the dierence St , Zt is the investor's measure of his
reserve of prior gains. How should this quantity behave over time? If the return on the stock market is particularly good, investors should feel as though
they have increased their reserve of prior gains. Mathematically, this means
that the benchmark level Zt should move up less than the stock price itself,
so that the cushion at time t + 1, namely St , Zt ; be larger than the
cushion at time t, St , Zt . Conversely, if the return on market is particularly poor, the investor should feel as though his reserves of prior gains are
depleted. For this to happen, Zt must fall less than St .
+1

23

+1

A simple way of modelling the sluggishness of the benchmark level Zt is
to write the dynamics of zt as

zt = zt RR :
t
+1

(21)

+1

where R is a xed parameter. This equation then says that if the return
on the risky asset is particularly good, so that Rt > R, the state variable
z = ZS falls in value. This is consistent with the benchmark level Zt behaving
sluggishly, rising less than the stock price itself. Conversely, if the return is
poor and Rt < R, then z goes up. This is consistent with the benchmark
level falling less than the stock price.21
R is not a free parameter in our model, but is determined endogeneously
by imposing the requirement that in equilibrium, the mean value of zt be
equal to one. The idea behind this is that on average the investor's benchmark level should be the same as the current stock value, so that zt = 1,
although of course at any particular moment, the benchmark level may be
above or below the current stock value. It turns out that R is typically of
similar magnitude to the average stock return.
We can generalize (21) slightly to allow for varying degrees of sluggishness
in the dynamics of the historical benchmark level. One way to do this is to
write
!
R
(22)
zt =  zt R + (1 , ) (1):
+1

+1

+1

t+1

When  = 1, this reduces to (21), which represents a sluggish benchmark
level. When  = 0, it reduces to zt = 1, which means that the benchmark
level Zt tracks the stock value St one-for-one throughout  a very fast moving
benchmark level. Note that this is exactly the preliminary model considered in Section 2. By varying  between 0 and 1, we alter the sluggishness
of the benchmark level  the higher , the more sluggish Zt is.
The parameter  can also be given an interesting interpretation in terms
of the investor's memory: it measures how far back the investor's mind
stretches when recalling past gains and losses. When  is near zero, the
benchmark level Zt is always close behind the value of the stock St : prior
gains and losses are quickly swallowed up and are not allowed to aect the
+1

The benchmark level dynamics in (21) are one simple way of capturing sluggishness.
More generally, we can assume dynamics of the form zt+1 = zt g(Rt+1 ; R), where g(; R)
is strictly decreasing and equal to 1 at R.
21

24

investor for long. In eect, the investor has a short term memory, recalling
only the most recent prior outcomes. When  is closer to one, though, the
benchmark level moves sluggishly, allowing past gains and losses to linger
and aect the investor for a long time; in other words, the investor has a
long memory.22

3.2 Equilibrium Conditions

To evaluate our new model, we derive the equations that characterize asset
prices in equilibrium. To recap, our investor chooses (Ct; St ) to maximize

E

"1
X
t=0

#

,
C
t
( 1 , + bt t St vb(Rt ; zt)) ;
t

1

+1

(23)

+1

where for zt  1, vb is dened by
(

, Rf;t
Rt  zt Rf;t
t
vb(Rt ; zt ) = R
(zt Rf;t , Rf;t ) + (Rt , zt Rf;t) for Rt < zt Rf;t ;
+1

+1

+1

+1

and for zt > 1,

+1

(

, Rf;t
Rt  Rf;t ;
t
vb(Rt ; zt ) = R
for
(zt )(Rt , Rf;t )
Rt < Rf;t

(25)

(zt ) =  + k(zt , 1).

(26)

bt = b C ,t ;

(27)

+1

+1

+1

+1

with
and

+1

0

and nally,

(24)

zt

+1

=  zt R
Rt

!

+1

+ (1 , ) (1):

(28)

We propose a one-factor equilibrium in which the Markov state variable,
zt , determines the distribution of all future returns. Specically, we assume
A simple mathematical argument can be used to show that the half-life of the
:693 . In other words, after this amount of time, the
investor's memory is equal to , 0log

investor has lost half of his memory. When  = 0:9; this quantity is 6.6 years and when
 = 0:8, it equals 3.1 years.
22

25

that the price-dividend ratio of the stock is a function of the state variable
zt :
ft  Pt =Dt = f (zt );
(29)
and then show that there is indeed an equilibrium satisfying this assumption.
Applying the above one-factor assumption to equation (10), we show that
the distribution of the stock return Rt is determined by zt and function
f () as follows:
Rt = 1 +ff(z(z)t ) eg  +1 :
(30)
t
In the proposed equilibrium, the riskfree rate is again constant.
The proposition below characterizes the equilibrium.
+1

+1

+1

+

t

Proposition 2 For the preferences given in (23)-(28), there exists an equilibrium in which the gross riskfree interest rate is constant at

Rf = , e g, 22 = ;
1

(31)

2

and the stock's price-dividend ratio, as a function of the state variable zt ,
satises, for all zt :
"

1 = Et 1 +ff(z(z)t ) e ,
t
+1

(1

+1 )

)(g +t

#

"

+ b Et vb 1 +ff(z(z)t ) eg
t
0

+1

+t

+1 ; zt

!#

:

(32)

This proposition is proved in the Appendix. Informally, our results again
follow from the agent's Euler equations
2
!, 3
C
t
+1
5;
1 = Rf Et 4

(33)

2
!, 3
C
1 = Et 4Rt+1 t+1 5 + b0 Et [vb(Rt+1 ; zt )] :

(34)

Ct

Ct

Once again, the prospect theory term only enters the Euler equation
for the risky asset. This enables our model to explain various features of
equity returns without simultaneously predicting a high mean and volatility
of the riskfree interest rate. This is a point which has frustrated many earlier
attempts to understand stock return data by playing with the form of utility
26

over consumption. Those earlier models typically use a high risk-aversion
over consumption shocks to explain the equity premium; unfortunately, that
high also leads to a strong desire to smooth consumption intertemporally,
generating high interest rates. In our model, the contribution of the second
term in (34) means that we do not need a high to understand the equity
premium, allowing us to avoid the riskfree rate puzzle as well.23
In Section 3.3, we solve for the price-dividend ratio numerically and use
simulated data to show that our model provides a simple way of understanding many of the hitherto puzzling empirical features of aggregate stock
returns. In particular, our model is consistent with both a low mean and
volatility of consumption growth on the one hand, and a high mean and
volatility of stock returns on the other. Moreover, our model generates longhorizon predictability very similar to that observed in empirical studies. Most
importantly of all, we obtain these results with reasonable parameter values.
For example, our results do not require high levels of risk-aversion over consumption.
It may be helpful to outline the intuition behind these results before
moving to the simulations. Return volatility is a good place to start. An
important feature of the model of this section is that it allows the volatility
of returns and the volatility of consumption growth to be very dierent. This
is critical because the former is high and the latter is low. Indeed, the main
failing of the model in Section 2 was that it forced these two quantities to be
identical.
To understand what is dierent in our new model, suppose that there is
a positive dividend innovation this period. This will generate a high stock
return. However, this high return will also increase the investor's reserves
of prior gains, since his benchmark price level goes up more slowly than the
stock price itself. This makes the investor less risk-averse, since future losses
will be cushioned by the prior gains, which are now larger than before. The
investor's lower risk-aversion eectively lowers the rate at which the future
dividend stream is discounted, giving stock prices an extra jolt upwards.
A similar story holds for a negative dividend innovation. It generates a low
stock return, depleting prior gains or increasing prior losses, this time because
the investor's benchmark level falls less than the stock price itself. Following
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) is perhaps the only consumption-based model that
avoids problems with the riskfree rate. A clever choice of functional form for the habit
level over consumption enables them to use precautionary saving to counterbalance the
strong desire to smooth consumption intertemporally.
23

27

this painful prior loss, the investor is more risk-averse than before, and the
increase in risk-aversion pushes prices still lower. The eect of all this is to
make returns substantially more volatile than dividend growth.
The fact that returns are now more volatile also leads us to expect a more
substantial equity premium from our model. In the framework of Section 2,
stock returns were not volatile enough to produce the kind of large losses that
scare loss-averse investors into charging a high premium. This is no longer
the case.
Long horizon predictability also results naturally in our model. Put simply, since the investor's risk-aversion varies over time depending on his investment performance, expected returns on the risky asset also vary. To
understand this in more detail, suppose once again that there is a positive
shock to dividends. This generates a high stock return, which in turn lowers
the investor's risk-aversion, and pushes the stock price still higher, leading to
a higher price-dividend ratio. Since the investor is less risk-averse, subsequent
stock returns will be lower on average. Price dividend ratios are therefore
inversely related to future returns, in exactly the way that has been documented by numerous studies, including Campbell and Shiller (1988) and
Fama and French (1988b).

3.3 Numerical Results

In this section, we present the price-dividend ratio f (zt ) that solves equation
(32). The parameter values we use are summarized in Table 1. We set the
mean g of log consumption growth equal to 1.84% and the standard deviation
to 3.79%. Risk-aversion is still 0.9, the time discount rate  = 0:98, and
b = 2.
The parameters that are new to the specication of Section 3 are k, ,
and R. We set k, which determines (zt ) and hence the way the pain of a loss
varies with the state variable, equal to 50. To understand what this means,
suppose that the state variable zt is initially equal to 1, and that the stock
market then experiences a sharp fall of 10%. From equation (28) with  = 1,
this means that zt increases by approximately 0.1 to 1.1. From (26), the pain
of any additional losses will now penalized at 2:25 + 5 = 7:25, a more severe
penalty.
The variable  controls the sluggishness of the benchmark level. We rst
present results for  = 1, the most sluggish case, to see how far our model
can stretch in terms of the results it generates. We then present some results
0

28

for lower . R is not a parameter we have any control over. Rather, it is
completely determined by the other parameters and the requirement that
the equilibrium unconditional mean of zt be equal to one. Trial and error
leads to a value of R = Rf + 4:0% for the case of  = 1.
Before presenting our results, we briey describe the way they were obtained. Solving equation (32) is not a trivial task. The complication is due
to the fact that zt is a function of both t and f (). In economic terms,
our state variable is endogenous: it tracks prior gains and losses, which depend on past returns, themselves endogenous. Equation (32) is therefore
self-referential and needs to be solved in conjunction with
+1

+1

zt

+1

and

=  zt RR
t

!

+1

+ (1 , ) (1);

Rt = 1 +ff(z(z)t ) eg
+1

+1

+t

t

(35)

+1 :

(36)

After trying a number of dierent approaches to this problem, we settled
on the following technique. We start out by guessing a solution to (32), f
say. We then construct a function h so that zt = h (zt ; "t ) solves
equations (35) and (36) for this f = f . This equation determines the
distribution of zt conditional on zt .
Given the function h , we get an new candidate solution f through
the following recursion:
h
i
f i (zt ) = Et (1 + f i (zt ))e , g  +1
(37)
!#
"
i
+ b f i (zt )Et v 1 + fi (zt ) eg  +1 ; zt ; 8zt .
f (zt)
(0)

(0)

+1

(0)

+1

(0)

(0)

( +1)

(1)

( )

0

+1

+1

(1

)( +
( )

( )

t

+1

)

+

t

( )

With f in hand, we can calculate a new h = h that solves equation (35)
and (36) for f = f . This h gives us a new candidate f = f from (37).
We continue this process until convergence occurs.
Price-Dividend Ratio
Figure 4 presents the resulting price-dividend ratio as a function of the
state variable zt . It is a decreasing function of zt . The intuition for this
is straightforward: a low value of zt means that recent returns on the asset
have been high, giving the investor a reserve of prior gains. These gains cushion any subsequent losses, making the investor less risk-averse. He therefore
(1)

(1)

(1)

(1)

(2)

29

discounts future dividends at a lower rate, raising the price-dividend ratio.
Conversely, a high value of zt means that the investor has recently experienced a spate of painful losses; he is now especially sensitive to further losses
which makes him more risk-averse and lowers price-dividend ratios.
Distribution of the state variable and of returns
Figure 4 by itelf does not tell us the range of price-dividend ratios we are
likely to see in equilibrium. For that, we need to know the distribution of
the state variable zt in equilibrium, and we present it in the top left panel
of Figure 5. To obtain it, we use equations (35) and (36) together with
the price-dividend ratio graphed in Figure 4 to impute the state variable
dynamics zt = h(zt ; "t ). We then draw a long time series ("t)t ; of
10,000 independent draws from the standard normal distribution and starting
with z = 1, use h to generate a time series for zt . Note from the graph that
the unconditional mean of zt is very close to one, and this is no accident.
We chose the value of R in equation (35) precisely to make the mean of zt
as close to one as possible.
As we generate the time series for zt period by period, we also compute the returns along the way using equation (36). The top right panel of
Figure 5 plots the distribution of returns that we obtain. We now present
sample moments computed from these simulated returns; the time series is
long enough that sample moments should serve as good approximations to
population moments.
Unconditional Means and Volatilities
+1

10 000
=1

+1

0

Our preliminary model is Section 2 utterly failed to reproduce the most
basic characteristics of stock returns, their mean and volatility. Using b = 2,
the equity premium, or mean log excess return, was a paltry 0.91% and
volatility only 3.79%. Table 3 shows that the more realistic model we are
now using fares much better. The average return on the risky asset in excess
of the risk-free rate is now a very substantial 4.1%.
Our success in generating a more sizeable equity premium is largely due
to the fact that the current model does a much better job explaining return
volatility. Table 3 shows that the equilibrium volatility of returns is now
almost 14%. Innovations in consumption growth lead to changes in riskaversion and hence discount rates, making returns much more volatile than
consumption growth. These volatile returns scare the loss-averse investor
0

30

into charging a much higher equity premium than before.
Table 3 also reports the average value and standard deviation of the pricedividend ratio in our simulations.
Conditional Means and Volatilities
The bottom left panel in Figure 5 plots the conditional expected return
as a function of zt , obtained by numerically integrating the return equation
(36) over the conditional distribution of zt given by zt = h(zt ; "t ). The
conditional expected return is an increasing function of the state variable.
Low values of zt mean that the investor has accumulated prior gains that will
cushion future losses. He is therefore less risk-averse, leading to a lower expected return in equilibrium. The dashed line shows the level of the constant
riskfree rate for comparison.
The bottom right panel in Figure 5 graphs the conditional volatility of
returns as a function of the state variable. Since much of the return volatility
in our model is generated by changing risk-aversion, the conditional volatility
in any state depends on how sensitive the investor's risk-aversion in that
state is to consumption shocks. The gentle inverted U-shape in the graph
reects the fact that in our specication, risk-aversion is most sensitive near
zt = 1, so that conditional volatility is highest near that point. Empirically,
volatility has been found to be higher after market crashes than booms, which
in our context would mean an upward sloping conditional volatility curve.
Of course, we could generate this result by stipulating that investors' riskaversion is more sensitive in troughs than at peaks. Since we have found no
independent evidence of this, we do not impose it in our model.
Autocorrelations
+1

+1

+1

Table 4 presents autocorrelations of log returns and of the price-dividend
ratio. As expected, our model produces negatively autocorrelated returns at
all lags: high prices lower risk-aversion and lead to lower returns on average.
These negative autocorrelations imply long-horizon mean-reversion of the
kind documented by Poterba and Summers (1988) and Fama and French
(1988a). Moreover, the price-dividend ratio is highly autocorrelated in our
model, closely matching its actual behavior.
Long-horizon Predictability
Since the investor's risk-aversion changes over time in our model, expected
returns also vary, and hence returns are predictable. To demonstrate this,
31

we use our simulated data to run regressions of cumulative log returns over
a k-year horizon on the lagged dividend-price ratio for k = 1, 2, 3, and 4,

t
+ k( D
(38)
St ) + "k;t:
where rt is the log return. Table 5 presents the slope coecients k and R (k)
obtained from our simulated data alongside the empirical values. Note that
our simulated results capture the main features of the empirical ndings,
including an R that increases with the return horizon.
We conclude by presenting some results for dierent benchmark level
dynamics. In particular, we alter the parameter  in (22). The results
so far have been for  = 1, which represents a very sluggish benchmark
level. Table 6 shows what happens when we try  = 0:9 and  = 0:8.
Even before looking at the results, we know that they are unlikely to be
as impressive as those for  = 1. A faster-moving benchmark level makes
it harder to accumulate prior gains or losses. The investor's risk-aversion
will therefore change more slowly over time, generating lower volatility and
hence a lower equity premium. Table 6 shows, though, that the results are
still respectable, with even  = 0:8, generating returns twice as volatile as
consumption growth.
Adding the evidence on the eect of prior outcomes has improved our
model's ability to make sense of several features of aggregate stock returns.
However, even this model is not able to fully match the empirical estimates
of the equity premium and volatility. This should not be seen as a weakness
of our approach, but on the contrary, as entirely realistic. While we believe
that the eects we describe are very relevant for aggregate stock market
behavior, we do not insist that they are the only mechanism at work. The
literature has produced other possible stories for particular features of the
data: the excess volatility of returns, for example, may also also be the result
of investors extrapolating earnings trends too far into the future  see Barsky
and De Long (1993) and Barberis, Shleifer, Vishny (1998).
Having said this, there is a sense in which the equity premium and volatility numbers that we have generated so far actually represent a very conservative lower bound on what our framework is capable of. This is because we
have worked throughout with Lucas' (1978) model, which forces consumption to equal dividends, while in reality they are very dierent. We adopted
this model because it is the simplest possible framework that can illustrate

rt + rt +    + rt k =
+1

+2

+

k

2

2

32

our ideas. The drawback though, is that its restrictive assumption prevents
us from demonstrating the full force of our preference specication and from
showcasing its full range of predictions.
To see this, imagine a model which does distinguish between dividends
and consumption, perhaps by introducing another source of wealth such as
labor income. Since stocks are now a claim to volatile dividends rather
than to smooth consumption, stock returns will also be more volatile. This
much is also true in consumption-based models. However, in those models,
separating dividends from consumption has no eect on the equity premium :
even though stock returns are more volatile, making stocks more risky, they
are also less correlated with consumption  because dividends are only weakly
correlated with consumption  and this makes stocks less risky. Overall the
equity premium is largely unaected.24
In our world, the eect could not be more dierent. Since our investor
worries about wealth uctuations per se and not simply about the consumption uctuations they induce, any increase in volatility translates directly
into a higher equity premium.
In summary then, separating dividends and consumption should lead to
results for volatility and the equity premium that are even more striking
than those in the tables. And this is not all. Such a framework would also
generate stock returns that are only weakly correlated with consumption
growth innovations. The wildly counterfactual perfect correlation typically
implied by consumption-based models is a continued source of embarassment
for that paradigm.
24

See Campbell and Cochrane (1999) for an insightful discussion of this point.

33

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a new framework for pricing assets, derived
in part from the traditional consumption-based approach, but which also
incorporates two long-standing ideas in psychology: the prospect theory of
Kahneman and Tversky (1979), and the evidence of Thaler and Johnson
(1990) and others on the inuence of prior outcomes on risky choice.
Consistent with prospect theory, the investor in our model derives utility
not only from consumption levels but also from changes in the value of his
nancial wealth from year to year. He is much more sensitive to reductions
in wealth than to increases, the loss-aversion feature of prospect utility.
Moreover, consistent with experimental evidence, the utility he receives from
gains and losses in wealth depends on his prior investment outcomes; prior
gains cushion subsequent losses  the so-called house-money eect  while
prior losses intensify the pain of subsequent shortfalls.
We studied asset prices in the presence of agents with preferences of this
type, and found that our model can explain the high mean, volatility, and
predictability of stock returns. The key to our results is that the agent's
risk-aversion changes over time as a function of his investment performance.
This generates time-varying risk premia, which in turn make prices much
more volatile than underlying dividends. In combination with the agent's
loss-aversion, the high volatility of returns generates large equity premia.
Our results obtain with reasonable values for all parameters, including even
the investor's risk-aversion over consumption uncertainty.

34

5 References
Abel, Andrew (1990), Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching
Up with the Joneses, American Economic Review 80, 38-42.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998), A Model of
Investor Sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-43.
Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen (1996), The Spirit of Capitalism and
Stock-Market Prices, American Economic Review 86, 133-157.
Barsky, Robert B., and J. Bradford de Long (1993), Why Does the Stock
Market Fluctuate?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 291-311.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert Hodrick and David Marshall (1997), The Implications of First Order Risk Aversion for Asset Markets' Risk Premia, Journal
of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler (1995), Myopic Loss Aversion and
the Equity Premium Puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73-92.
Campbell, John (1999), Asset Price, Consumption and the Business Cycle, forthcoming in John Taylor and Michael Woodford eds., Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Campbell, John, and John H. Cochrane (1999), By Force of Habit: A
Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy.
Campbell, John and Robert Shiller (1988), Stock Prices, Earnings, and
Expected Dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.
Ceccheti, S., P. Lam, and N. Mark (1990), Mean Reversion in Equilibrium
Asset Prices, American Economic Review, 80, 398-418.
Cochrane, John H. (1998), Where is the Market Going: Uncertain Facts
and Novel Theories, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Discussion Paper.
Constantinides, George (1990), Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal of Political Economy 98, 531-552.
Constantinides, George, and Darrell Due (1996) Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers, Journal of Political Economy 104, 219-240.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam (1998), Investor Psychology and Security Market Under- and Over-reactions, Journal
of Finance 53, 1839-85.
35

Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin (1989), Substitution, Risk Aversion,
and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,
Journal of Political Economy 57, 937-968.
Epstein, Larry. G. and Stanley E. Zin (1990), First-order risk aversion and
the Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387-407.
Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin (1991), Substitution, Risk Aversion,
and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns II:
An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Political Economy 99, 263-286.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French (1988a), Permanent and Temporary
Components of Stock Prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-273.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French (1988b), Dividend Yields and Expected
Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
Gertner, Robert (1993), Game Shows and Economic Behavior: Risk Taking
on Card Shark, Quarterly Journal of Economics 151, 507-521.
Hansen, Lars P., and Kenneth Singleton (1983), Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns, Journal of
Political Economy 91, 249-265.
Hansen, Lars P., and R. Jagannathan (1991), Restrictions on Intertemporal Marginal Rates of Substitutions Implied by Asset Returns, Journal of
Political Economy 99, 225-262.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas (1996), Evaluating the Eects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing, Journal of Political Economy 104, 668-712.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy Stein (1999), A Unied Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading and Overreaction in Asset Markets, forthcoming,
Journal of Finance.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (1979), Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (1996), The Equity Premium: It's Still a Puzzle,
Journal of Economic Literature 34, 42-71.
Linville, Patricia, and Gregory Fischer (1991), Preferences for Separating or
Combining Events, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 60, 5-23.
Lucas, Robert (1978), Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica
46, 1419-1446.
36

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward Prescott (1985), The Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.
Odean, Terrance (1995), Are Investors Reluctant to Realize their Losses?,
Journal of Finance 53, 1775-1798.
Poterba, James, and Lawrence Summers (1988), Mean-reversion in Stock
Returns: Evidence and Implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22,
27-60.
Rabin, Matthew (1997), Risk Aversion, Diminishing Marginal Utility and
Expected Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem, Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley.
Rabin, Matthew (1998), Psychology and Economics, Journal of Economic
Literature 36, 11-46.
Segal, U. and A. Spivak (1990), First Order versus Second Order Risk Aversion, Journal of Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Shefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman (1985), The Disposition to Sell Winners
too Early and Ride Losers too Long: Theory and Evidence, Journal of
Finance 40, 777-790.
Shleifer, Andrei (1999), Inecient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral
Finance, manuscript, Harvard University.
Shumway, Tyler (1997), Explaining Returns with Loss Aversion, Working
Paper, University of Michigan.
Sundaresan, Suresh (1989), Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the
Volatility of Consumption and Wealth, Review of Financial Studies 2, 7388.
Thaler, Richard (1985), Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice, Marketing Science 4, 199-214.
Thaler, Richard H., and Eric J. Johnson (1990), Gambling with the House
Money and Trying to Break Even: The Eects of Prior Outcomes on Risky
Choice, Management Science 36, 643-660.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman (1981), The Framing of Decisions
and the Psychology of Choice, Science 211, 453-458.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman (1992), Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
37

Zou, Heng-Fu (1994), The Spirit of Capitalism and Long-Run Growth,
European Journal of Political Economy 10, 279-293.

38

</ref_section>

6 Appendix: Proof of Propositions
We rst prove Proposition 2, since the proof for Proposition 1 follows immediately. We conjecture that in equilibrium, the riskfree gross interest rate is
constant at Rf given by (31), and the stock returns have a one-factor Markov
structure given by (35), (29), and (30), with f () satisfying (32) for all zt .
We then show that, under rational expectations, the representative investor
indeed consumes all the dividend and holds the total supply of assets at each
time t.
The representative agent's optimization problem is
max E

fCt ;Stg

" 1 " 1,
X t Ct
t=0

##

,

 1 , + b t C t St vb(Rt ; zt)
0

+1

(39)

+1

subject to the standard budget constraint

Wt = (Wt , Ct )Rf + St(Rt , Rf );
+1

(40)

+1

where Wt denotes the representative agent's pre-consumption wealth at t.
Let J (Wt ; zt; t) be the value function. It must satisfy, subject to (40), the
following Bellman equation:
"

#

Ct , + E hb t C , S vb(R ; z ) + J (W ; z ; t + 1)i :
J (Wt ; zt; t) = max

t
t
t
t
t
t
t
C ;S
1,
( t

t

1

0

t)

+1

+1

+1

(41)

We guess that the value function has the form
,
W
t
J (Wt ; zt ; t) =  [1 + f (zt )] 1 , :
1

t

+1

(42)

Let V (Ct; St ) denote the term inside square brackets in (41):
,
h
i
V (Ct; St ) = t 1C,t + Et b t C ,t Stvb(Rt ; zt ) + J (Wt ; zt ; t + 1) :
1

0

+1

+1

+1

+1

(43)
Then, under the proposed value function, we can show that the second partial
derivative matrix of V (Ct; St ), at any point (Ct; St ) with Ct > 0 and St > 0, is
negative denite. (This proof is given at the end of this appendix.) Therefore,
the necessary and sucient conditions for a policy of (Ct; St), with Ct > 0
and St > 0, to maximize V (Ct; St ) are provided by a pair of Euler equations
39

which are derived by varying Ct and St, respectively, around their optimal
values of Ct and St and are given below:
"

Rf Et [1 + f (zt )]
+1

W

t+1

Ct

, #

=1

(44)

2
!, 3
W
t
+1
5 + b0 Et [vb(Rt+1 ; zt )] = 0: (45)
Et 4[1 + f (zt+1 )] (Rt+1 , Rf )

Ct
We now show that the policy of Ct = C t = Dt and St = Wt = Pt , for all

t, indeed satises the above Euler equations. Under this policy,
Wt = Dt + Pt = Dt (1 + f (zt ));
+1

+1

+1

+1

(46)

+1

and the Euler equation (44) becomes

Rf Et

"

#
Dt , = 1;
Dt
+1

which is satised by the conjectured riskfree rate in (31). Under the same
policy, the Euler equation (45) becomes
"

D

Et (Rt , Rf ) D
t
+1

t+1

, #

+ b Et [vb(Rt ; zt )] = 0;
0

+1

which is satised under the proposed one-factor Markov stock returns in (29)(30), the conjectured riskfree rate in (31), and the conjectured price-dividend
ratio function f () that satises (32) for all zt . So under the conjectured bond
and stock returns, the representative agent indeed consumes all dividends and
holds one unit of the stock. The equilibrium is thus shown to exist.
The proof of Proposition 1 follows exactly as above, except that zt  1
for all t, ft  f , and the stock returns are i.i.d. over time.
Finally, we show that the second partial derivatives of V (Ct; St) in (43)
are negative denite. Let JW and JW W denote, respectively, the rst and
second partial derivatives of the value function J with respect to wealth.
Then the second partial derivatives of V (Ct; St) are given by
h

i

VCC (Ct; St) = , t Ct, + Et Rf JW W (Wt ; zt ; t + 1) ; (47)
h
i
VSS (Ct; St) = Et (Rt , Rf ) JW W (Wt ; zt ; t + 1) ;
(48)
VCS (Ct; St) = Et [,Rf (Rt , Rf )JW W (Wt ; zt ; t + 1)] : (49)
(1+ )

2

+1

+1

2

+1

+1

+1

+1

40

+1

+1

To show that the second partial derivative matrix of V is negative denite at every strictly positive (Ct ; St), we need to show that VCC < 0 and
VCC VSS , VCS > 0 everywhere. Under the proposed value function given in
(42), JW W < 0, so VCC < 0 holds. To show that VCC VSS , VCS > 0, we can
split it into two terms
2

2

VCC VSS , VCS = A(Ct; St ) + B (Ct; St );

(50)

2

where

A(Ct; St ) = , tCt,

(1+ )

h

i

Et (Rt , Rf ) JW W (Wt ; zt + 1; t + 1) > 0;
2

+1

+1

(51)

and using a shorthand notation for the value function,
h

i

h

i

B (Ct ; St) = Et Rf JW W (t + 1) Et (Rt , Rf ) JW W (t + 1)
, [Et [,Rf (Rt , Rf )JW W (t + 1)]] :
(52)
q

2

2

+1

2

+1

q

Dene x  Rf ,JW W (t + 1) and y  (Rt , Rf ) ,JW W (t + 1), and using
+1

2
!2 3
E
(
xy
)
Et(x2 )Et(y2) , [Et(xy)]2 = Et(y2)Et 4 x , t 2 y 5 > 0;

Et (y )

we nd that B (Ct; St ) > 0. So VCC VSS , VCS > 0, and the second partial
derivative matrix of V is indeed negative denite everywhere at Ct > 0 and
St > 0.
2

41

Table 1: Assumed parameter values for the models in Sections 2 and 3.

Parameter Section 2
g
0.0184

0.0379
0.9

0.98

2.25
b0
(range)
k

-

Section 3
0.0184
0.0379
0.9
0.98
2.25
2
50
1 (+range)

Table 2: Unconditional moments for returns under the preliminary model. Empirical values for consumption growth come from annual data from 1889-1985;
those for stock returns are based on annual NYSE data from 1926-1995.
Model Value Empirical Value
Log Consumption growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
Log Excess Stock Return
Mean
Std. Dev.
Sharpe Ratio

0.0184
0.0379

0.0184
0.0379

0.0091
0.0379
0.24

0.0603
0.2002
0.3

42

Table 3: Unconditional moments for returns under the full model. Empirical values for consumption growth come from annual data from 1889-1985; those for
stock returns are based on annual NYSE data from 1926-1995.
Model Value Empirical Value
Log Consumption growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
Log Excess Stock Return
Mean
Std. Dev.
Sharpe Ratio
Price-Dividend Ratio
Mean
Std. Dev.

0.0184
0.0379

0.0184
0.0379

0.041
0.133
0.31

0.0603
0.2002
0.3

17.0
3.1

25.3
6.7

Table 4: Autocorrelations of log returns and price-dividend ratios in the full
model. Empirical values are based on annual NYSE data from 1926-1995.
Model Value Empirical Value

Corr(r ; r ,
t

k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

Corr((

P
D

k=1
k=2
k=3
k=4
k=5

t

;

k)

)t ( D )t,k )

-0.10
-0.07
-0.06
-0.03
-0.03

0.07
-0.17
-0.05
-0.11
-0.04

0.84
0.72
0.62
0.54
0.47

0.70
0.50
0.45
0.43
0.40

P

43

Table 5: Coefficients and R2 in regressions of k-year horizon log returns on the
lagged dividend-price ratio, r +1 + r +2 +    + r + = + ( tt )+  : Empirical
values are based on annual NYSE data from 1926-1995.
D

t

t

t

k

k

k

S

k;t

k ; R2 (k) Model Value Empirical Value

( )

1
2
3
4
R2 (1)
R2 (2)
R2 (3)
R2 (4)

3.4
6.1
8.3
10.1
8%
13%
18%
22%

4.2
8.7
12.1
15.9
7%
16%
22%
30%

Table 6: Simulation Results for different benchmark level dynamics; lower
means a less sluggish benchmark level.

 = 1  = 0:9  = 0:8
Excess Stock Return
Mean
Std. Dev.
Sharpe Ratio
Price-Dividend Ratio
Mean
Std. Dev.
Corr(R ; R , )
t

k=1

Corr((

P
D

k=1

t

;

0.041
0.133
0.31

0.030
0.088
0.34

0.023
0.066
0.35

17.0
3.1

20.2
1.4

23.7
0.9

-0.10

-0.13

-0.13

0.84

0.7

0.62

k

)t ( D )t,k )
P

44



Prospect Utility
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

utility

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0
gain/loss

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Figure 1. Shape of prospect utility function plotted against the gain/loss, X: Losses are
penalized at  = 2:25 times the rate the gains are rewarded.

45

Price / dividend Ratio

Equity Premium

60

0.06

50
0.04

40
30

0.02

20
10
0
0

0
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0

0.05

0.1

0.15
sigma

0.2

Risk free Rate
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15
sigma

0.2

Figure 2. The graph plots the price-dividend ratio, mean log excess return, and risk-free
rate as a function of ; the standard deviation of consumption growth, in an economy
where the agent has prospect utility over gains and losses but no memory of prior outcomes. Solid line is for b0 = 0; dashed line for b0 = 0:3; dash-dot line for b0 = 2; and
dotted line for b0 = inf :

46

Utility of Gains and Losses in the Presence of Prior Gains

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

utility

0.1
0
z=1.0
z=0.9
z=0.8

−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
−0.25 −0.2 −0.15 −0.1 −0.05

0
0.05
gain/loss

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

Figure 3. The graph plots the utility from a gain/loss of R +1 , R in situations where the
investor has had prior gains. The size of the prior gain is measured by the state variable
z and the riskfree rate is set at 3%.
t

t

47

f

Price / dividend Ratio
50
45
40
35

P/D ratio

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

z

Figure 4. The graph plots the price-dividend ratio against the state variable z in an economy where the agent has prospect utility over gains and losses and where prior outcomes
influence risky choice.

48

Distribution of State Variable z

0

0.5

1

1.5

Return Distribution

2

−0.5

Conditional Expected Return

0

0.5

Conditional Standard Deviation
0.25

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15
0.1
0.1
0.05
0

0.05
0.8

0.9

1

0

1.1
z

0.8

0.9

1

1.1
z

Figure 5. The figure shows the distribution of the state variable z and of stock returns,
and plots the conditional expected return and standard deviation of asset returns against
the state variable in an economy where the investor has prospect utility over gains and
losses and where prior outcomes influence risky choice.

49

