                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION AND
                                   THE USE OF INFORMATION
                                TECHNOLOGY: EVIDENCE FROM
                                   THE TRUCKING INDUSTRY

                                            Atreya Chakraborty
                                             Mark Kazarosian

                                           Working Paper 7222
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7222


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 1999




Presented at the NBER Conference "The Patent System and Innovation" funded by the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation via a grant to the NBER Project on Industrial Technology and Productivity. We wish to thank
Richard Arnott, Kit Baum, Ernie Berndt, Ellie Berman, Russ Campbell, Don Cox, Thomas Hubbard, Adam
Jaffe, Bob Pritchard, Dan Stock, Dan Swaine, seminar participants at the NBER productivity workshop, and
the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for many helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants from the
Northeast Transportation Institute’s third annual conference at Atlantic City. Research assistance was provided
by Andy Simms. This research was funded by the NBER. We also thank the American Trucking Association
for providing the data, and Judy Feldmann for copy editing the paper. All opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Atreya Chakraborty and Mark Kazarosian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Product Differentiation and the Use of Information
Technology: New Evidence from the Trucking Industry
Atreya Chakraborty and Mark Kazarosian
NBER Working Paper No. 7222
July 1999
JEL No. D21, L21

                                             ABSTRACT

        Since the mid-1980s many authors have investigated the influence of information technology
(IT) on productivity. Until recently there has been no clear evidence that productivity increases as
a result of IT spending. This productivity paradox is partly due to the difficulty in correctly
identifying outputs, particularly in the service sector such as the trucking industry. Products are often
differentiated by quality attributes of the service provided, rather than merely the physical content of
the good delivered by motor carriers. A carrier’s primary marketing objective, e.g. on-time-
performance vs. lowest rate carrier, are precisely what differentiates a trucking firm’s service. This
paper uses cross-sectional data to show that the use of increasingly sophisticated IT by trucking firms
varies depending upon marketing objectives. Our empirical results imply that in order to measure the
impact of IT on productivity it is crucial to account for how the firm differentiates its product. We
conclude that the productivity paradox can be alleviated if measures of output incorporate firms’
marketing objectives.


Atreya Chakraborty                                      Mark Kazarosian
Brandeis University                                     Stonehill College
Dept.of International Economics and Finance             Department of Economics
Waltham, MA 02254                                       249 Duffy
cnt@mediaone.net                                        Easton, MA 02357
                                                        kaz@mediaone.net
                                          1. Introduction


        Did a university's 1980 investment in new Vax computer help faculty and students be

more productive? Does investment in a satellite communications network improve the

productivity of UPS workers? The answers ten years ago to similar questions were either

"maybe," or "no," and this productivity paradox of information technology (IT) fueled a large

literature.'

        Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1998) summarize the key reasons for the productivity paradox

with the following humorous passage:

               Productivity is a simple concept. It is the amount of output produced
               per unit of input [yet productivity] is notoriously difficult to
               measure.. .In particular, there are two aspects of productivity that have
               increasingly defied precise measurement: output and input.

More recently, better data and a clearer understanding of how to measure both outputs and inputs

have begun to reveal that use of technology may in fact improve productivity. Using cross-

sectional data this paper finds that the use of increasingly sophisticated IT by trucking firms

depends on marketing objectives. Marketing objectives are defined by a firm's competitive

strategy, and these objectives are met by product differentiation. Our empirical results imply that

in order to measure output precisely, it is crucial to account for how the firm differentiates its

product.

        Evidence of a connection between a firm's use of IT and its marketing objectives would

suggest that these traditionally intangible variables add a new dimension to the firm's measured

output. If this is true, then productivity studies (even at the firm level) may need to include the
firm's objectives to identify output correctly. Measured output can no longer be limited to

simply counting widgets.

        Measures of productivity--defined as the effect of IT on output--must incorporate a firm's

competitive strategies. This connection of IT with competitive strategy is important for




 Brynjolfsson (1993) and Wilson (1993) survey the literature that investigates the impact of information technology
on productivity.
understanding one of many reasons the productivity paradox initially existed. Suppose two

trucking firms provide the (seemingly) exact same service: the delivery of heavy machinery. Yet

one firm has on-time performance as its most important objective, while the other firm markets

itself as having the lowest freight rate. Each firm uses IT differently depending upon how each

markets its service, even though both may deliver one machine per day. If output is measured as

the number of machines delivered, the relationship between productivity and IT use will be

mismeasured. The on-time performer delivering an asphalt spreader to a construction site two

hours late can count its output as zero. The lowest-rate carrier moves that same spreader when it

is idle from one storage site to another. If that delivery is a few hours late it is still a productive

day. The on-time performer will differentiate its service--timely delivery of the spreader--by

using sophisticated IT. The lowest-rate firm has little need for the same technology. Production

studies that aggregate over all firms delivering heavy machinery will not accurately gauge the

true impact of IT.

        The difficulty of measuring output in the face of accelerating use of technology is clearly

important in the modern economy, yet the existing empirical literature is in its early stages. Until

now, data sets containing both detailed output and financial characteristics, as well as particular

types of firm-specific technologies, have been hard to find. Even with the recent availability of

firm-level data explored by Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996), and detailed truck-level data explored

by Hubbard (1998), still the issue of how to measure output precisely has not been fully

explored. We do not attempt to measure productivity in this paper, but we do uncover evidence

indicating that given the use of IT to differentiate a firm's product, marketing objectives must be

taken into account when measuring output.




                                                 2
         We use a new data set that contains information about firms' objectives, detailed

technology use, and financial and operating characteristics. Our probit and ordered probit

estimations explain the use of three levels of technological sophistication. The groups of

technology that reflect intensity are intuitively straightforward. The categories are 1) no

technology, 2) two-way radios or cell phones, or pagers, and 3) automatic vehicle location

(AVL), or on-board-computers, or satellite communications.2 We test whether IT use responds to

truckers' haul characteristics differently depending upon the firm's primary marketing objective.3

The empirical models control for key variables, including complementary technologies,

operating characteristics, financial attributes, and

industry-wide organizational structure.4

         Our results show that a firm's marketing objective is a key factor in detenmning the

patterns of IT use. Haul characteristics have a statistically significant influence on IT use for

firms with a primary marketing objective of on-time performance. For those firms not concerned

with on-time performance, this is not the case. We infer from these results that two firms could

be delivering the same product, yet be using different levels of technology owing to the particular

market niche they have carved. A firm's choice to use sophisticated IT depends more upon the

way a product is delivered (e.g., on-time versus lowest freight rate) rather than what product is

delivered. Moreover, the patterns of IT use that we observe suggest that the number of products

delivered is not the only component of the measured output. We take these results as evidence




2 The probit model simply collapses the first two categories of the ordered probit intoone category.
 The haul characteristics in our model include the time-sensitivity of the goods, and the route variability of the haul.
 Our models distinguish between information-gathering technologies (dependent variable) and
information-processing technologies (explanatory variable). Please see the variable descriptions and expected
coefficients in the data section below for a detailed explanation of the distinction.



                                                        3
that output measures should incorporate the firm-specific objective that reflects the customer's

perception of a successfully delivered good.

       After a summary of the related literature and a brief description of the trucking industry

in section 2, section 3 presents the empirical implementation. Section 4 describes thedata,

section 5 the results and implications and section 6 offers concluding remarks.2.




                         Literature Review and the Trucking Industry

       Porter (1985a,b,c) lays the groundwork for understanding the complex relationship

between a firm's use of IT and the nature of that firm's output. Firms must adopt some forms of

IT just to survive in a quickly changing environment. Technology changes industry structure,

creates competitive advantage, spawns completely new businesses, and literally transforms

industries by actuating new approaches to competitive behavior. Firms are increasingly able to

customize products to serve small market niches--thus IT enhances a company's ability to

differentiate itself. Products have been reshaped by the use of IT, and the product's definition

must now include multidimensional quality characteristics such as, in the motor carrier industry,

whether the truck delivers the product on time or at the lowest freight rate.

       Porter recognized early that the influence of IT on the modem economy would make it

difficult to pin down a precise definition of the firm's output. Indeed a "productivity paradox"

emerged in the 1980s literature, and this paradox in no small part reflected Porter's observations

that output, transformed by IT, would be difficult to measure for many reasons. Roach (1987)



                                               4
and Solow (1987) first recognized this paradox--no clear evidence of productivity increases as a

result of IT spending. Their premature conclusions, summarized by Solow's statement that "we

see the computer age everywhere except in the productivity statistics," were based on early and

aggregate data. As Porter implicitly predicted, it was too early for the data to reveal the true

long-term benefits of IT--production processes don't change overnight. Also, even if the IT

benefits existed, they were washed out in the aggregate data.

       The ensuing research that investigates the influence of IT on firms' performance is large,

and is reviewed by Brynjolfsson (1993) and Wilson (1993). The results from these studies are

mixed, suggesting positive, negative, and zero effects of the use of technology on productivity.

The assorted results can be only partly explained by problems stemming from the use of

aggregate data (Morrison and Berndt 1990), small sample size of firm-level data (Loveman

1994), unreliable data (Siegel and Griliches 1991), or misspecifications, such as using profits as

performance measures (Dos Santos et al. 1993). More recently, examinations of large firm-level

time-series data by Brynjolfsson and Bitt (1995, 1996), Lichtenberg (1995), and Dewan and Mm

(1997) indicate that IT might enhance productivity.

       Even after careful investigation of representative microdata, a nagging question remains--

what reflects the true output of the firm? In today's highly specialized economy, particularly in

the service sector, output is certainly more than merely the number of widgets produced. Instead,

to measure output one must take into account the value provided to the customer. Brynjolfsson

and Bitt (1996) acknowledge that there is "an inherent difficulty of measuring the benefits of IT

investment." Recognizing this, they queried managers to determine their justifications for

investing in IT. The most important reasons were customer service, cost savings, timeliness, and

quality. Indeed, Brynjolfsson and Bitt (1995) suggest that future research examine subsamples


                                               5
of IT data based on organizational form and management strategy. Our paper does precisely that

by exploring how the use of IT varies in response to the manager's perception of what is

important--such as timeliness.

       A clear illustration of the difficulty in defining output as a result of IT can be found in the

motor earner industry. Trucking offers a prime test case since as in any service, several

nonphysical components compose the firm's output. Also the industry has recently become

technologically intensive, and technology use is heterogeneous.

       Deregulation (1978-79) stimulated competition among previously unrelated trucking

firms. The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) eased its strict entry policy by granting

operating certificates at an accelerated rate. Because of this open-door policy along with more

flexible carrier rates, the industry experienced a drastic restructuring and reorganization (Zingales

1998, Hubbard 1998, Swan 1997). Truckers could now haul goods, relatively unfettered by

previously constraining regulations. The availability and proliferation of IT throughout the

trucking industry coincided with this deregulation. New and existing firms needed to carve out

niches, i.e., differentiate their products by offering services related to their "core competence" or

comparative advantage.

       Zingales (1998) finds that both the fittest (economically efficient) as well as the fattest

(substantially liquid) trucking firms survived the deregulation. IT such as cellular phones and

electronic data interchange (EDI), coupled with deregulation played an important role at this time

by enabling entry into otherwise untouchable markets. Smaller (or newly entering) firms that

perhaps did not have the financial ability to buy sophisticated technology were forced to be the

fittest and specialize along a different path than the larger firms. Firms with the ability to borrow




                                                6
more easily, or with more cash availability (the fattest), could more quickly adopt the

sophisticated and expensive technologies, such as satellite communications.

       Porter's insight that IT use would make output difficult to measure is particularly

important in the trucking industry and is highlighted by the findings of Swan (1997) and

Zingales (1998). Swan shows that trucking firms that change their operating routines will

experience decreased productivity and face an increased risk of failure. Zingales investigates the

increased risk of bankruptcy in the post-deregulation trucking industry. Surviving firms were

among the fittest and the fattest and were precisely those who adjusted their operating routines to

the changing needs of the industry. The adjustment of operating routines was often associated

with the adoption of IT to gain a market niche and exploit the firm's core competence. This

dynamic market made it increasingly difficult to measure output and consequently, the

productivity resulting from IT investment.

       Hubbard (1998) investigates where and why IT is valuable in the trucking industry. He

uses truck-level data to explore how the use of two types of on-board computers are influenced

by detailed carrier, shipper, and haul information. He finds that trip recorders, a technology that

enables incentive benefits, are more common on trucks operating far from home, making fewer

stops, within private fleets, and on trucks that are under longer-term use agreements. Electronic

vehicle management systems (EVMS) (associated with coordination benefits) are more common

as haul-length increases, within for-hire fleets, and on trucks that are under longer-term use

agreements.

       Our investigation is similar to Hubbard (1998) in that both papers explore the

determinants of IT use. Yet we ask a different question, owing to our access to information

about the firm's marketing objectives, more detailed technology data, and the firm's financial


                                               7
characteristics. Hubbard's finding that both incentive- and coordination-related benefits make IT

valuable complement our finding that IT use depends upon the firm's marketing objectives. For

example, the goal of being an on-time performer (a key variable in our investigation) is certainly

closely related to both incentive- and coordination-related benefits of IT. Hubbard did not

explicitly consider how his results related to productivity, yet those results support our

conclusion. The firm needs to be concerned with both incentive- and coordination-related

benefits of IT in order to meet its objective of being on time.

                                            The Empirical Model
        We observe the use of IT in discrete amounts. For example, either trucking firm uses cell

phones or it does not. Yet the need for technology in production is truly a continuous,
unobserved (latent) variable. This variable--the sophistication of IT use--is determined by a
firm's operational characteristics and marketing objectives. We model this latent variable in two

ways. The latent variable has either one observed threshold (a probit model) or two observed
thresholds (an ordered probit model). Each threshold denotes the transition from one set of

technologies to another. As the firm crosses a higher threshold, more sophisticated technologies
are used. Our goal is to identify empirically both these thresholds and the firms' characteristics
that affect the observed use of technology.
        Our first specification, the probit model, captures a simplistic view of adopting IT. In
this world the firms are either high- or low-technology users. High technologies are state-of-the-
art information-gathering technologies that include satellite communications (S ATCOM), on-
board computers (OBC), or automatic vehicle location and tracking devices (AVL).5 Low

technologies are basic communication technologies that include two-way radios, cell phones, or
pagers. The low-technology group in this specification also includes firms using none of the

above communication technologies. These firms perhaps depend upon local telephone networks.


 Please see the data section and the appendix below for a detailed description of technologies.



                                                       8
        Our second approach, the ordered probit, recognizes that firms using no communication

technologies whatsoever may have very different operational characteristics than their
counterparts using even the most basic gadgets. Hubbard (1998) investigates a problem similar

to ours and uses a multinomial logit. His three categories distinguish firms with no technology
from those with trip recorders and those with EVMS. We have grouped and ordered our six

information-gathering technologies according to their sophistication. For example, a satellite
communications network gathers more information than a two-way radio and is in the high-
technology category. Using an ordered probit helps us to capture this inherent ordering of the
sophistication of IT use.

        Both of our empirical specifications are summarized here. The probit model simply
collapses the first two categories of the ordered probit, presented below, into one category.


t,   =13'X, + E
y  1 ifnolTisusedi.e., t 0
y= 2ifon1yCELLorCBorPAGER,                          i.e.   t1   u1
y = 3 ifOBCorAVLorSATCOM,                      i.e. t       /i2

Here, t. is assumed to be the unobserved intensity of IT use, while X1 denotes a vector of firm-

specific characteristics that may influence the probability of using more sophisticated
technologies. The latent variable, t, , determines the use of a more sophisticated group of
technologies for the ith trucking firm. The vector X contains the time-sensitivity of the route,

route variability, average load, average haul, total equipment, debt to equity ratio, net profit
margin and the sum of five additional information-processing (complementary) technologies.
The cumulative distribution of E is assumed to be normal. The unobserved index t is assumed

to have two thresholds, p and u2. Crossing each threshold is associated with a transition to
using a new set of technologies. The variable y denotes three sets of observed technologies,




                                                9
which are grouped in order of increasing sophistication described above. Maximum likelihood
estimates of Au and    $   are obtained to investigate the impact of haul characteristics on IT use.

                                                   4. Data

        Empirical evidence about the influence of a firm's objectives on IT use is scarce, because
this type of data is rarely collected. Recently a data set containing detailed information on
marketing objectives as well as IT use has become available. This data is the Motor Carrier

Safety, Operations, and Technology (MCSOT) Survey, conducted by the American Trucking
Association (ATA). The survey contains a special module in which respondents report the use of

various types of information-gathering and information-processing (complementary)
technologies. In addition to being the unique source of detailed IT data, the survey contains

other information (e.g., a firm's ranking of marketing objectives, and operational characteristics)
relevant to testing the hypothesis outlined above. The survey information used below was
collected in June 1998 and the data for technology use covers both 1996 and 1998.
        Our empirical investigation also uses data drawn from a second source, the US

Department of Transportations Bureau of Transportation Statistics (DOT). The bureau queries
2800 class 1 and class 2 for-hire trucking firms ( $3 million revenue) that are engaged in
interstate commerce.6 Owing to nonresponses, the final 1996 survey contains information on
1800 firms. The DOT data contains the name of each firm as well as other detailed information

(e.g., full income statement, balance sheet, labor force information, equipment data, and
operating statistics). These data (specific variables described below) provide control variables

for our empirical model.7




6
  For-hire trucks are those that are not part of a private fleet. For example the hypothetical firm Acme Retailers
employs a for-hire trucking company to deliver goods to its retail outlets--Acme doesn't maintain its own private
fleet.
  Both the Transportation Technical Services Company (Blue Book database) and the ATA (Financial and Operating
Statistics) organize and summarize the DOT data into machine readable form. We use variables from both sources.



                                                     10
         The ATA's MCSOT survey was sent to the 1800 firms contained in the DOT data, and

755 of these responded. Ignoring missing values (n=26), extreme values for firm size (n=8), and
firms that report owning no trucks (n=18) leaves our final merged data sample at 703 firms.


Variable Descriptions and Expected Coefficients

         A.      Marketing Objectives and Commodities Hauled

        Table 1 describes the firms' primary marketing objectives according to the industry's

conventional organizational structure--truckload (TL) and less-than-truckload (LTL).8 For a
detailed description of these categorizations, see Swan (1997). Briefly stated, TL carriers are
point-to-point operators--single trucks hauling their load directly from origin to destination--

typically carrying more than 10,000 pounds. LTL carriers use an airline-type hub-and-spoke
system with shipments of less than 10,000 pounds. The table shows the vast majority of the
firms market themselves as on-time performers (OTP-72%); 85% of the LTL firms are OTP
while only 77% of the TL firms are OTP.

        Table 2 describes the percentage of firms that haul each commodity.9 The patterns of this
table seem reasonable. More firms haul goods that are normally associated with timely

deliveries whose primary marketing objective is on-time performance versus non-on-time

performers. For example, parcels, processed food, and retail goods are hauled by more on-timers
than non-on-timers (see columns 3 and 4). On the other hand, more non -on-time performers
haul nonperishable goods, such as dump-trucking and mineral ores. More firms whose objective
is to provide specialized and dedicated equipment (see column 7) haul hazardous chemicals and
heavy machinery. A notable overall pattern is that various firms represented by varying




8
 Our entire sample (uncensored) includes 703 firms. Only 611 firms (table 1, column 2--all firms censored) could
unambiguously categorize their marketing objective.
 Since each firm might haul many different products, the columns do not add to 100.



                                                     11
marketing objectives haul virtually all products. For example, 13% of on-time performers haul
heavy machinery while 13% of firms offering the lowest freight rate also haul heavy machinery.


        B.       Technologies
        Our empirical specification emphasizes the distinction between information-gathering

and information-processing (complementary) technologies. Following Hubbard (1998), we say
that an information-gathering technology is one that resides on the truck. The question we

examine--what determines technology use--refers to information-gathering technologies. For
example, we categorize satellite communications as a gathering technology. One of its functions
is to provide the driver and dispatchers information about the location of the truck. An example

of a technology that processes information is computer-aided dispatching. Sometimes a
gathering technology cannot be used without a processing technology, whereas in other cases

they can be used independently.
        We acknowledge that there are many gray areas in categorizing these technologies, and
that it is difficult to create clear partitions. We assume the following reasonable, intuitive
categories. The information-gathering technologies--used to create our dependent variable--are

cell phones, two-way radios, and pagers (low technology), and automatic vehicle location
systems, satellite communications, and on-board computers (high technology). The information-

processing technologies are electronic data interchange, computer-aided routing, computer-aided
dispatching, the internet, and maintenance-tracking software. We use the information-gathering
technologies to construct our limited dependent variable describing technology use. The sum of
the five processing technologies is used as a control variable.10

        Table 3 contains descriptive statistics for the use of each technology. The incidence of

technology use is as expected. Among the gathering technologies for all firms (column 2), the

  Hubbard (1998) emphasizes the importance of processing technologies in explaining the use of information-
gathering technology. He labels the processing technologies "backoffice" technologies. His data does not contain
information on these backoffice technologies, and he takes special care to empirically confirm that his model has no
bias owing to the exclusion of this type of technology.



                                                      12
low technologies--celiphones and pagers--are used by the largest percentage of the firms, 61%
and 56% respectively. Fewer firms (automatic vehicle location systems (23%), satellite

communications (32%), and on-board computers (7%) use the more sophisticated and more

expensive gathering technologies (high technologies). Two-way radios are both low technology
and inexpensive, yet are used by a relatively small percentage of firms (31%). Perhaps the
usefulness of two-way radios in improving productivity has been overshadowed by cell phones
and pagers. Finally, it seems reasonable that very few firms (5%) use no technology at all.

       Reasonable patterns of technology use emerge by comparing on-time performers (OTPs,
column 3) with firms offering the lowest freight rate (LFR--column 4), and with all firms that are

non-OTP. The sophisticated technologies (e.g., automatic vehicle location systems) are used by
more OTP firms (compared to LFR or non-OTP) whereas the low technologies (e.g., cellphones)

are used by more LFR and non-OTP firms (than by OTP firms.) The OTP firms also use more

information-processing technologies (e.g., computer aided routing and dispatching) than their
LFR counterparts. It seems that the OTP firms use the higher technologies to meet their

marketing objective, even though these technologies are generally more expensive.

       C.      Explanatory Variables
       The empirical model described above contains a vector of control variables X1 that are
assumed to influence the probability of using more highly sophisticated information-gathering

technologies. Table 4 contains sample means of these variables.

       One of our two key explanatory variables describes the percentage of the firm's

dispatches that are time-sensitive or perishable (row 1). The variable ranges from 1 to 5, 1
indicating that none of the dispatches is time-sensitive, 2 indicating that 1-25% are time-
sensitive, etc. The 3.9 average for time-sensitivity in table 4 indicates that for the average firm,
between 26 and 50% of their dispatches are time-sensitive. As expected those who market
themselves as on-time performers haul more time-sensitive goods than do non-on-timers. We




                                               13
expect that the probability of using more sophisticated technology will increase as the proportion

of time-sensitive hauls increases if the firm markets itself as an on-time performer.
       Our second key explanatory variable describes the variability of the company's routes
(row 2). It ranges from 1 to 4, 1 indicating not at all variable, and 4--indicating extremely
variable. The probability of using sophisticated technology should rise as the route variability

rises, only with firms for which the variability of the route may preclude them from obtaining
their objective. For example, an on-time performer that hauls mostly within the hub-and-spoke
system (LTL hauler) should be expected to use more sophisticated technology in response to an

increase in route variability. In contrast, a point-to-point hauler (TL hauler) is not expected to
use high technology gadgets in response to more variable routes. Their objectives are different.

The incentive to use information-gathering technology should, then, be clearly related to how the

production activity is organized.
       Both time-sensitivity and route-variability are firm-specific haul characteristics. We
expect that these characteristics will influence the use of IT differently, depending upon how

firms market themselves to their customers. Our data include a variable that ranks each firm's

marketing objectives among five items--providing the lowest freight rates, on-time performance,
short turn-around, safety of performance, and availability of specialized equipment. We assume
that if a firm ranks on-time performance as its most important marketing objective, then being on
time is a key component of that firm's output. With this in mind, we run separate regressions on
firms with different marketing objectives.
       Grimm et al. (1989), McMullen (1987), and McMullen and Tanaka (1995) explain costs
in the motor carrier industry and include output attributes as explanatory variables to help capture

the heterogeneity of output. Our investigation of IT use has the same concern--to reduce
heterogeneity in our sample as much as possible--so that the impact of marketing objectives can
be more clearly examined. The output attributes we include to reduce heterogeneity are the
average load and the average haul. The average load indicates the number of tons transported by



                                               14
each unit dispatched. The average haul length measures how far the average unit travels each
time it is dispatched.

       A low average load indicates that the trucks operate more frequently, reflecting higher

quality service. Trucks with lighter loads are more often LTL carriers where operating costs are
typically higher for many reasons. Coupled with the need for more advanced hub-and-spoke
infrastructure, an LTL carrier should find more sophisticated technology useful for coordination
purposes (Hubbard 1998). We expect that trucks with a smaller average load will use more

sophisticated technology--a negative coefficient on average load.
       A longer average haul length indicates the need for more sophisticated technology such

as satellite communications and automatic vehicle location systems. The further the truck is
from home, the less cost-effective is a cell phone or a pager. We expect a positive coefficient on
average haul. Columns 3 and 4 in Table 4 reveal that on-time performers have a lower average

load and a lower average haul than their counterparts that offer the lowest freight rate. This
makes sense, since absent the need to be on time, firms offering the lowest freight rate

concentrate on reducing average costs by making sure their trucks are fuller (higher average load)

and travel longer distances (higher average haul).
       Total equipment is defined as the number of trucks plus tractors plus trailers. This
variable controls for the size of the firm's operation. On-time performers operate more units than
LFR firms (Table 4). Firms offering the lowest freight rate as their specialty don't need the
larger fleets to ensure on-time delivery. We also include the net profit margin (net income as a
percent of gross revenue) as a control variable to ensure that our results are not driven by the
firm's financial well-being.

       Zingales (1998) explains the survival of post-deregulation trucking firms with the level of

pre-deregulation leverage. He finds that highly leveraged firms are less likely to survive. We
include the debt-to-equity ratio to control for the firm's leverage and are uncertain about this

variable's coefficient. More highly leveraged firms may be indicative of the ability to borrow to



                                               15
acquire sophisticated IT, but it may also indicate that the firm has already exhausted its

borrowing capacity. If the firm is unable to borrow it is less capable of adopting sophisticated

technology.

                                                 5. Results

Main Findings
        Our estimation strategy investigates the impact of haul characteristics on the use of
information technology. The question to be examined is: Does the impact of haul characteristics
on IT use vary depending upon the firm's marketing strategy? If the answer is yes, then two
firms may seem to offer identical services yet in fact offer different services as a result of

disparate marketing strategies and varying IT usage. Outputs might then be grouped incorrectly
in productivity studies, and the impact of IT on productivity may be mismeasured.
        We investigate the variation in IT use with two separate specifications. In the first
specification, we categorize information-gathering technologies used on the truck as either high-
tech or low-tech. These two groups serve to define our dependent variable for probit estimates
(table 5). In our second specification we create three groups of IT use, in order of increasing
sophistication. These ordered probit estimates are presented in tables 6 and 7. A list of variable
means for all explanatory variables is presented in table 4. Table 5, specification 1 predicts the
use of IT for the entire sample (n=703). Specifications 2 and 3 partition the sample according to
whether or not the firm's primary marketing objective is to be an on-time performer."
        The evidence indicates that a firm's use of increasingly sophisticated IT varies

considerably depending upon its marketing strategy. For those firms that market themselves as
on-time performers (table 5, specification 2), the estimated probit coefficients for both the
proportion of time-sensitive hauls and for the firm's route variability are positive and significant

at the five-percent level. For firms with marketing objectives other than on-time performance,

' The number of observations for on-timers (439) plus non-on-timers (172) does not sum to 703 because we
dropped 92 firms that reported more than one primary marketing objective.



                                                    16
the coefficients for those same key haul characteristics are statistically insignificant (specification

3).

       For on-time performers (specification 2) at sample means, a 25% rise in the number of
time-sensitive hauls increases the probability of using sophisticated IT by 5%. For non- on-time
performers, the same 25% rise in time-sensitive hauls has a statistically insignificant impact on

technology use. The impact of time-sensitive hauls on technology use is 50% higher for on-
timers compared to the entire sample.

       The impact of route variability on the use of information-gathering technology follows
the same pattern as the impact of time-sensitive hauls. On-time performers use more

sophisticated technology as routes become more variable, while for non-on-timers route

variability has no impact. For on-time performers, a 25% rise in route variability increases the

probability of using sophisticated technology by 7%. The impact of route variability on
technology use is 100% higher for on-timers compared to the entire sample.
       The sharp difference between the estimates for on-timers versus non-on-timers supports

the hypothesis that a firm's measured output must incorporate information about service-oriented

firm-specific goals. Productivity studies that aggregate over all firms producing the same
physical good are likely to misrepresent the true output of the firm. Firms with different
customer-oriented goals (e.g., on-time performers vs. non-on-time performers) use different
technologies in response to variations in the same haul characteristics. The services, and
therefore the output, that the on-time performer produces are clearly different.

       The remaining estimates in table 5 for on-timers (specification 2) accord with several of
our predictions outlined in the data section above. A notable (overall) result is that the combined

explanatory variables perform better at explaining technology use within a particular marketing
objective (on-timers) than for the sample that includes all other marketing objectives combined

(non-on-timers).




                                               17
        To reduce sample heterogeneity we included average load and average haul as output

attributes. Trucks with a smaller average load use more sophisticated IT, possibly owing to the
need for more coordination. The significantly positive impact of average haul indicates that
trucks traveling longer distances are more likely to use sophisticated IT.

        The total equipment coefficient suggests that larger operations find the more

sophisticated technologies useful, perhaps again for coordination purposes. Yet the insignificant

coefficient on net profit margin raises doubts about firms buying IT simply because they have the

cash.

        Firms use significantly higher levels of information technology as they become more

leveraged. It may be that they are borrowing to acquire some of the more expensive technologies

such as satellite communications. Finally, it makes sense that firms with more highly

sophisticated gathering technologies will be more likely to have more processing

(complementary) technologies.

Additional Findings

        We address possible objections to our above specification by splitting our sample in a

more traditional manner (TL and LTL), and by using an alternate (ordered) categorization of the

technologies contained in the dependent variable. Our additional findings indicate that our main

results are robust.

        One alternative for creating our dependent variable is to use a categorization of

technologies that reflects an order of sophistication that includes no technologies, some low-level

gadgets, and highly sophisticated gadgets. Grouping together firms that use no technologies with

those using low-level yet highly effective technologies such as cell phones may raise questions

regarding the validity of our result. To address this potential concern we re-estimate the table 5


                                               18
specifications using the ordered probit model described in the empirical specification section

above. Our results, presented in table 6, still indicate that firms choose more sophisticated

technologies differently depending upon their marketing objective.

        Second, our results may be questioned since we neglect to control for the highly

heterogeneous organizational structure in the motor carrier industry. As mentioned earlier, TL

and LTL carriers operate differently along many dimensions. We partition our sample along the

TLILTL lines, yet we find that this categorization is not the main concern when estimating IT

use. Specifications 1 and 2 in Table 7 indicate that for all firms neither time-sensitivity nor route

variability has a statistically significant impact on technology use. This split does little to resolve

the problem that occurs owing to aggregating over heterogeneous competitive strategies.'2

        Specifications 3, 4, and 5 in table 7 support our previous conclusion: the important

categorization in explaining variation in IT use is the firm's primary objective for quality customer

service. There is a notable difference in results between TL and LTL firms for on-timers.

Specification 4 (LTL firms only) reveals that route variability has a significantly positive influence

on IT adoption. This statistically significant effect is not present for only TL firms (specification 3).

For on-timers, the time-sensitivity of hauls has a statistically significant positive impact on

technology use. This result holds for both TL and LTL firms (specifications 3 and 4). For TL firms

that are not concerned with on-time performance (specification 5), these haul characteristics have no

impact.'3 A notable difference in results between TL and LTL firms for on-timers is that the route-

variability coefficient is much larger for the LTL firms. Firms in both categories may have


12
  In table 7, all firms (columns 2 plus 3--325 firms) excludes specialized carriers. The censored sample (columns 4
'
through 6--283 firms) also excludes firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.
  We cannot compare LTL on-time performers with LTL non on-time performers since the sample size for LTL non
on-timers is only 8.



                                                  19
                                           6. Conclusion

       The estimates presented above indicate that marketing objectives are a pivotal factor in

determining the use of information technology. We find that sophisticated IT is used differently

by firms with similar haul characteristics yet different marketing strategies. Firms that market

themselves as on-time performers use IT differently than do firms that have other marketing

criteria. This finding is important because marketing strategies can add distinct quality

dimensions to a good or service. Previous research has found that a primary reason for the

productivity paradox is the incorrect measuring of outputs. Our results indicate that output

cannot be measured correctly until the impact of marketing objectives--the quality dimension of

the good--is recognized. Even in firm-level productivity studies, precise measurement of the

influence of IT on productivity should control for the quality dimension of the good. One way to

accomplish this might be to group firms producing similar goods and services according to their

primary marketing objectives.




                                              20
                                       REFERENCES

Brynjolfsson, Erik. "The Productivity Paradox of Information Technology." Communications of
       the ACM 35 (December 1993): 66-77.         -




Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt. "Beyond the Productivity Paradox." Communication of the
       ACM 41, no.8 (1998): 49-55.

______• "Paradox Lost? Firm-Level Evidence on the Returns to Information Systems Spending."
      Management Science 42, no.4 (1996): 541-558.

______• "Information Technology as a Factor of Production: The Role of Differences among
      Firms." Economic Innovation and New Technology 3 (1995): 183-199.

Dewan, Sanjeev, and Chung-ki Mm. "The Substitution of Information Technology for Other
      Factors of Production: A Firm Level Analysis." Management Science 43, no.2 (1997):
       1660- 1675.

Dos Santos, B.L., K.G. Peffers, and D.C. Mauer. "The Impact of Information Technology
      Investment Announcements on the Market Value of the Firm," Information Systems
      Res.,4,1 (1993): 1-23.

Grimm, C.M., T.M. Corsi, and J.L. Jarrell. "U.S. Motor Carrier Cost Structure Under
     Deregulation," Logistics and Transportation Review, 25, no. 3 (Fall 1989): 23 1-249.

Hubbard, Thomas. "Why Are Monitoring Technologies Valuable? The Use of On-Board
      Information Technology in the Trucking Industry." UCLA and NBER, Mimeo (August 4,
       1998).

Lichtenberg, R. "The Output Contributions of Computer Equipment and Personnel: A Firm-
       Level Analysis." Economics of Innovation and New Technology 3, 3-4 (May 1995): 201-
       217.

Loveman, G.W. "An Assessment of the Productivity Impact on Information Technologies," in
     T.J. Allen and M.S. Scott Morton (Eds.), Information Technology and the Corporation of
     the 1990s: Research Studies, MIT Press,     Cambridge, MA (1994).

McMullen, B. Stan. "The Impact of Regulatory Reform on US Motor Carrier Costs." Journal of
     Transport Economics and Policy September (1987): 307-3 18.


McMullen, B. Stan, and Hiroshi Tanaka. "An Econometric Analysis of Differences Between
     Motor Carriers: Implications for Market Structure." Quarterly Journal of Business and
     Economics 34, no.4 (1995): 16-29.



                                            21
Morrison, C.J., and E,R. Berndt. "Assessing the Productivity of Information Technology
       Equipment in the US Manufacturing Industries." NBER Working Paper 3582.
       January (1990).

Porter, Michael E. "Technology and Competitive Advantage." Journal of Business Strategy 5
        (1985a): 60-68.

Porter, Michael E. Competitive Advantage. Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance, The
        Free Press (1985b),

Porter, Michael E. and Victor E. Millar. "How Information Gives You a Competitive
        Advantage." Harvard Business Review, July-August (1985c): 149-160.

Roach, S.S. "America's Technology Dilemma: A Profile of the Information Economy," Morgan
       Stanley Special Economic Study (April 1987).

Siegel, D. and Z. Griliches. "Purchased Services, Outsourcing, Computers, and Productivity in
        Manufacturing," NBER Working Paper 3678 (April 1991).

Solow, Robert, New York Times Book Review (July 12, 1987).

Swan, P.F. "The Effect of Changes in Operations on Less-Than-Truckload Motor Carrier
      Productivity and Survival," Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Michigan, 1997.

Wilson, D. "Assessing the Impact of Information Technology on Organizational Performance,"
      in R. Barker, R. Kauffman, and M.A. Mahmood (Eds.), Strategic Information Technology
      Management. Idea Group, Harrisburg, PA, 1993.

Zingales, Luigi. "Survival of the Fittest or the Fattest? Exit and Financing in the Trucking
       Industry." The Journal of Finance 3, no.3 (1998): 905-938.




                                              22
</ref_section>
                                                       Table 1

                                 Distribution of Primary Marketing Objectives


     Firm's Primary                                 Organizational Structure of the Market
    Marketing Objective

                                     All Firms            Only TL            Only LTL            Specialized
                                    (Censored)'

On-Time Performance                      439                   184              45                   210
                                      (7 1.85%)           (77.3 1%)          (84.9 1%)            (77.19%)

Lowest Freight Rate                       61                   18                6                   37
                                       (9.98%)            (7.56%)            (11.32%)             (11.56%)

Safety                                   32                    12                 0                  20
                                      (5.24%)             (5.04%)                                  (14.06)

SpecializedfDedicated                    66                    19                 2                  45
Equipment                             (10.80%)            (7.98%)             (3.77%)             (3.77%)

Short Turn-Around                         13                 5                    0                    8
on Customers Request                  (2.13%)             (2.10%)                                   (2.50)

Non-On-Timers                            172                   54                8                   110
(Rows 3 through 6)                    (28.15%)            (22.69%)           (15.09%)             (22.91%)

Sample Size                              611                 238                 53                  320

 * The entire sample (all firms uncensored) is 703 firms. The censored sample of 611 (column 2) excludes 92
   firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.




                                                          23
                                                Table 2

                             Percentage of Firms Hauling Each Commodity


  Goods Hauled                              Finn's Primary Marketing Objective


                      All      On-Time         Non-On-      Lowest     Safety    Specialize   Short
                     Firms    Performance        Time       Freight                 d         Turn
                                              Performers     Rate                Equipment Around
                                              (Cols. 4-7)

Auto Parts or        0.16        0.16            0.12        0.08      0.19        0.11       0.23
Vehicles

Raw Petroleum        0.04        0.03            0.08        0.11      0.03        0.06       0.08
Products

Mine Ores            0.03        0.02            0.05        0.03      0.09       0.06        0.00

Processed Food       0.24        0.27            0.17        0.18      0.09        0.17       0.31

Parcels              0.05        0.06            0.01        0.02      0.00       0.02        0.00

Heavy Machinery      0.15        0.13            0.19        0.13      0.25       0.23        0.15

Refined Petroleum    0.11        0.10            0.13        0.13      0.03       0.17        0.15
Products

Forest Products      0.15        0.15            0.18        0.11      0.09       0.29        0.15

Farm Fresh           0.14        0.14            0.12        0.15      0.06       0.14        0.08
Products

Refuse               0.02        0.02            0.005       0.00      0.00       0.00        0.08

Household Goods      0.06        0.05            0.06        0.10      0.03       0.05        0.00

Dump Trucking        0.10        0.07            0.17        0.16      0.13       0.20        0.23

Retail               0.14        0.15            0.10        0.11      0.09       0.12        0.00

Building Materials   0.24        0.23            0.26        0.21      0.28       0.32        0.15




                                                24
Hazardous                0.15          0.15               0.19         0.20         0.06          0.27            0.08
Chemicals

                      703            439               172    -       61             32           66              13
Sample Size

 Notes: The percentages for each column do not add to 100% because most trucking firms haul more than one commodity.
 * The entire sample (column 2--all firms uncensored) is 703 firms. The censored sample (columns 3 plus 4) of 611
   excludes 92 firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.
                                                        Table 3

                                         Sample Means of Technology Use


            Information Technology Use                            Firm's Primary Marketing Objective


                                                           All         On-Time          Lowest         Non-On-Time
                                                         Firms        Performanc        Freight         Perfomers
                                                                            e            Rate
     Low Technology--Information Gathering

     Celiphone 1998                                       0.61             0.60            0.69           0.67

     Pager 1998                                           0.56             0.52            0.64           0.66

     Two-way Radio 1998                                   0.31             0.31            0.43           0.34

     High Technology--Information Gathering

     Auto Vehicle Location 1998                            0.23            0.25            0.10            0.20

     On Board Computers 1998                               0.07            0.07            0.03            0.06

     Satellite Comm. 1998                                  0.32            0.32            0.21            0.30

     Information Processing

     Computer Aided Dispatching 1996                       0.29            0.31            0.18            0.28

     Computer Aided Routing 1996                           0.22            0.23            0.15            0.24

     Electronic Data Interchange 1996                      0.29            0.32            0.26            0.28

     Internet 1996                                         0.10            0.10            0.08            0.09




                                                         25
Maintenance Tracking Software 1996                    0.17             0.19           0.15             0.16

Others

No IT use                                             0.05             0.06           0.08             0.03

No Info Gathering Technology 1998                     0.11             0.13           0.11             0.08

No Info Processing Technology 1996                    0.47             0.45           0.59             0.45

Sample Size                                           703              439             61               172

 * The entire sample (column 2--all firms uncensored) is 703 firms. The censored sample (columns 3 plus 5) of 611
   excludes 92 firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.




                                                     26
           Characteristics

                                           All          On-Time              Lowest           Non-On-Time
                                         Firms*        Performance         Freight Rate        Performers

     Time-Sensitive Hauls                 3.90               3.98               3.85               3.80
     (Scale: 1-5)

     Route Variability                    3.20               3.15               3.28               3.29
     (Scale: 1-4)

     Average Load                        14.93             14.64               15.26              16.52
     (Tons)

     Average Haul                      554.06             521.64              751.15            637.42
     (Miles)

     Total Equipment                   414.48             437.55              260.85            356.12
     (Power Units and Trailers)

     Leverage                             0.56               0.57                0.49              0.53
     (Debt/Equity)

     Net Profit Margin                    1.58               1.59                1.32              1.83
     (Net Income/Gross Rev.)

     Information Processing                1.08              1.15                0.82              1.04
     Technology (Scale: 0-5)

     Sample Size                       703                439                  61               172

       * Theentire sample (column 2--all firms uncensored) is 703 firms. The censored sample (columns 3 plus 5)
of       611 excludes 92 firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.




                                                        27
                                                          Table 5

                        Probit Estimates — Impact of Haul Characteristics on IT Use


             Variable                                          Estimated Coefficient
                                                                    /-.... .-1.._..-i r.._.\
                                            All Firms'1                   On-Timers            Non On-Timers

 Time Sensitive Hauls                         0.082                          0.125                  -0.003
                                             (0.042)**                      (0.056)**               (0.083)

 Route Variability                            0.083                          0.175                  -0.130
                                             (0.068)                        (0.089)**               (0.142)

 Average Load                                -0.0174                        -0.021                  -0.0007
 (Tons)                                      (0.007 1)**                    (0.0 100)**             (0.0 136)

 Average Haul                                 0.0002                         0.0003                  0.0005
 (Miles)                                     (0.0001 )* *                   (0.0001 )**             (0.0002)* *

 Total Equipment                              0.0002                         0.0001                  0.00122
 (Power Units and Trailers)                  (0.00006)* * *                 (0 .00006)*             (0.00031) * * *

 Leverage (Debt/Equity)                       0.750                          0.818                   0.023
                                             (0.208)***                     (0.260)***              (0.455)

 Net Profit Margin                            0.020                          0.022                   0.00 1
 (Net Income/Gross Rev.)                     (0.0 13)                       (0.017)                 (0.025)

 Information-Processing                       0.203                          0.201                   0.252
 Technology (Scale: 0-5)                     (0.040)***                     (0.049)***              (0.091)***

 Log Likelihood                           -416.23                       -260.84                   -86.56

 Dependent Variable Mean                      0,36                           0.36                    0.47

 Sample Size                               703                           439                      172

   Notes: Dependent variable is 1 if the firm uses Satellite Communication or On-board Computers or Automated Vehicle
Locators. Dependent variable is zero other wise. , , *** indicate 90%, 95% and 99% level of significance respectively.
    The entire sample (column 2--all firms uncensored) is 703 firms. The censored sample (columns 3 plus 4) of
     611 excludes 92 firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.




                                                        28
              Ordered Probit Estimates —Impact of Haul Characteristics on 11 Use


         Variable                                    Estimated Coefficient
                                                        (Standard Error)

                                    All Firms             On-Timers            Non On-Timers


Time-Sensitive Hauls                  0.059                  0.109                    -0.035
                                     (0.035)*               (0.047)**                 (0.070)

Route Variability                     0.043                  0.064                    -0.015
                                     (0.057)                (0.074)                   (0.120)

Average Load                         -0.014                 -0.0184                    0.0032
                                     (O.0059)**             (0.0082)**                (0.0111)

Average Haul                          0.000 1                 0.0002                   0.0002
                                     (0.0001)                (0.0001)                 (0.0002)

Total Equipment                       0.000 19                0.00009                  0.00 126
(Power Units and Trailers)           (0.00006)***            (0.00006)                (0.0003)***

Leverage (Debt/Equity)                0.584                  0.63 1                    0.086
                                     (0.178)***              (0.223)***               (0.383)

Net Profit Margin                     0.020                  0.022                     0.005
(Net Income/Gross Rev.)              (0.011)                 (0.0 14)                 (0.020)

Information-Processing                 0.164                  0.161                    0.216
Technology (Scale: 0-5)               (0.036)***             (0.044)***               (0.082)***

Cut lb                                -0.444                 -0.134                   -0.907
                                      (0.273)*               (0.352)                  (0.565)

Cut2h                                  1.219                  1.430                    1.181
                                      (0.275)***             (0.356)***               (0.568)**

Log Likelihood                     -634.17                -407.17                  -130.09

Sample Size                         703                    439                       172




                                              29
    Notes: Dependent variable is 1 if the firm does not use any information-gathering technologies. Dependent variable is
2 if the firm only uses low technologies--Celiphones or Pagers or Two-Way Radios. Dependent variable is 3 if the firm
uses high technologies--Satellite Communications or On-board Computers or Automated Vehicle Locators. Dependent
variable is zero other wise. , , *** indicate 90%, 95% and 99% level of significance respectively.
    a
      The entire sample (column 2--all firms uncensored) Is 703 firms. The censored sample (columns 3 plus 4) of
       611 excludes 92 firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.
    bThe estimated thresholds (Cuti and Cut2) are significantly different from each other at 99% level of significance.




                                                      30
                                                         Table 7

                     Ordered Probit Estimates —Impact of Haul Characteristics on IT Use
                                                    by -
                                Marketing  Objectives and Industry Structure


         Variable                                                  Estimated Coefficients

                                          All Firmsa                          On-Timers             Non-On-Timers
                                  TL                   LTL                 TL          LTL               TL

Time-Sensitive Hauls           0.072                0.192                0.131          0.457          -0.123
                              (0.062)              (0.165)              (0.075)*       (0.232)***      (0.162)

Route Variability             -0.069                0.239                0.021          0.497          -0.355
                              (0.099)              (0.205)              (0.122)        (0.257)*        (0.239)

Average Load                  -0.0063               0.0289              -0.0167         0.0346          0.0359
                              (0.0102)             (0.0361)             (0.0127)       (0.0412)        (0.0258)

Average Haul                   0.0003              -0.0003               0.0004        -0.000 1         0.0005
                              (0.0001)**           (0.0007)             (0.0002)**     (0.0009)        (0.0003)

Total Equipment                0.0005 1             0.00002              0.00037       -0.00005        0.0018 1
(Power Units and Trailers)    (0.00015)***         (0.00010)            (0.00017)**    (0.00011)       (0.00075)**

Leverage (Debt/Equity)         0.349                   1.071             0.437          1.282          -0.118
                              (0.302)              (0.811)              (0.356)        (0.978)         (0.716)

Net Profit Margin              0.007                   0.0 13            0.007          0.039           0.009
(Net Income/Gross Rev.)        (0.0 18)            (0.063)              (0.025)        (0.070)         (0.034)

Information-Processing          0.141               0.243                0.146          0.311           0.053
Technology (Scale: 0-5)        (0.057)**           (0.141)*             (0.065)**      (0.171)*        (0.162)

Cut 1"                         -0.461               0.372                0.071          2.396          -1.521
                               (0.474)             (0.966)              (0.553)        (l.344)*        (1.280)

Cut 2"                          0.972                  3.125             1.452          5.239           0.086
                               (0.475)**           (1 .056)***          (0.559)***     (1.566)***      (1.262)

Log Likelihood               -245.55              -38.21              -173.92         -27.97          -45.06




                                                          31
Sample Size                      266                   59                 184                 45                      54

     Notes: Dependent variable is 1 if the firm does not use any information-gathering technologies. Dependent variable is 2 if
  the firm only uses low technologies--Celiphones or Pagers or wo;Way Radios. Dependent variable is 3 if the firm uses high
  technologies--Satellite Communications or On-board Computers or Automated Vehicle Locators. Dependent variable is zero
  other wise. , , *** indicate 90%, 95% and 99% level of significance respectively.
       All firms (columns 2 plus 3--325 firms) excludes specialized carriers. The censored sample (columns 4 through 6--283
  firms) also excludes firms that listed more than one primary marketing objective.
     bThe estimated thresholds (Cut 1 and Cut2) are significantly different from each other at 99% level of significance.




                                                             32
                          Appendix: Description of Technologies14

        This appendix provides brief descriptions of each of the eleven technologies listed
in the paper. These technologies are used for fleet management, and to enhance the
competitive advantage of the industry and of individual trucking companies by improving
the efficiency of goods movements through real-time information exchange and
communications, and by providing customers with up-to-the-minute information
regarding the location and timing of shipments and deliveries.

Low technology communications and information gathering

1.      Cellular phones

Voice and data are transmitted by these mobile communication devises. While this
technology is common, service areas are limited and "dead zones" exist in less populated
areas, mountainous areas, tunnels, or anywhere transmitters are sparse.

2.      Two-way radios

Voice conversations are transmitted via these proprietary radio systems. The ranges of
two-way radios can extent to 50 miles with the appropriate transmitter.

3.      Pagers

One-way text messages are transmitted to a small receiver via a number of paging
networks. The range is only constrained by the type of supporting technology.

High technology for information gathering

4, 5.   Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL), and Satellite Communications (SATCOM)

AVL is a broad descriptive category of technologies to track the location of transponders.
It is possible to pinpoint the location of a vehicle using ground-based or satellite
technologies. When combined with on-board computers and routing and dispatching
software, these systems allow for real-time optimization of fleet routing and dispatching.
Drivers, dispatchers, shippers, and receivers can track a truck from pickup to delivery,
perform just-in-time deliveries, coordinate intermodal shipments, and provide improved
customer service. Satellite communications provide AVL capabilities and also
' We wish to thank Bob Pritchard for his contribution to this footnote. Parts of this appendix draws
heavily, and reproduces portions of information exactly from Commercial Vehicle Fleet Management and
Information Systems, Technical Memorandum 3, ITS Fleet Management Technology Resource Guide,
prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc., in cooperation with ATA Foundation Private Fleet Management
Institute. The memorandum was prepared for the Federal Highway Administration, May 1996.




                                                33
communications between the vehicle and dispatcher. With an on-board computer, two-
way text or voice communications can allow for dynamic routing and dispatching, as well
as the real-time monitoring of vehicle operating parameters (speed, RPMs, etc.). Satellite
systems are less effective in urban areas, because their radio-navigation signals are
reflected and distorted by buildings, bridges, power lines, and other structures. Ground-
based AVL are more reliable in urban areas which may make this technology more
attractive to short-haul motor carriers. Since sufficient antenna coverage for ground
based systems does not exist throughout the US, satellite systems that have global
coverage, can be used more effectively by long-haul carriers.

6.      On-board computers (OBCs)

OBCs are either vehicle based or hand-held computers used to capture information from
the vehicle, or by the driver. OBCs are sometimes used as trip recorders, for monitoring
vehicle performance measures such as speed, fuel consumption and drivers' hours of
service. Information stored in OBCs can be uploaded to the dispatch center using mobile
communication systems, or downloaded to a system when the truck returns to its
domicile. OBCs are often used as a platform for two way text communications, and
sometimes in conjunction with routing and dispatching systems as well as with
maintenance-scheduling software. OBCs can provide the following functions:

• Business Transactions: Registers delivery times, state line crossings, and customer
   signatures for proof-of-delivery; transmits delivery notifications.
• Driver Log: Enables drivers to input records of fuel consumption and hours of service
   using a keyboard and display screen.
• Vehicle Location Information: Deciphers AVL system transmissions.
• Vehicle performance data collection: Engine idling, braking, shifting, and
   acceleration patterns, as well as data from diagnostic systems for ancillary equipment
   such as refrigeration units can be captured. OBCs can allow for remote diagnostics
   prior to a malfunction in order to improve the safety performance of vehicles.

Technology for information processing

7.      Electronic data interchange (EDT)

A series of standardized messages comprises the umbrella concept of EDI and allows for
computer to computer data transmission. The transmissions can occur between trucking
companies and shippers, or between any two trading partners. ED! allows for automatic
scheduling, billing, receipt of load acknowledgment, etc.

8, 9.   Computer-aided routing, and dispatching (CAR and CAD):

Routing and dispatching software provides decision support for route selection in order to
minimize the time and cost of moving freight. Systems are used to schedule trucks and



                                            34
drivers subject to availability of parameters such as allowable driving hours, size of load,
origin and destination. Static systems allow for preplanning. More sophisticated
dynamic systems allow routing and dispatch decisions based on real-time truck locations,
generate route maps, estimate delivery times and distances, and help improve cost
estimates. These software provide the following benefits:

• Improved dispatcher productivity: Companies report that routing procedures, which
    previously took staff eight hours with a manual system, now can be finished in one
    hour.
• Reduced client inventory costs: With the reliable delivery provided by CAR and CAD
    systems, "just-in-time" inventory systems can be more commonly used and
    "manufacture on demand" is also made feasible. With these software firms no longer
    need to keep extensive inventories at manufacturing plants.
• Improved communication efficiency: With a computerized system, load information
    to drivers can be relayed instantaneously.
• Reduced labor costs: Companies do not need to employ logistics experts to operate
    these systems. Simple user interfaces make it possible for employees without
    specialized training to operate the system. Shippers can make their routing and
    dispatching information available on the internet so that receivers can track shipments
    in real-time thus reducing dispatchers' workloads.

10.    Maintenance tracking software (MTS)

This software optimizes many areas of vehicle maintenance. For example, MTS can
track and reorder parts in a repair department or do real-time vehicle diagnostic via
satellite communications. As real-time information becomes available about the
performance of trucks, MTS is used to continuously improve the performance of vehicles
and schedule preventive and emergency repairs as needed in the most cost-effective
manner.

11.    Internet

The Internet provides a variety of communications opportunities. Its current most
common application allows for low-cost computer to computer messaging and data
sharing. EDT is viable via the Internet, replacing the higher cost proprietary
telecommunications networks.




                                          35
