                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EXPLAINING INEQUALITY THE WORLD
                                ROUND: COHORT SIZE, KUZNETS
                                   CURVES, AND OPENNESS

                                              Matthew Higgins
                                            Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                            Working Paper 7224
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7224


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         July 1999




We would like to thank Abhijit Banerjee, Angus Deaton, Michael Kremer, Andrew Warner, David Weil and
participants at the Harvard-MIT Growth and Development Workshop for helpful comments and suggestions.
In addition, we are grateful to Leonardo Bartolini and Alan Drazen for providing a tabulation of the IMF data
on capital controls. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.

© 1999 by Matthew Higgins and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Explaining Inequality the World Round:
Cohort Size, Kuznets Curves, and Openness
Matthew Higgins and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 7224
July 1999
JEL No. O1, J1, I3

                                              ABSTRACT

        Klaus Deininger and Lyn Squire have recently produced an inequality data base for a panel of
countries from the 1960s to the 1990s. We use these data to decompose the sources of inequality into
three central parts: the demographic or cohort size effect; the so-called Kuznets Curve or demand effects;
and the commitment to globalization or policy effects. We also control for education supply, the so-called
natural resource curse and other variables suggested by the literature. While the Kuznets Curve comes out
of hiding when the inequality relationship is conditioned by the other two, cohort size seems to be the most
important force at work. We resolve the apparent conflict between this macro finding on cohort size and
the contrary implications of recent research based on micro data.



Matthew Higgins                                           Jeffrey G. Williamson
International Economics Function                          Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                          216 Littauer Center
Federal Reserve P.O. Station                              Harvard University
New York, New York 10045                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
matthew.higgins@ny.frb.org                                and NBER
                                                          jwilliam@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu
                                                1. Introduction




        The empirical results presented in this paper provide strong support for cohort size effects on

inequality the world round: large mature working age cohorts are associated with lower aggregate

inequality, and large young adult cohorts are associated with higher aggregate inequality. This finding is

consistent with the writings of Richard Easterlin and others regarding the fallout from America’s previous

baby boom. It is also of interest because standard theoretical models associated with Angus Deaton and

others argue the opposite. In addition, the paper reports compelling evidence that inequality follows the

inverted-U pattern described by Simon Kuznets, tending to rise as a country passes through the early

stages of development, and tending to fall as a country passes through the later stages. This is a littered

academic battlefield, but our work differs from most previous studies of the Kuznets hypothesis by

examining the inequality-development relationship conditional on other variables. In particular, and as we

have noted, the analysis stresses a country's position in the demographic transition, as measured by the

mature adult share of the labor force, and on a country's degree of economic openness. However, and

consistent with so much of recent inequality debate about rising wage inequality in the US and in other

OECD economies in the 1980s, we find only limited support for the hypothesis that a policy commitment

to globalization has an impact on inequality.

        Section 2 surveys the three main hypotheses upon which this papers dwells: cohort size, Kuznets

Curves and openness. Section 3 describes patterns in inequality, openness and cohort size, across regions

and since the 1950s. Section 4 presents pooled and fixed-effects estimates of the relationship between

inequality and cohort size, Kuznets Curve effects, openness and other variables. It also explores the

quantitative significance of the estimated effects. Section 5 conducts simulation exercises to evaluate


                                                        1
potential sources of the negative link between cohort size and inequality. Section 6 concludes.

                                  2. Reviewing the Three Hypotheses




2.1 Inequality and Cohort Size

        The cohort size hypothesis is simple enough: fat cohorts tend to get low rewards. When those fat

cohorts lie in the middle of the age-earnings curve where life-cycle income is highest, this labor market

glut lowers income in the middle, thus tending to flatten the age-earnings curve. Earnings inequality is

moderated. When instead the fat cohorts are young or old adults, this kind of labor market glut lowers

incomes at the two tails of the age-earnings curve thus tending to heighten the slope of the upside and the

downside of the age-earnings curve. Earnings inequality is augmented. This demographic hypothesis has a

long tradition in the United States starting with the entry of the baby boomers into the labor market when

they faced such poor prospects (Easterlin 1980; Freeman 1979; Welch 1979), and it was surveyed

recently by David Lam (1997: pp. 1023-4 and 1044-52). Kevin Murphy and Finis Welch (1992) and

Murphy and Lawrence Katz (1992) have now extended this work to include the 1980s. All of these

studies have shown that relative cohort size has had an adverse supply effect on the relative wages of the

fat cohort in the United States since the 1950s. This tradition ignores the potential endogeneity of hours

and weeks worked, educational attainment and labor-force participation rates with respect to cohort size.

We shall do the same in this paper, but it should be noted that one effort to endogenize those effects for

the United States has concluded that:

         “almost all of the change in the experience premium over the past 30 years (younger and older

        relative to prime-age workers) and a significant portion of the change in the college wage

        premium can be explained solely as a function of changing age structure.” (Macunovich 1998:

        263)


                                                       2
3
         If the cohort size hypothesis helps explain United States post-war experience with wage

inequality, it might do even better world wide. After all, there is far greater variance in the age distribution

of populations between regions and countries than there has been over time in the United States.

Furthermore, the demographic transition in the Third World has generated much more dramatic changes

in relative cohort size than did the baby boom in the OECD. The higher demographic variance between

countries at any point in time versus within countries over time can also be illustrated by a pair of

summary statistics from the data set used in this paper. Define the variable MATURE as the proportion

of the adult population 15-69 who are ages 40-59. When the standard deviation of MATURE is

calculated between countries in the sample we get a figure, 5.10, that far exceeds the standard deviation

over time within countries for the sample, 1.66. Thus, the variance in cohort size across countries and

regions is more than nine times the variance for countries over time.

         All of this suggests that cohort size is likely to matter in explaining inequality the world around

since the 1950s, fat young-adult cohorts creating inequality while fat prime-age cohorts doing just the

opposite. Interestingly, a recent and influential paper by Angus Deaton and Christina Paxson (1997)

suggests that faster population growth (and, thus, fat young and thin prime-age cohorts) should reduce

inequality. The resolution of the apparent conflict is, we think, straightforward, but is reserved for section

5.

         Two caveats are in order before we proceed. First, we have relied on the micro cohort size

literature to motivate the discussion of demographic effects on inequality. This literature assumes that

cohort size effects reflect the competitive market-clearing equilibrium, driven by imperfect substitutability

in production between workers of different experience levels. We are unable to test this assumption, but

the validity of our empirical results does not rest on it. It is also possible, for example, that more mature

workers are better at "gaming" the economic system, and thus, in extracting rents from other age groups.


                                                         4
The fact of cohort-size-effects-on-income requires only that the total income accruing to a cohort rises

less-than-proportionately with cohort size, whatever the causal mechanism. Second, as a related matter,

the micro cohort size literature focuses on earnings; the international macro inequality data pertains to

total income, and sometimes consumption. We know of no way to address this mismatch without

abandoning the attempt to link international demographic variation with international variation in inequality.

Given the much greater demographic variation in the international data, we hold that this would be

throwing out the baby with the bathwater. In effect, we assume that what holds true for earnings holds

true for income as well. The true links between demography and income inequality are no doubt more

complex, depending on the links among demography, savings rates, the transmission of wealth across

generations, and the mean and variability of returns to accumulated assets.




2.2 Inequality and Openness 1

           After 1973 and especially in the 1980's, the US experienced a dismal real wage performance for

the less skilled, mostly due to declining productivity growth coupled with increasing wage inequality

between skills. The ratio of weekly wages of the top decile to the bottom decile increased from 2.9 in

1963 to 4.4 in 1989 (Kosters 1994; Freeman 1996). This inequality was manifested primarily by an

increasing wage premiums for workers with advanced schooling and age-related skills. While the same

inequality trends were apparent elsewhere in the OECD in the 1980s, the increase was typically far

smaller (Kosters 1994). The debate over explanations for these inequality facts started with the

observation that rising inequality coincided with rising globalization in the form of trade and immigration.

The latter underwent increasing quantity and declining quality (Borjas 1994). Trade shares in the US

increased from 12 to 25% of GNP between 1970 and 1990 (Lawrence and Slaughter 1993), while World


1
    Much of this section is taken from Williamson 1997, pp. 119-121.

                                                            5
Bank figures document that the share of output exported from low-income countries rose from 8 to 18%

between 1965 and 1990 (Richardson 1995, p. 34). These inequality developments also coincided with a

shift in US spending patterns which resulted in large trade deficits. Thus, economists quite naturally

explored the linkages between trade and immigration, on the one hand, and wage inequality, on the other.

          The standard Heckscher-Ohlin two-factor, two-good trade model makes an unambiguous

prediction. Every country exports those products which use intensively abundant and cheap factors of

production. Thus, a trade boom induced by either declining tariffs or transport costs will cause exports and

the demand for the cheap factor to boom too. Globalization in poor countries should favor unskilled labor

and dis-favor skilled labor; globalization in rich countries should favor skilled labor and dis-favor unskilled

labor. Robert Lawrence and Matthew Slaughter (1993) used the standard Heckscher-Ohlin trade model

to explore wage inequality and concluded that there was little evidence to support it. Instead, the authors

concluded that technological change was the more important source of rising wage inequality. Hot debate

ensued.

          This strand of the debate stressed the evolution of labor demand by skill, ignoring the potential

influence of supply. George Borjas (1994) and his collaborators (Borjas, Freeman and Katz 1992) took a

different approach, emphasizing instead how trade and immigration served to augment US labor supply. In

order to do this, they first estimated the implicit labor supply embodied in trade flows. Imports embody

labor thus serving to augment effective domestic labor supply. Likewise, exports imply a decrease in the

effective domestic labor supply. In this way, the huge US trade deficit of the 1980s implied a 1.5%

increase in the US labor supply and, since most of the imports were in goods which used unskilled labor

relatively intensively, it also implied an increasing ratio of unskilled to skilled effective labor supplies. In

addition, there was a shift in national origin of immigrants from the 1960s to the 1980s so that an

increasing proportion of immigrants were from the less developed nations (e.g., Mexico and Asia) and


                                                           6
thus more unskilled, which in turn meant a far higher fraction of immigrants were relatively unskilled just

when there were more of them.

        These relative supply shifts gave economists the desired qualitative result—wage inequality

between skill types. The quantitative result, at least in Borjas's hands, also seemed big. Borjas estimated

that 15 to 25% of the relative wage decline of high school to college graduates was due to trade and

immigration. He also estimated that 30 to 50% of the decline in relative wage of high school dropouts to

all other workers was due these same globalization forces, one-third of which was due to trade and two-

thirds to immigration.

        Thus far, the discussion has focused mainly on the United States, perhaps because this is where

rising inequality and immigration have been greatest. But the question is not simply why the United States

and even Europe experienced a depressed relative demand for low-skilled labor in the 1980s and 1990s

(Freeman 1995, p. 19), but whether the same factors were stimulating the relative demand for low-skill

labor in the poor Third World. This is where Adrian Wood (1994, Chp. 6; 1995) entered the debate.

Basing his results on insights derived from classical Heckscher-Ohlin theory (extended by Stolper-

Samuelson), Wood concluded that trade globalization could account for rising inequality in the rich North

and falling inequality in the poor South. Wood's research has been met with stiff critical resistance. Since

his book appeared, we have learned more about the inequality and globalization connection in the Third

World. The standard Stolper-Samuelson prediction would be that unskilled labor abundant poor countries

should undergo egalitarian trends in the face of globalization forces, unless they are overwhelmed by

industrial revolutionary labor-saving events on the upswing of the Kuznets Curve (Kuznets 1955), or by

young adult gluts generated by the demographic transition (Bloom and Williamson 1997, 1998). A recent

review by Donald Davis (1996) reports the contrary, and a study of seven countries in Latin America and

East Asia shows that wage inequality typically did not fall after trade liberalization, but rather rose


                                                         7
(Robbins 1996). This apparent anomaly has been strengthened by other studies, some of which have been

rediscovered since Adrian Wood's book appeared. Of course, none of these studies are very attentive to

the simultaneous role of emigration from these developing countries.

         As detailed below, we have designed our empirical specification with an eye to the possibility of

non-standard Stolper-Samuelson effects. Here, Davis's study is of particular interest. Davis shows that,

given partial specialization, the textbook SS propositions linking external prices hold only within a given

cone of specialization (for example, Mexico might be the capital-rich country within its cone, even if it is

capital-poor relative to the U.S.). The rough empirical analogue of this observation is that greater

openness might raise returns to capital or skilled labor (and thus raise inequality) only for the richest

countries, and might lower returns to capital or skilled labor only for the poorest countries. As a result, we

interact our measures of openness with dummy variables capturing the top and bottom thirds of the world

national income per capita ranking.

         As with our discussion of demographic effects, two caveats are in order before we proceed.

First, the standard Stolper-Samuleson predictions can fail for reasons other than partial specialization, and

the possible violation of these standard assumptions should be kept in mind in interpreting our empirical

results. Second, the Stolper-Samuleson predictions apply to relative factor rewards, e.g., those of land vs.

labor, of capital vs. labor, or of skilled vs. unskilled labor. Relative factor rewards have a clear intuitive

connection with aggregate inequality measures, but the actual correspondence between factor rewards

and inequality is no doubt fairly rough.




2.3 Strong vs Weak Versions of the Kuznets Curve Hypothesis

         Simon Kuznets (1955) noted that inequality had declined in several nations across the mid-20th

century, and supposed that it probably had risen earlier. Furthermore, Kuznets thought it was demand-side


                                                         8
forces that could explain his Curve: that is, technological and structural change tended to favor the

demand for capital and skills, while saving on unskilled labor. These labor-saving conditions eventually

moderated as the rate of technological change (catching up) and the rate of structural change

(urbanization and industrialization) both slowed down. Eventually, the labor-saving stopped, and other,

more egalitarian forces were allowed to have their impact. This is what might be called the strong version

of the Kuznets Curve hypothesis, that income inequality first rises and then declines with development.

The strong version of the hypothesis is strong because it is unconditioned by any other effects. Demand

does it all.

          The weak version of the Kuznets Curve hypothesis is more sophisticated. It argues that these

demand forces can be offset or reinforced by any other force if it is sufficiently powerful. The forces of

some demographic transition at home may glut the labor market with the young and impecunious early in

development, reinforcing the rise in inequality. Or emigration to labor-scarce OECD or oil-rich economies

may have the opposite effect, making the young and impecunious who stay home more scarce (while the

old receive remittances). It depends on the size of the demographic transition and whether the world

economy accommodates mass migration. A public policy committed to high enrollment rates and to the

eradication of illiteracy may greatly augment the supply of skilled and literate labor, eroding the premium

on skills and wage inequality. Or public policy might not take this liberal stance, allowing instead the skill

premium to soar, and wage inequality with it. A commitment to liberal trade policies may allow an

invasion of labor-intensive goods in labor-scarce economies, thus injurying the unskilled at the bottom of

the distribution. Or, trade policies may protect those interests. And a commitment to liberal trade policies

in industrializing labor-abundant countries may allow an invasion of labor-intensive goods in OECD

markets, the export boom raising the demand for unskilled labor and thus augmenting incomes of common

labor at the bottom. Or, trade policies may instead protect the interests of the skilled in the import-


                                                         9
competing industries. Finally, natural resource endowment may matter since an export boom in such

economies will raise the rents on those resources and thus augment incomes of those at the top who own

those resources.

         The strong version of the Kuznets Curve has received most of the attention since 1955, while the

weak version has received very little. A phalanx of economists, led by Hollis Chenery and Montek

Ahluwalia at the World Bank (Chenery et al., 1974; Ahluwalia, 1976), looked for unconditional Kuznets

Curves in a large sample of countries, and the results are illustrated in Figure 1. The inequality statistic

used by Ahluwalia was simply the income share of the top 20%. Based on his 60-country cross-section

from the 1960s and 1970s, it looked very much like there was a Kuznets Curve out there. True, the more

robust portion of the Curve lay to the right; income inequality clearly fell with the development of

economically mature economies. The left tail of the Curve appeared to be less robust; there was

enormous variance in inequality experience during earlier stages of development. This strong version of

the Kuznets Curve also seemed to be supported by what historical data was available at that time, some

of it reported in Figure 2.

         Oddly enough, the attack on the Kuznets Curve continued to take aim at the strong and

unconditional version long after the 1970s. Even as late as 1993, Sudhir Anand and S. Kanbur published a

paper critical of the Kuznets Curve which contained no other explanatory variable but GDP. As is by

now well known, it turned out that the Kuznets Curve disappeared from Figure 1 when dummy variables

for Asia and Latin America were added. The Latin countries tend to have higher inequality, and in the

1960s, before the Asian miracle, they were located closer to the middle of the income per capita ranking.

The Asian countries tend to have lower inequality, and were located closer to the bottom of the income

per capita ranking in the 1960s.




                                                        10
        It seems to us that the more effective attacks on the Kuznets Curve (including that by Kuznets

himself) have always been based on the quality of the income distribution data. The World Bank data was

poor: there was simply very little consistency as to how income was measured, how the recipient unit

was defined, and how comprehensive was the coverage of the units. Thanks to Klaus Deininger and

Lyn Squire (1996), we now have an excellent inequality data base which this paper exploits. Even with

this new data base, however, Deininger and Squire were unable to find any evidence supporting the

Kuznets Curve that Ahluwalia saw 25 years ago in Figure 1. Once again, the strong version of the

Kuznets Curve hypothesis fails. While some countries may conform to the Kuznets Curve in the late 20th

century, just as many do not.

        But for which countries does the strong version of the hypothesis fail, and why? When it does fail

is it because demand is being overwhelmed by some combination of other forces, including cohort size

and openness?




                          3. Inequality, Cohort Size and Openness: The Data




        Deininger and Squire subject their inequality data to various quality and consistency checks. In

order to be included in their “high quality” data set, an observation must be drawn from a published

household survey, provide comprehensive coverage of the population, and be based on a comprehensive

measure of income or expenditure. The resulting data set covers 111 countries and four decades (the

1960s through the 1990s), yielding 682 annual observations. We exclude from our analysis here a

number of countries with insufficient economic data, yielding a data set covering 85 countries, and

including a total of 600 annual observations. Although many countries contribute only one or two annual

observations, 19 countries contribute 10 or more, permitting the analysis of inequality trends over time.


                                                      11
          We focus on two measures of inequality, the Gini coefficient (GINI) and the ratio of income

earned by the top income quartile to income earned by the bottom quartile (GAP). To highlight inequality

patterns across regions and over time, Table 1 reports unweighted averages of these inequality measures

by region and decade. Inequality follows the expected regional patterns. It is quite high in Latin America

and sub-Saharan Africa, with Gini coefficients in the 1990s of 50 and 46.4, respectively. Inequality is

much lower among OECD countries and along the Pacific Rim, with Gini coefficients in the 1990s of 33.0

and 39.2, respectively. T. Paul Schultz (1998) has also used this data to decompose statistically the

sources of world inequality into its within and between components, concluding that two-thirds of world

inequality is due to between country variation. Two-thirds is a big number, and it justifies all the recent

attention of the new growth theory on country growth performance since the 1960s. Yet, it is the within

country variance that motivates this paper. The within country inequality data summarized in Table 1 also

confirm a point already noted by Deininger and Squire (1996) and Li, Squire and Zou (1998): inequality

displays little apparent variation over time within regions. The OECD s Gini coefficient, for example,

moves from 33.6 to 33.0 between the 1970s and the 1990s; and the Ginis for Latin America and the

Pacific Rim are also quite stable over the past four decades, despite impressive growth, policy regime

switches and demographic transitions. However, and this deserves stress, data limitations make it almost

impossible to draw firm conclusions about regional inequality trends across the four recent decades. For

example, the Gini coefficient for Latin America in the 1970s is based on 12 countries, while the Gini for

the 1990s is based on 10; only 6 Latin countries, not necessarily representative, can be observed during

both decades. Data limitations are even more severe for the GAP variable, which, it turns out, is even

more easily distorted by changes in sample membership.

        To study Kuznets effects, we rely on real GDP per worker, measured at purchasing power

parity. Some earlier studies have relied on real GDP per capita rather than per worker, but we feel that


                                                       12
labor productivity is more closely connected to Kuznets's notion of stages of development. GDP per

worker is viewed as a proxy for a constellation of variables which have unequal derived demand impact

on factor markets, an impact which Kuznets himself summarized as (unskilled) labor-saving in early

stages of development. Following many earlier studies, the possibility of this inequality turning point

appearing at later stages of development is captured by adding a quadratic GDP per worker term to the

model. Table 2 reveals the expected labor productivity growth patterns: real GDP per worker grows

rapidly along the Pacific Rim, moderately in the OECD, and stagnates in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin

America.

        Our openness measure comes from Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner (1995), who classify an

economy as closed (dummy = 0) if it is characterized by any of the following four conditions: (i) a black

market premium of 20 percent or more for foreign exchange; (ii) an export marketing board which

appropriates most foreign exchange earnings; (iii) a socialist economic system; (iv) extensive non-tariff

barriers on imports of intermediate and capital goods. The black market premium is generally the most

decisive criteria of the four, by itself identifying the vast majority of countries considered closed.

According to the Sachs-Warner index, the OECD region has been quite open since the 1960s. The

Pacific Rim became open in the 1970s. Latin America waited until the first half of the 1990s to make a

significant switch toward economic openness, while sub-Saharan Africa still remains closed. Since there

is no generally accepted metric for assessing an country's degree of economic openness (Anderson and

Neary 1994), we experiment with alternative measures of openness to test the robustness of our results

based on the Sachs-Warner index.

        To capture the effects of cohort size, we rely on the fraction of the labor force in its peak earning

years (MATURE). Because data concerning age-specific labor-force participation rates are unavailable,

we approximate this by the fraction of the adult population aged 40-59. This cohort size measure has


                                                        13
been relatively stable within regions over the past three decades, but it varies substantially across regions,

standing far higher in the developed world than elsewhere (Table 2). Evidently, the mature adult share of

the labor force rises substantially only during latter stages of the demographic transition.




                                             4. Empirical Results




         Our benchmark empirical model treats the data as decadal averages by country, following

Deininger and Squire (1998). We first estimate the standard unconditional Kuznets Curve, with only real

output per worker and its square as explanatory variables. We then add measures of openness and

cohort size to the conditional Kuznets Curve. To assess the robustness of our results, we consider the

stability of the estimated relationships over time; add to the model several additional variables identified in

the literature as potential inequality determinants; experiment with alternative measures of economic

openness; and explore alternative demographic variables for which our cohort size measure might act as a

proxy. We then turn from our benchmark (pooled) specification to a fixed-effects specification. While

the benchmark estimates are driven by the dominant cross-country variation in the data, fixed-effects

estimate only the within-country variation over time. Both provide considerable support for the

hypotheses that inequality follows an inverted-U as an economy's aggregate labor productivity rises, and

that inequality falls as an economy's population matures. However, both the benchmark and fixed-effects

models provide only limited support for the hypothesis that economic openness brings increased inequality.

Cohort size has a consistent and powerful effect throughout.




4.1. Pooled Estimates




                                                         14
        Since the benchmark model relies on decadal averages, each country contributes between one

and four observations. The average number of observations per country in our largest sample is 2.4, or

about two and a half decades. All specifications include three dummy variables describing whether an

inequality observation is (i) measured at the personal or household level, (ii) based on income or

expenditure, or (iii) based on gross or net income. 2 All specifications also include a dummy variable for

the presence of a socialist government as well as decade dummies, the latter ensuring that the estimates

are driven entirely by cross-sectional variation. The standard errors used to generate our test statistics

are robust to heteroskedasticity of an unknown form.

        We begin by estimating the unconditional Kuznets Curve, that is, a model containing only real

output per worker and its square as explanatory variables (RGDPW and RGDPW2), along with the

various dummy variables. These initial results point to a relationship between inequality and labor

productivity, significant at the 1 percent level, but the relationship involving GINI does not follow the

expected inverted-U (Table 3, columns 1 and 2). The estimated coefficients for RGDPW and RGDPW2

are both negative in the two GINI regressions, implying that inequality declines monotonically with the

level of economic development. When inequality is measured instead by GAP (=Q5/Q1), the inverted-U

does appear, but the individual coefficients are very imprecisely estimated, reflecting a high degree of

collinearity between the two variables (Table 3, columns 3 and 4). Much the same holds true when the

model is estimated for the four decades in our sample (not reported): for both the GINI and GAP

variables, RGDPW and RGDPW2 are always jointly significant at the 1 percent level, but the estimated

sign pattern is often perverse. Adding regional dummy variables for sub-Saharan Africa and Latin

America changes these results but little (columns 2 and 4).




2
 Deininger and Squire (1996) note that measured inequality levels vary systematically along these dimensions,
making it important to control for them in empirical work.

                                                        15
         It is, of course, possible that the inverted-U posited by Kuznets is masked by other forces, such as

cohort size and economic openness. After all, economic relationships are seldom expected to hold without

controlling for other relevant influences.3 In this spirit, we add to the model the measures of openness and

cohort size discussed earlier, and when we do the Kuznets Curve emerges from hiding (Table 4, columns

1 and 2, 3 and 4). RGDPW and RGDPW2 are jointly and individually significant at the 1 percent level,

and they display the expected sign pattern. However, it is worth noting that the estimated inequality

turning point is quite high, at about $15,000 evaluated at purchasing power parity in 1985 prices.4 For

comparison, as of 1990, real output per worker stood at $36,800 in the U.S. (which passed the estimated

turning point well before 1950), $16,000 in Korea, and $6,800 in Thailand. According to Kuznets, the

transition from a traditional, agricultural economy to a modern, industrial economy should be essentially

complete at the estimated turning-point, or at least the economy should undergo a pronounced slowdown

in the rate of structural change at the turning point. Thus, it is difficult to interpret these results in the

manner Kuznets would have preferred, as showing the path of inequality over the course of the

agricultural-industrial transition. We return to this issue below.

         Next, note that Table 4 reports emphatic support for a link between cohort size and aggregate

inequality. The estimated coefficient for MATURE is negative and easily statistically significant at the 1

percent level for both the GINI and GAP variables, indicating that a more experienced labor force is

associated with reduced inequality, regardless of schooling levels or its distribution. The estimated

quantitative impact is also large. According to the estimated coefficients, a one-standard deviation




3
  The distinction between unconditional and conditional convergence in country income levels provides an apt
analogy (Williamson 1998). Numerous studies fail to find support for unconditional convergence, but find
powerful evidence of convergence after controlling for determinants of steady-state income levels.
4
  Recall that these estimates are based on output per worker, which is generally about twice as high as output per
capita. Also, developing country productivity levels evaluated at purchasing power parity are often more than twice
as high as productivity levels evaluated at current prices and exchange rates (Summers and Heston, 1992).

                                                         16
increase in this variable would lower a country's Gini coefficient by 6.5, and reduce the value of its GAP

variable by 2.8. We will return to the quantitative impact of these cohort size effects, as well as of the

other two explanatory variables, but these cohort size effects appear to be very big.

        Finally, note that Table 4 does not support the view that economic openness is closely connected

with higher inequality. Nor does Table 4 support the more complex predictions of standard trade theory,

namely that poor countries who go open should become less unequal while rich countries who go open

should become more unequal. There are two specifications each under GINI and GAP. The first

specification interacts OPEN with an indicator variable which equals 1 if a country is in the top third of

the labor productivity distribution in 1975-79; this new variable is called RICH. The second specification

interacts OPEN with an indicator variable which equals 1 if a country is in the bottom third of the labor

productivity distribution in 1975-79; this new variable is called POOR. As Table 4 shows (columns 1

through 6), OPENxRICH and OPENxPOOR are always small and insignificant, indicating that the impact

of openness (as measured here) does not vary with income, productivity and human capital endowment.

Standard trade theory (Hecksher-Ohlin and Stolper-Samuelson) does not survive in these data.

        As noted earlier, the standard trade theoretical predictions rest on several ancillary assumptions;

the failure of our empirical result to support those predictions may mean that one or more of the

assumptions is violated. Perhaps more important, our tests may simply lack statistical power against the

null hypothesis that inequality is unrelated to openness. Remember, we interact the Sachs-Warner

openness measure with a dummy variable which selects members of (depending on the specification) the

top or the bottom third of the world income distribution. It turns our that, by this measure, almost all

countries in the top third of the world income distribution are rated as open, and almost all countries in the

bottom third as closed. Because the available data may not permit a sharp test of the hypothesis that the

openness-inequality relationship should vary with the level of development—and in light of the negative


                                                       17
openness results reported above—the remainder of this paper treats the openness-inequality relationship

as independent of level of development.

           Turning to the direct effect of openness, the coefficient on the Sachs-Warner OPEN variable is

negative and statistically significant at the 1 percent level for the GINI variable (columns 1 and 2); and

negative but significant at the 10 percent level in only one of the two specifications for the GAP variable.

According to these estimated coefficients, an economy rated as fully open (dummy = 1) would have a

Gini coefficient of 3.5 below that of an economy rated as fully closed (dummy = 0). Given that the cross-

country standard deviation for Gini coefficients is close to 10, the maximum quantitative impact of 3.5

does not appear to be very large (and only 7 percent of the Latin American Gini in the 1990s). Similarly,

according to the estimated coefficients, the GAP variable is only 14 percent higher for a closed than for

an open economy, a reduction of only about 1.3 percent evaluated at the sample average for the 1990s.5




           4.2. Checking Robustness

           To evaluate the robustness of these results, we experiment with a number of alternative

specifications. We begin by adding dummy variables for sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America to control

for unobserved factors peculiar to these regions (Table 4, columns 3 and 6). Now how do our three main

hypotheses perform? First, and most important for this paper, the link running from older working age

populations to lower inequality remains significant at the 1 percent level. Second, the Kuznets Curve

persists. Deininger and Squire (1998) found that the Kuznets Curve disappeared when African and Latin

American dummies were introduced, a finding consistent with those writing in the 1970s and 1980s in the

wake of Montek Ahluwalia's (1976) work for the World Bank. In contrast, the addition of these regional

dummies to our conditional model makes only modest changes in the evidence supporting the Kuznets


5
    The cross-country standard deviation is close to 5.0.

                                                            18
Curve. For the GINI variable, RGDPW and RGDPW2 are easily significant at the 1 percent level, while

the estimated productivity turning point falls slightly. For the GAP variable, the statistical significance of

the productivity variables falls from the 1 percent level, but still retains significance at the 5 percent level.

Third, the evidence of any link between economic openness and inequality essentially disappears. The

coefficient for OPEN retains its negative sign, but is far from significant statistically.

         We next explore the stability of the empirical relationships over time, estimating the models

separately for each decade. (The estimates will also be influenced by decadal differences in the

availability of the inequality data.) The results lead to some softening of the evidence supporting the

Kuznets Curve (Table 5). For the GINI variable, the coefficients for RGDPW and RGDPW2 are of the

expected signs and jointly statistically significant at or close to the 1 percent level for the 1970s and 1980s,

and are significant at the 10 percent level for the 1960s. However, there is no evidence of a Kuznets

Curve in the 1990s. Similarly, for the GAP variable, coefficients for RGDPW and RGDPW2 are of the

expected signs and jointly statistically significant at the 5 percent level for the 1970s and 1980s, but switch

signs and fall well short of statistical significance for the 1990s. In short, it seems wise to be tentative

even about the emergence of a conditional Kuznets Curve in these data. After all, while the poor results

for the 1960s might reflect the small sample size (in particular, there are few inequality observations for

Africa or Latin America), the results for the 1990s are just plain negative.

         Splitting the sample by decade tends to increase the already strong support for cohort size effects

on inequality. The MATURE variable attains 5 percent significance levels everywhere but once (for the

GAP variable in the 1960s, a period for which the sample size is small). In contrast, the Sachs-Warner

openness measure—treated here as the simple additive variable OPEN since Table 4 rejected complex

interactions—attains a conventional significance level for only one specification, that for the GINI variable

in the 1960s.


                                                         19
         The large theoretical and empirical literature on inequality has identified many other potentially

important inequality determinants. We further examine the robustness of our empirical results by adding a

number of these other determinants to our benchmark equations (Table 6). Francois Bourguignon and

Christian Morisson (1998) focus on the role of relative labor productivity in agriculture and non-agriculture

to capture Kuznets's notion that the differential development of these sectors plays a key role in explaining

inequality. These authors also include arable land per capita to capture a potential link between natural

resource endowment and inequality, and the secondary school enrollment ratio, to capture the intuitive

notion that broader access to education reduces inequality.

         Table 6 confirms the importance of the Bourguignon-Morisson agricultural variables in explaining

inequality. The productivity ratio between industry and agriculture is significant at the 1 percent level,

bigger productivity gaps contributing to greater inequality. The estimated coefficient implies that a

reduction in the productivity ratio from 7.0 to 1.5 (the values, respectively, for Peru and the U.S. in the

early 1990s) would lower a country’s Gini coefficient by 2.2, compared with a cross-sectional standard

deviation of about 9.7. Similarly, a more abundant agricultural endowment is associated with higher

inequality, supporting the view that abundant resources can be a social “curse” as well as a drag on

growth (Sachs and Warner 1995).6 The secondary school enrollment ratio has the expected sign, but it is

significant at the 10 percent level for only the GINI inequality measure. For both the GINI and GAP

variables, however, the Kuznets Curve and cohort size effects remain significant at the 1 percent level,

with little change in the coefficient estimates.

         Note that Table 6 also adds a measure of financial depth (M3/GDP) and political freedom




6
 We experimented by measuring natural resource abundance as the share natural resource exports in GDP, rather
than as agricultural land per capita. The alternative variable was statistically insignificant. (Natural resource exports
include fuels, minerals and primary agricultural products.)

                                                           20
(Freedom),7 both of which were suggested by Squire and two collaborators (Li, Squire and Zou 1998).

Regarding the former, some inequality theories argue that countries with poorly developed financial

systems will have higher inequality since the poor, lacking collateral, will be unable to make profitable

investments. In any case, neither variable is significant in our data. A final specification drops variables

which are insignificant at the 10 percent level, and adds dummy variables for Latin America and Africa,

with little effect on the results.

         The largely negative results described above concerning the relationship between inequality and

economic openness could reflect the choice of a poor or misleading index of the latter. Similarly, the

positive results concerning the relationship between inequality and our measure of cohort size could

reflect a proxy relationship between this variable and some relevant, omitted demographic variable. To

explore these possibilities, we experimented with several alternative measures of openness, and added

several alternative demographic variables to the model.

         As alternative measures of openness, we used measures of the presence of capital controls,8

quantitative and tariff restrictions on imports, the share of imports plus exports in GDP, and the portion of

this variable orthogonal to variables designed to capture a country's "natural" level of openness: the logs

of country size, population, per capita income, per capita crude proven oil reserves, the average distance

from trading partners, and two dummy variables describing, respectively, whether a country is an island or

is landlocked.9 None of the alternative openness measures was significant at the 10 percent level when


7
  FREEDOM is taken from the Barro-Lee data set, and it is a geometric average of two indices, one measuring civil
liberties and one measuring political rights.
8
  The IMF records four policies restricting capital flows: (1) separate exchange rates for capital account transactions,
(2) payment restrictions for current transactions, (3) payment restrictions for capital transactions, (4) mandatory
surrender of export proceeds. For each of the four possible restrictions, we define a dummy variable equal to 1 when
the restriction is in place, and 0 otherwise. We then take the sum of the four dummy variables as our measure of the
presence of capital controls.
9
  Exports plus imports as a share of GDP is often used as a measure of openness—indeed, Summers and Heston
(1995) simply label the variable as OPEN—although it has no clear connection with openness in an economically
relevant sense. Standard trade models imply that a country's product and factor prices might be determined entirely

                                                          21
used in place of the Sachs-Warner OPEN index. 10 The cross-country data, it appears, do not support the

hypothesis that more open economies will suffer from higher inequality. It should be stressed, however,

that the evidence supporting a Kuznets Curve was unaffected during these experiments, remaining

significant at the 1 percent level for both the GAP and GINI variables. The same held true for the cohort

size impact on inequality.

         To check the robustness of the cohort size effect and our choice of MATURE, we added the

following demographic variables to the model, one at a time: the total fertility rate, the population growth

rate, the labor-force growth rate, the infant mortality rate and life expectancy at birth. Our preferred

cohort size measure, of course, depends on the behavior of age-specific fertility and mortality rates over

several previous decades. Even so, MATURE could serve as an excellent point-in-time proxy for such

demographic variables: for the 1990-94 period, the cross-country correlation of MATURE with labor

force growth and the total fertility rate is -0.88 and -0.74, respectively. This point is important because

some models of fertility choice imply that fertility will fall as income inequality declines (Perotti 1996).

According to this reasoning, the negative estimated coefficient for MATURE could be capturing the

endogenous response of fertility to inequality, rather than a cohort size effect, as we have inferred.

Our robustness tests suggest that our inference is correct: our principal cohort size findings are unaffected

by adding the alternative demographic variables to the model. Of the new variables, the total fertility rate

and life expectancy at birth are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, but only when the model




in the world market even with a low trade share, or diverge substantially from their free-trade values even with a high
trade share. Moreover, much of the variation in the trade/GDP ratio is explained by country size and population,
although these variables should be unrelated to a country's trade policy stance. We take the residual of OPEN from
the variables listed in the text as a crude attempt to capture the variation in the trade/GDP ratio potentially explained
by economic policy.
10
   For brevity, we do not report these results here. The specifications correspond to Table 4, columns 1 and 4, but
with only a simple, non-interacted measure of openness.



                                                           22
does not include dummy variables for sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. 11 In contrast, MATURE

is always easily statistically significant at the 1 percent level, with little change in the estimated

coefficient. RGDPW and RGDPW remain jointly significant at the 1 percent level, with little change in

the estimated inequality turning point.

         The results described above provide emphatic support for the link between inequality and cohort

size. They also offer strong, even if not unequivocal, support for a Kuznets Curve. Even so, our

empirical models are not without their flaws. First, the estimates suffer from possible simultaneity bias, as

is true of most other work in this area. The dearth of variables correlated with the relevant explanatory

variables, and clearly uncorrelated with disturbances to inequality, makes it difficult to address this issue in

a satisfactory way. Equally important, the estimates are likely to suffer from omitted-variable bias. Our

strategy thus has been to address this issue by testing the robustness of our principal results to the

inclusion of other variables identified in the literature as potential inequality determinants. An alternative

strategy is to rely on fixed-effects.




4.3. Fixed-Effects Estimates

         Fixed-effects are estimated by adding country-specific dummy variables to the model, and it

removes one potential source of bias: unobserved country-characteristics that (i) affect inequality and (ii)




11
  Again, for brevity, we do not report these results here. The specifications correspond to Table 4, columns 1 and 4,
but with only a simple, non-interacted measure of openness, and including both MATURE and the alternative
demographic variable.



                                                          23
are correlated with included explanatory variables. 12 It is important to keep in mind, however, that any

reduction in bias comes at a significant cost since it removes all cross-sectional variation from the data,

potentially reducing the efficiency of parameter estimates. The loss in efficiency could be sizeable in our

data since most of the variation in inequality and in the principal explanatory variables is across countries,

rather than within countries over time. Table 7 makes this point by showing the fraction of the variance in

GINI, GAP and the explanatory variables accounted for by a set of country dummies alone. The

explained fraction exceeds 85% for both dependent variables and for all five explanatory variables listed

in Table 6 but one, and for that case, OPEN, it still exceeds 75%.

         Given the evidence in Table 7 just summarized, it is quite clear that fixed-effects estimates face a

daunting hurdle. Nonetheless, we press bravely on with the fixed-effects specifications in Table 8. As




12
  Roughly speaking, a fixed-effects model will exhibit smaller expected omitted-variable bias if the fixed-by-country
components of the included and omitted variables are more closely related than the time-varying components of the
included and omitted variables. Consider a simple bivariate example. Suppose we have a panel data for a variable,

Y , generated according to the process: Yi,t = β1X1,i ,t + β2 X2,i,t + µi,t , where µi,t is i.i.d. X1 is observed, but
 X2 is unobserved.   Let    X1 be a random variable generated according to the process: X1,i,t =η1,i +ε1,i,t .    Here,

η1,i is a country-specific disturbance, constant over time, and ε1,i,t is an orthogonal i.i.d. observation-specific
disturbance. Finally, let   X2 be generated according to a similar process.   The simple algebra of omitted variable bias


                                                          σ +ν
implies that, for a pure pooled model:   E(βˆ1 ) = β1 + β2 122 122 .       Here,   σ12 = Cov(η1,η2 ) ,
                                                          σ1 +ν1
σ12 =Var(η1 ) , ν12 = Cov(ε1,t , ε2,t ), and ν12 = Var(ε1 ), with all relationships holding for every individual i.

                                                     ν
For a simple fixed-effects model:   E(βˆ1 ) = β1 + β2 122 .   As a result, the bias is smaller for the fixed effects model
                                                     ν1
        σ12 ν12
when:      >    .
        σ12 ν12


                                                            24
before, we find no “unconditional” Kuznets Curve: however, a Kuznets Curve does emerge when controls

for cohort size, educational supply and openness are added to the model. The estimated inequality turning

point remains high, in fact, somewhat higher than we found for the pooled model. Cohort size effects

remain powerful, with the mature adult populations having lower inequality, and the same is true of high

levels of educational supply (proxied by secondary enrollment rates).

         The residuals from these fixed-effects estimates, however, display pronounced serial correlation.

At best, this suggests that the underlying structural disturbances are serially correlated, leaving estimated

standard errors biased, and invalidating statistical inference. Worse, residual serial correlation often points

to the influence of omitted, serially dependent explanatory variables, raising the prospect that coefficient

estimates as well as standard errors are biased (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993, p. 364). Serial

correlation can be addressed by relying on an autoregressive (AR) or lagged dependent variable (LDV)

specification. The LDV specification is more robust to the presence of omitted, serially dependent

variables, and is generally preferred in modern empirical work. Davidson and MacKinnon (1993, pp. 346-

366) describe how an AR model of a given order can be nested within a corresponding LDV model via

common factor restrictions.13 Standard diagnostic tests favor the LDV model, and the results reported in

Table 8 (columns 3 and 7) are based on it. The LDV specification sharpens our empirical results

considerably. The coefficients for real output per worker and its square display the expected

positive/negative sign pattern in both the GINI and GAP equations, and are jointly significant at the 1

percent level. The estimated inequality turning points are somewhat lower than found using the non-LDV

specification, at about $17,000 for both inequality measures. Our cohort size measure is also significant at



13
  As consecutive annual inequality observations are rare in our data set, we consider only an AR(1) and the
corresponding LDV(1) model. We now consider countries with as few as three complete observations for all
variables (including the lagged dependent variable) in order to avoid restricting the sample too severely. Even so,
the number of countries in the sample falls from 44 to 23 for the GINI equation, and from 37 to 21 for the GAP
equation.

                                                         25
the 1 percent level in both inequality equations. The estimated quantitative impact of the variable,

however, is just over half that found under the earlier, pooled specification. 14 The results for secondary

school enrollment ratios are much stronger than for the corresponding pooled models: the estimated

coefficients are negative and significant at the 1 percent level for both inequality equations, and the

estimated quantitative impacts are more than twice as large. Finally, the new results again fail to confirm

a link between economic openness and inequality.

           Although the LDV estimates represent an improvement on the naive fixed-effects estimates

generated earlier, they will not satisfy readers with delicate econometric scruples. In particular, the

current disturbance is correlated with the mean-deviation for the lagged dependent variable (Nickell

1981). As a result, the estimated coefficient for the lagged dependent variable is biased downward, and

coefficient estimates for other RHS variables are also potentially biased. 15 The econometrician's toolkit

now contains techniques for deriving unbiased panel estimates in an LDV setting (for a review, see

Judson and Owen 1997), but those techniques require a richer data set than that available here. 16




14
     Letting   β̂1represent the estimated coefficient for the lagged dependent variable, and β̂2 the estimated coefficient

                                                                                            βˆ 2
for MATURE, the estimated long-run impact of a change in MATURE is given by
estimates imply that an increase in of one percentage point in MATURE (say, from 1
                                                                                           ˆ . lowers
                                                                                     35−toβ36)
                                                                                               The coefficient
                                                                                                      a country’s GINI
                                                                                            1
coefficient by 0.50 (say, from 40 to 39.5). A similar expression holds for the long-run impact of changes in the other
RHS variables.
15
   Fixed effects transforms all variables into deviations from country-specific means. Consider an LDV model with a
single RHS variable, with a typical transformed observation:

 yi,t − yi = β1(yi,t −1 − yi,−1) + β2 (xi,t −1 − xi,−1) +εi ,t .   Given a total of T observations for each country, we have


                    1 2
E( yi,−1,εi,t ) =       σε , leading to biased parameter estimates.
16                T −1 by Anderson and Hsiao (1981) and Arellano and Bond (1991) instrument for the lagged
   The estimators proposed
dependent variable using deeper lags. The estimator proposed by Arellano and Bover (1995) transforms the data
into deviations from forward-looking means. These estimators are infeasible given an unbalanced panel with few
complete consecutive observations.

                                                               26
However, standard fixed-effects LDV estimates are consistent in T: any bias fades as the time series

dimension of the panel grows large. We exploit this fact by restricting the sample to countries with at least

seven complete observations (that is, current inequality and the first lag of inequality must be observed at

least seven times). The only effect of this is to increase the quantitative and statistical significance of the

estimated Kuznets Curve, the cohort size and the education effects (Table 8, columns 4 and 8).

        The cross-section data, exploited using the pooled model, and the time series data, exploited using

the fixed-effects LDV model, point to powerful Kuznets Curve and cohort size effects. Both approaches

suffer from econometric shortcomings. However, as these shortcomings differ in character, the pooled

and fixed-effects results can be seen as mutually supporting.




4.4. Quantitative Implications

        Tables 9 and 10 explore the impact on inequality of demand (proxied by the Kuznets Curve),

openness and cohort size. The figures in Table 9 show how inequality would be affected were the

regional values of the three explanatory variables replaced by OECD values (columns 1 and 2) or by

Pacific Rim values (columns 3 and 4). The biggest effects coming from this exercise are those associated

with cohort size. Compared with the OECD, both Africa and Latin America had much greater inequality,

the Gini Coefficient being 13.4 points higher in the 1990s in Africa and 17 points higher in Latin America

(Table 1). Table 8 shows that if Africa had the same demographic mix as the OECD, inequality

(measured by the Gini coefficient) would have been lower by 8.58 points, cohort size accounting for

almost two-thirds of the difference between the two regions. If Latin America had the same demographic

mix as the OECD, inequality would have been lower by 8.07 points, cohort size accounting for almost half

of the difference between the two regions. Compared with the Pacific Rim countries, inequality (again

measured by the Gini coefficient) in Africa and Latin America in the 1990s was much higher, bigger by


                                                        27
7.2 points in Africa and by 10.8 points in Latin America (Table 1). Table 8 shows that if Africa had the

same demographic mix as the Pacific Rim, inequality would have been lower by 3.57 points, cohort size

accounting for about half of the difference between the two regions. If Latin America had the same

demographic mix as the Pacific Rim, inequality would have been lower by 3.06 points, cohort size

accounting for almost a third of the difference between the two regions. Openness (OPEN) also helps

account for the inequality differences between regions in Table 8 (whether GINI or GAP), but its

contribution is tiny compared with cohort size. The Kuznets demand effects (RGDP per worker) are also

smaller than cohort size, and they account for none of the differences between Africa and the Pacific

Rim or Latin America and the Pacific Rim.

        While Table 9 explores the impact of the three explanatory variables on between-region inequality

differences in the 1990s, Table 10 explores their impact on within-region inequality changes from the

1970s to the 1990s. Table 1 shows that within-region inequality change over these two decades was small,

and that cohort size changes were serving to raise inequality in Africa, lower it in the OECD and the

Pacific Rim, and to change it not at all in Latin America.




4.5 The Future

        The estimation results can also be used to assess the effect of anticipated demographic change on

inequality over the next half century. As is well known, the currently developed world is greyer than the

currently developing world. The contrast is starkest for the OECD and sub-Saharan Africa. MATURE,

the proportion of the adult population 15-69 who are aged 40-59, stood at 34.7 among OECD countries in

the early 1990s, but at only 23.4 in Africa (Table 11). Even among Pacific Rim countries, the mature

adult share was only 27.7.

        The coming decades will witness substantial convergence among regional age distributions, as


                                                       28
birth rates and adult mortality in the currently developing world continue to fall. 17 In Latin America and

the Pacific Rim, MATURE is expected to rise by about 9 percentage points between the early 1990s and

2025, 33.4 and 36.9, respectively. A further, more modest increase is expected for the years between

2025 and the middle of the century. In Africa, the expected sequence is somewhat different: MATURE

shows a moderate increase between the early 1990s and 2025, but a much larger increase between 2025

and 2050. Among OECD countries, a moderate increase in the mature adult share is expected between

1995 and 2025, with a slight decline in the subsequent decades.

           Our empirical results suggest that these demographic changes will be a powerful force promoting

reduced inequality the world round. The impact should be strongest in the currently developing world,

where the rise in MATURE will be most pronounced. According to our estimates, the rise in the mature

adult share of the labor force, taken by itself, will reduce Latin America's Gini coefficient from 50 to 42.8

by 2025, with a further, more modest decline between 2025 and 2025. The Gini coefficient for Pacific

Rim countries is estimated to fall from a relatively low 39.2 to a still lower 31.4 by 2025, before stabilizing.

Demography is estimated to bring only a modest decline before 2025 in African inequality, with the Gini

coefficient falling to 43.5, from 46.4 in the early 1990s. However, the rapid rise in MATURE during

2025-2050 would push Africa’s Gini coefficient down sharply to 37.8. The OECD, for its part, would see

a moderate decline in inequality up to 2025, followed by a modest rise. Note that these demographic

changes would still leave inequality in Latin America and Africa well above OECD or Pacific Rim levels,

although the gap would be reduced.




                               5. Explaining Cohort Size Effects on Inequality




17
     The figures cited here come from the U.N.'s "medium variant" population projection.

                                                          29
        This section attempts to place the cohort size effects estimated above in context, by drawing on

earlier theoretical and empirical work linking demography and inequality. We find that our estimated

cohort size effects are roughly twice as large as typical estimates from the U.S. micro literature.

The effect of steady-state changes in population growth on aggregate inequality can be broken down into

three channels. First, slower population growth increases the share of older, high-earning workers at the

expense of younger, low-earning workers. Thus, the contribution of age structure to aggregate inequality

is altered, even without any change in the age-earnings profile. Deaton and Paxson (1997) show that

slower steady-state population growth raises aggregate earnings inequality, so long as the age-earnings

profile slopes upward throughout the lifecycle. 18 Second, different age groups might be characterized by

different inequality levels. Deaton and Paxson (1994, 1997) present evidence that income inequality tends

to increase with age for several countries examined.19 Slower population growth, by raising the average

age of the population, should raise aggregate inequality through this channel. Finally, slower population

growth tilts the population age distribution toward older, more experienced cohorts, possibly reducing the

experience premium, and lowering aggregate inequality. As noted above, the consistent empirical finding

is that smaller youth cohorts enjoy higher mean earnings, although estimates of the magnitude of this

effect vary widely .

        The first two channels identified above work through changes in the relative population weights of

age groups which differ in the mean or variance of earnings, treating the age-income profile as fixed (in

both first and second moments). There is no attempt to assess the impact of these two demographic

events on labor markets. The third channel works through the effect of cohort size on the age-income



18
   The effect of slower population growth on inequality, operating through this channel, is ambiguous if labor
earnings tend to decline for during the final years of working life. The ambiguity is compounded if labor-force
participation declines for older adults.
19
   The authors present evidence that within-cohort inequality in consumption, income and earnings tends to rise
with age in the U.S., UK, Taiwan and Thailand.

                                                        30
profile itself; this channel works entirely through labor-market effects. Notably, the first two channels

work against the empirical results found here, implying that a higher share of mature adults in the labor

force should be associated with higher aggregate inequality, while the third channel supports those results.

Which dominates: composition effects or labor-market effects? To our knowledge, nowhere is there an

attempt in the existing literature to assess how these three channels, working together, might affect

aggregate inequality.

          We rely on simulations to answer this question. The simulation results depend on three key sets

of parameters: the age profile of labor productivity over the lifecycle; the age profile of the variance of

earnings over the lifecycle; and the elasticity of substitution in the aggregate production function between

different age groups or experience levels. A high elasticity of substitution implies of course small cohort

size effects. To fix ideas, assume that there are only two age groups, the mature and the young. The



                                                                                                   1/ ε
                                                                              wm γm  Ly      
                                                                                =              
                                                                              wy γ y  Lm     
ratio of expected earnings for old and young individuals is then given by:                                , where
                                                                                               



γ is an age specific productivity parameter, and ε is the elasticity of substitution in production between

young and mature workers. Mature adults enjoy higher expected incomes both because they are more


productive ( γ m   > γ y ) and because (given positive population growth) they are relatively scarce


( Lm   < Ly ).

          For the age profile of the mean and variance of log income, we draw on estimates for the U.S.

from Deaton and Paxson (1994, 1997). Importantly, we treat the estimated mean age-income as


                                                        31
representing the age profile of labor productivity.20 We select various values for the elasticity of

substitution across age groups. We then evaluate the inequality indexes associated with various steady-

state population growth rates (and the corresponding labor-force age distributions). The Appendix

contains a more complete description of the simulation experiments.

         Several simulation details deserve note. First, the age profiles for the mean and variance of log

income refer to total, rather than simply labor, income. This choice corresponds to our country inequality

data, which also refer to total income. Second, we apply the assumed cohort size effects to total, rather

than simply labor, income. We make this simplifying assumption due to lack of information concerning the

evolution of the mix between labor and non-labor income over the course of the lifecycle. If non-labor

income rises to a sizeable fraction of labor income during the later years of working life, the simulations

will overstate the effect of relative cohort size on the age-income profile. Third, in deriving cohort size

effects, we assume that all surviving, non-elderly adults are active in the labor force. We make this

simplifying assumption to avoid having to specify the potential endogenous response of relative labor-force

participation rates to relative cohort size. To the extent that labor-force participation is lower among more

mature adults (boosting their relative scarcity), the simulations will understate the effect of cohort size on

the age-income profile. 21 Finally, estimated age effects on the mean and variance of log earnings are

based on household rather than personal income, with households identified by age of household head. It

is possible, of course, that sustained changes in population growth might have systematic effects on

changes in household composition, but it is beyond the scope of this exercise to evaluate the effect of such



20
   Deaton and Paxson (1994) divide household survey data into age x cohort (year of birth) cells, and calculate the
mean and variance of log income for each cell. The cell observations are then regressed on a set of age and cohort
dummies to derived estimated age effects.
21
   Lower labor-force participation among older adults would raise the level of the age premium. The derivative of
total labor income with respect to cohort size depends on whether labor force participation responds positively or
negatively to higher wages (that is, on whether the substitution effect outweighs the income effect). If the
substitution effect is the stronger, the impact of relative cohort size on relative labor income will be magnified.

                                                         32
changes on aggregate inequality.

        The first three sets of simulations provide a point of reference by assuming perfect substitutability

in production across age groups (Table 12). The first set of simulations considers the effect of population

growth rates on the mix between older, high-earning workers and younger low-earning workers; the

variance of log earnings over the lifecycle is held constant. The second set of simulations considers the

effect of population growth rates on the mix between older, more unequal workers and younger, more

equal workers; the mean of log earnings over the lifecycle is held constant. The third set of simulations

considers these two channels working together. We show the Gini coefficient and the Q5/Q1 income

ratio at population growth rates of 0, 2 and 4% per annum, along with the associated values for

MATURE.

        The most striking result is the small magnitude of changes in inequality working through changes

in the mix between older, high-wage and younger, low-wage workers (row 1). Moving from steady-state

population growth of 0 to 4% indeed lowers inequality, as suggested by Deaton and Paxson, but only from

32.5 to 32.1 for the Gini coefficient and from 5.3 to 5.1 for the Q5/Q1 income ratio. (The low aggregate

inequality statistics are due to the fact that we have held within-cohort inequality constant at the estimated

value for the 20-24 age group.) Additional simulations (not reported here) show that any decline in

inequality would be quite small even if the age-income profile sloped upward throughout the lifecycle,

rather than declining gently after age 50-54.

        The effect of changes in the mix between younger, low-variance and older, high-variance

workers is evidently more powerful (row 2). Moving from 0 to 4% steady-state population growth lowers

inequality appreciably, from 43.1 to 39.7 for the Gini coefficient, and from 9.6 to 7.8 for the Q5/Q1

income ratio. Taking the mean-earnings and variance effects together results in an inequality reduction of

similar magnitude (row 3).


                                                       33
        Could cohort size effects be powerful enough to reverse the conclusion that slower population

growth (and a higher mature adult population share) brings greater inequality? The answer to this

question depends on the elasticity of substitution between older and younger workers. We take an

elasticity of substitution of 3.0 as representative of the estimates from the U.S. micro literature (see the

Appendix). Under that assumption, the addition of cohort size effects is enough to reverse the

presumption that faster population growth reduces aggregate inequality (row 4); inequality now remains

essentially unchanged in moving from 0 to 4% population growth, as measured by both the Gini coefficient

and the Q5/Q1 income ratio.

        Our estimates concerning the effects of cohort size evidently imply a lower elasticity of

substitution across age groups than is typically found in the U.S. micro literature. We have already

observed that such work usually ignores the potential endogeneity of hours and weeks worked,

educational attainment and labor-force participation rates with respect to cohort size, suggesting that

estimates based on total cohort population and income might yield larger elasticities. It is also possible, of

course, that substitutability across age groups is higher in the U.S. than elsewhere, or that the variance of

log income rises more steeply with age in the U.S. than elsewhere. We can only raise these possibilities

here. For now, we merely ask whether our macro results might correspond to a lower—but still

plausible—elasticity of substitution.

        Accordingly, the next simulation considers an elasticity 1.5 (row 5). Cohort size effects now

overwhelm the pure population weight effects. As the steady state population growth rate falls from 4 to

0%, inequality falls substantially, from 49.1 to 44.2 for the Gini coefficient, and from 12.5 to 10.1 for the

Q5/Q1 income ratio. Notably, the bulk of the inequality decline occurs in moving from 4 to 2%

population. Because 4% is an extremely fast population growth rate, and 2% is still considerable, it might

be wondered whether the simulation results are informative about actual country experiences.


                                                        34
           It turns out, however, that the steady state assumption used in generating the simulation results

dramatically understates the typical variation in relative cohort size. For example, in the simulations, the

ratio of the 20-29 age group to the 45-54 age group is 2.84 at a 4% steady-state population growth rate,

and 1.75 at a 2% steady-state growth rate. Yet in 1985, fully 75% of 133 countries had 20-29/45-54 age

ratios above 1.87; 50% were above 2.39; 25% were above 2.69; and 10% were above 2.87. The typical

demographic transition, which features rapid and then slowing population growth, evidently results in

cohort size ratios corresponding to very fast steady-state population growth rates. Thus, the simulation

experiments comparing 4 and 2% steady-state population growth should be quite informative about actual

country experiences.

           Of course, the cohort size would have an even more powerful effect on inequality if the variance

of log income rises less rapidly with age than suggested by Deaton and Paxson’s estimates. The authors

estimate the age-variance profile after controlling for cohort or year-of-birth effects (footnote 19). It is

impossible also to accommodate unrestricted year effects: for any observation, the current year is

collinear with cohort and age. 22 As Deaton and Paxson (1997) note, the result of this normalization is that

aggregate “trends ... are attributed to age and cohort, not to time [year]” (p. 103).23 This observation is

important in light of the well-known upward trend in inequality in the U.S. and, to a lesser extent, other




22
      As Deaton and Paxson note, year effects can be included by restricting them to be orthogonal to a time trend.
23
     In particular, suppose the cross-sectional variance of log income evolves according to:

Var(Yt ) = α + β *TIME+εt , where TIME represents a time trend (1, 2, etc.) and εt is an iid random
disturbance. Suppose also that     β >0  . It is then easy to show that fitting an age-cohort model to this series will
generate an upward tilt in estimated age effects, with positive cohort effects (higher cohort-specific inequality) for
younger cohorts. The reason is that the earliest cohorts are observed only in the first or first several surveys; they
then drop out. Similarly, the latest cohorts are observed only in the last or last several surveys. As a result, earlier
cohorts are “older” on average, allowing age to function as an excellent proxy for the TIME variable. In contrast, age
and year are approximately orthogonal under the alternative age-year model. Were this model fit to the DGP just
described, the upward trend in aggregate inequality would be reflected in an upward tilt in estimated year effects,
while the estimated age effects would be centered around the (assumed true) value of zero.

                                                            35
developed countries, since the 1970s. Preliminary work by one of the authors (Higgins 1999) considers

these issues in more detail, and shows using the CPS data for the U.S. that the estimated upward tilt with

age in variance of log income is much less pronounced under the age-year as opposed to age-cohort

model. Moreover, whereas the age-year model finds an upward trend in aggregate inequality dating from

the late 1970s (reflected in positive, increasing year effects), the age-cohort model finds a strong trend in

cohort effects, with large positive effects for younger cohorts.24

           It should be stressed that the age-cohort and alternative age-year models are algebraic

transformations of each other, and thus, give the same fitted values. This seems to be a rare case in

which a seemingly innocuous normalization has substantive implications. There is no clear metric for

choosing between the two models, but we would suggest considering the plausibility of the corresponding

data generating processes. The estimated year effects from the age-year model appear open to a simple,

plausible interpretation, as summarizing institutional and technological changes affecting inequality. The

estimated cohort effects from the cohort-year model appear to have no ready interpretation, as they imply

that more recent cohorts are (conditional on age) intrinsically more diverse than earlier cohorts.

           We illustrate the importance of this issue by relying on the estimated age effects from the CPS

data for the variance of log income. Slower population growth is now even more strongly linked with

lower inequality: in moving from 4 to 0% population growth, the simulated Gini coefficient falls from 45.9

to 38.2.




                                                6. Conclusion




24
   Indeed, under the age-cohort model, the standard deviation of log income, conditional on age, is estimated to be
0.37 log points higher for the 1975-79 cohort than for the 1915-19 cohort.

                                                         36
          The empirical results presented in this paper provide strong support for cohort size effects on

inequality the world round: large mature working age cohorts are associated with lower aggregate

inequality, and large young adult cohorts are associated with higher aggregate inequality. In addition, the

paper reports strong, even if not unequivocal, evidence that inequality follows the inverted-U pattern

described by Simon Kuznets, tending to rise as a country passes through the early stages of development,

and tending to fall as a country passes through the later stages. In contrast with most previous work on

the subject, our evidence in favor of the Kuznets hypothesis comes from examining the inequality-

development relationship conditional on other variables. Finally, consistent with much of recent inequality

debate about rising wage inequality in the US and in other OECD economies in the 1980s, we find only

limited support for the hypothesis that a policy commitment to globalization has an impact on inequality.

          This paper confirms a powerful world-wide connection between cohort size and inequality. Yet,

that finding must be accompanied by an important caveat, which, in turn, suggests an agenda. The paper

explores the connection using aggregate or economy-wide inequality data. The cohort-size hypothesis,

however, concerns the relationship between relative size and the slope of the age-earnings profile.

Aggregate inequality data provides only an indirect window to look in on such cohort size effects. A

definitive analysis of cohort size effects awaits the appearance of internationally comparable age-earnings

profile data. 25




25
   In this connection, the data developed under the Luxembourg Income Study and the World Bank’s LSMS study
represent rich potential resources.

                                                       37
                                                       References




Anand, S. and S. Kanbur (1993), “Inequality and Development: A Critique,” Journal of Development Economics 41,

         19-43.

Anderson, J. E. and J. P. Neary (1994), "Measuring the Restrictiveness of Trade Policy," The World Bank Economic

         Review 8, 151-69.

Anderson, T.W. and C. Hsiao (1981), “Estimation of Dynamic Models with Error Components,” Journal of the

         American Statistical Association 76, 589-606.

Ahluwalia, M. (1976), “Inequality, Poverty and Development,” Journal of Development Economics 3, 307-42.

Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an

         Application to Employment Data,” Review of Economic Studies 58, 277-297.

Arellano, M. and O. Bover (1995), “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of Error-Components

         Models,” Journal of Econometrics 68, 29-51.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1994), Data Set for a Panel of 138 Countries , available from the National Bureau of

         Economic Research at: http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/zip .

Bloom, D. and J. G. Williamson (1997), “Demographic Change and Human Resource Development,” Ch. 3 in Emerging

         Asia: Change and Challenges (Manila: Asian Development Bank).

--- (1998), “Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging Asia,” World Bank Economic Review 12,

         419-55.

Borjas, G. (1994), “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature 32, 1667-717.

Borjas, G., R. Freeman and L. Katz (1992), "On the Labor Market Impacts of Immigration and Trade," in G. Borjas and

         R. B. Freeman (eds.), Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and

         Source Areas (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Bourguignon, F. and C. Morison (1998), “Inequality and Development: The Role of Dualism,” Journal of

         Development Economics 57(2), 233-258.

Chenery, H. B. et al. (1974), Redistribution with Growth (London: Oxford University Press).


                                                          38
Davidson, R. and J. Mackinnon (1993), Estimation and Inference in Econometrics (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Davis, D. R. (1996), "Trade Liberalization and Income Distribution," NBER Working Paper 5693, National Bureau of

         Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. (August).

Deaton, A. S. and C. H. Paxson (1994), Intertemporal Choice and Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy 102(3),

         437-467.

--- (1995), “Saving, Inequality, and Aging: An East Asian Perspective,” Asia-Pacific Economic Review 1, 7-19.

--- (1997) The Effects of Economic and Population Growth on National Saving and Inequality, Demography 34(1),

         97-114.

Deininger, K. and L. Squire (1996), "A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality," World Bank Economic Review

         10, 565-91.

--- (1998), “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues: Inequality and Growth,” Journal of Development Economics 57(2),

         259-288.

Easterlin, R. A. (1980), Birth and Fortune: The Impact of Numbers on Personal Welfare (New York: Basic Books).

Freeman, R. (1979), The Effects of Demographic Factors on Age-Earnings Profiles, Journal of Human Resources 14,

         289-318.

--- (1995), "Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 15-32.

Gastil, Raymond and Lindsay Wright (1988, etc.), Freedom in the World (Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing

         Group).

Judson, R. and A. Owen (1997), “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data Models: A Practical Guide for Macroeconomists,”

         Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series mimeo.

Katz, L. and K. Murphy (1992), "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors," Quarterly

         Journal of Economics , 107, 35-78.

Kosters, M. H. (1994), "An Overview of Changing Wage Patterns in the Labor Market," in J. Bhagwati and M. H.

  Kosters (eds.), Trade and Wages: Leveling Wages Down? (Washington, D.C.: AEI Press).

Kuznets, S. (1955), "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," American Economic Review 45, 1-28.




                                                         39
Lawrence, L. and M. Slaughter (1993), Lawrence, L. and M. Slaughter [1993], "International Trade and American

         Wages in the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

         Microeconomics 2: 161-226.

Li, H., L. Squire and H. Zou (1998), Explaining International and Intertemporal Variations in Income Inequality,

         Economic Journal 108, 26-43.

Lindert, P. H. (1997), "Three Centuries of Inequality in Britain and America," in A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon

         (eds.), Handbook of Income Distribution (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Lindert, P. H. and J. G. Williamson (1985), Growth, Equality and History, Explorations in Economic History 22, 341-

         77.

Macunovich, D. J. (1998), Relative Cohort Size and Inequality in the United States, American Economic Review 88,

         259-64.

Macunovich, D. J. (1999), ” The Fortune of One’s Birth: Relative Cohort Size and the Youth Labor Market in the

         U.S.," Journal of Population Economics , forthcoming.

Murphy, K. and F. Welch (1992), The Structure of Wages, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 285-326.

Nickell, S. (1981), “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica 49, 1417-1426.

Perotti, R. (1996), "Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy," Journal of Economic Growth 1, 149-87.

Richardson, J. D. (1995), "Income Inequality and Trade: How to Think, What to Conclude," Journal of Economic

         Perspectives 9, 33-55.

Robbins, D. (1996), "Trade, Trade Liberalization and Inequality in Latin America and East Asia—Synthesis of Seven

         Countries," Harvard Institute for International Development, mimeo. (March).

Sachs, J. and A. Warner (1995), "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration," Brookings Papers on

         Economic Activity 1, 1-68.

Schultz, T. P. (1998), "Inequality in the Distribution of Personal Income in the World: How It Is Changing and Why,"

         Journal of Population Economics 11, 307-44.

Summers and Heston (1991), “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International Comparisons,

         1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2), 327-368.


                                                          40
--- (1995), Penn World Table (Mark 5.6), available on diskette from the National Bureau of Economic Research,

                  Cambridge, Massachusetts.

United Nations (1996), Age and Sex Quinquennial, 1950-2050 (New York: United Nations).

United Nations (1996), Demographic Indicators, 1950-2050 (New York: United Nations).

Welch, F. (1979), "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies Financial Bust," Journal of Political

         Economy 87, S65-97.

Williamson, J. G. (1997), "Globalization and Inequality, Past and Present," World Bank Research Observer 12, 117-35.

--- (1998), "Growth, Distribution, and Demography: Some Lessons from History," Explorations in Economic History

         35, 241-71.

Wood, A. (1994), North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a Skill-Driven World

         (Oxford: Clarendon Press).

--- (1995), "How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers," Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 57-80.

World Bank (1998), World Development Indicators on CD-ROM (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank).

</ref_section>




                                                         41
                                         Appendix

         Data Sources. Inequality data come from Deininger and Squire (1996). The data can be downloaded from

the World Bank web site: http://www.worldbank.org/growth/dddeisqu.htm. Demographic data are taken from the

United Nations diskettes, Sex and Age Quinquennial, 1950-2050 and Demographic Indicators, 1950-2050. Data

concerning real output per worker and exports plus imports as a share of GDP come from the data diskette Penn

World Tables (Mark 5.6), available from the National Bureau of Economic Research. Our principal measure of

openness comes from Sachs and Warner (1995). Data concerning the incidence of capital controls were developed

by the International Monetary Fund, compiled by Leonardo Bartolini and Alan Drazen, and obtained from these

authors via personal communication. Data concerning political rights and civil liberties were taken from Barro and

Lee (1994). The Barro-Lee data set is available from the NBER web site at: http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/zip .

The original source of the political rights and civil liberties data is Gastil and Wright (1988, etc.). All other data come

from the World Bank CD-ROM, World Development Indicators: 1998.

         Simulation Details. The simulation experiments concern a population ranging in age from 20 to 79. The

parameters describing the age profile for the mean and variance of log income are taken from Deaton and Paxson’s

(1994, 1997) estimates for the U.S. The parameters are taken from 1994, Table 1, and from various graphs in 1994,

1997 via visual approximation. Deaton and Paxson’s estimates are quite similar to the authors’ own estimates using

the CPS data for the U.S. As noted in the test, we use the estimated age profile of mean log income as a baseline;

and then alter this profile to reflect different experimental assumptions about the age distribution of the labor force

and the elasticity of substitution in production between different age groups. The key exception here is that we

assume that persons aged 65-79 are no longer in the labor force. For this age group, we begin with mean log income

for 64-year-olds, and adjust it downward using the appropriate age factors estimated by Deaton and Paxson.

         An assumed steady-state population growth rate fixes the population age distribution at zero mortality.

We then apply a Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (1996) mortality table to find the surviving population for

each age group. Finally, we calculate age-specific probabilities of household headship using the CPS data for the

U.S., and apply these probabilities to the surviving population to generate experimental survey samples. (Note that

this procedure affects the number of observations by age group, not the total population by age group; the latter is


                                                            42
relevant for assessing cohort size effects. ) We adopt this procedure because the Deininger-Squire dataset generally

reports inequality at the household rather than individual level. Sampling the entire surviving population has little

effect on our results.

         The final simulation experiment relies on age-year rather than age-cohort model to assess the age profile of

the variance of log income. We begin by estimating age-year and age-cohort models for the variance of log income

using the 1967-1997 CPS data for the U.S. We break age groups and cohorts into five-year periods. As noted

earlier, our estimates for the age-cohort model appear very close to those reported by Deaton and Paxson (1994,

1997). To ensure comparability with the earlier experiments, we then adjust the Deaton-Paxson age effects to reflect

the difference we find in age effects from the age-year and age-cohort models.

         Cohort Effects in the Micro Literature. Finis Welch (1979), in a seminal study on the subject, takes as his

measure of cohort size the percentage of all workers belonging to a given age x education group. For new entrants

to the labor force, he finds that the elasticity of annual earnings with respect to cohort size ranges from -.240 for high

school dropouts to -.907 for college graduates (Table 9, p. S90). However, he finds that the effects of cohort size

diminish over the lifecycle: the permanent effect for high school dropouts is in fact the smallest, at -.252; the effect

for high school graduates (no college) is the smallest, at –0.08.

         Welch’s estimates do not correspond directly with the elasticity of substitution framework used in the

simulations. In particular, the dependent variable is actual rather than relative wages. Moreover, in assessing the

elasticity of substitution across age groups, we must remember that an increase in the young adult age share implies

a decrease in other age shares. We proceed as follows to translate Welch’s results into our framework. First, we

calculate the labor force age shares associated with population growth of 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4% per annum, focusing on

the 20-24 and 50-54 age groups. (For simplicity, we assume zero mortality and 100% labor force participation.) At

successive population growth rates (and the associated labor force shares) we apply the average entry elasticity

across education classes to the wages of the 20-24 age group, and the average permanent elasticity across age

groups to the wages of the 50-54 age group. We then compare the change in the log wage gap with the change in

the log labor force ratio to calculate implicit elasticities of substitution. The implicit elasticities range from 2.6, in

moving from 0 to 1% population, to 2.9, in moving from 3 to 4% population growth.


                                                              43
         Murphy and Welch (1992) estimate elasticities of complementarity across various age and education

groups. Using these estimates, the authors assess the labor market effects of increasing the relative size of younger

cohorts by 20%. They find that the wages of younger high school graduates would fall by 6% relative to older

graduates, implying an elasticity of substitution of 3.3. They also find that the wages of younger college graduates

would fall by between 9 and 15% relative to older graduates, implying an elasticity of substitution of between 2.2 and

1.3.

         Katz and Murphy (1992) directly estimate the effect of changes in relative cohort size (measured by hours

worked) and relative hourly wages. Aggregating across education categories, the authors find an elasticity of

substitution of 2.9 (p. 76, footnote 24).

         Macunovich (1998,1999) relies on the gross fertility rate during a cohort’s year of birth as a measure of

cohort size. (The gross fertility rate is the number of births per female population aged 15-44.) This measure has no

natural interpretation in terms of relative steady-state cohort size. Holding mortality constant, a high steady-state

gross fertility rate implies a high steady-state population growth rate, making older workers will be relatively scarce.

Yet the gross fertility rate at birth would be the same for both older and younger workers. As a result, we are unable

to interpret Macunovich’s estimates in an elasticity of substitution framework. It should be noted, however, that her

estimates imply quite large cohort size effects. For the period since 1960, the estimated differential impact on the

demographically most favored and least favored cohorts is estimated to fall between 27% and 15% of labor

earnings.26




26
   Note that First, Macunovich’s coefficient estimates (1998, Table 1) pertain to normalized variables, that is,
variables transformed to be N(0,1). A one standard deviation increase in the gross fertility rate at year of birth is
estimated to reduce log cohort earnings by between -.047 and -.074, depending on the specification. The gross
fertility rate at year of birth for adults in the labor force (for any part of) the period since 1960 ranges between 134
and 67, a gap of approximately 3.8 standard deviations. The maximum differential impact on log wages then ranges
between 0.18 and 0.28, for an impact in levels of between 20 and 32 percentage points. Also, note that some of
Macunovich’s specifications includes the first and/or second differences of the gross fertility rate in addition to the
level. These additional variables also have no natural interpretation in terms of relative cohort size.

                                                           44
Table 1
Inequality: Patterns by Region and Decade

                               1960s               1970s              1980s              1990s
Full Sample
  Gini Coefficient                     37.7               38.8               37.6              39.7
                                     (10.3)             (9.71)             (9.20)            (9.68)
  Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        9.25               9.74                8.2              8.86
                                     (7.68)             (6.41)             (4.95)            (5.86)
  Countries                              37                 61                  73               63
OECD
  Gini Coefficient                     34.7               33.6               32.6              33.0
                                     (7.86)             (5.72)             (4.30)            (4.86)
  Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        6.94               6.64               6.20              6.49
                                     (3.73)             (2.60)             (1.79)            (2.28)
  Countries                              12                 19                  20               13
Africa
  Gini Coefficient                     45.3               49.8               41.6              46.4
                                     (10.5)             (8.39)             (7.74)            (9.35)
  Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        12.2               17.5               9.63            12.88
                                     (9.01)             (3.17)             (5.81)            (8.91)
  Countries                                4                  4                 11               15
Latin America
  Gini Coefficient                     53.6               50.4               50.1                50
                                     (5.26)             (4.94)             (5.47)            (5.35)
  Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        21.2               17.0               16.2              13.3
                                     (10.9)             (6.54)             (5.26)            (3.30)
  Countries                                6                12                  12               10
Pacific Rim
  Gini Coefficient                     37.4               39.0               38.5              39.2
                                     (7.05)             (7.03)             (6.76)            (7.45)
  Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        8.28               8.96               7.88              8.14
                                     (3.89)             (3.98)             (3.10)            (4.25)
  Countries                                6                  9                 10               7

Mean values, with standard deviations in parentheses. See the Appendix for data
sources. For each decade-region pair, the number of countries with available
inequality data is indicated under that line item. Note that apparent trends in inequality
may reflect changes in data availability.
Table 2
Income, Openess and Cohort Size: Patterns by Region and Decade
                                1960s              1970s             1980s              1990s
Full Sample
  RGDP per Worker                     7,425            10,063            11,237                12,265
                                    (6,580)            (8,222)           (9,074)               (9.965)
  Open                                0.329              0.383             0.425                 0.648
                                    (0.422)            (0.481)           (0.462)               (0.456)
  Mature                                28.4              27.5               26.9                 27.1
                                      (4.66)            (4.10)             (4.56)               (5.02)
OECD
  RGDP per Worker                   16,194             21,734            24,860                28,083
                                    (5,836)            (5,999)           (6,052)               (6,835)
  Open                                0.825              0.900             0.925                   1.0
                                    (0.337)            (0.308)           (0.236)                 (0.0)
  Mature                                34.3              32.9               32.4                 33.8
                                      (2.92)            (2.14)             (2.93)               (3.04)
Africa
  RGDP per Worker                     2,398              3,272             3,490                 3,380
                                    (1,765)            (2,584)           (2,755)               (3,056)
  Open                                0.032              0.045             0.141                 0.318
                                    (0.113)            (0.213)           (0.305)               (0.454)
  Mature                                25.5              25.3               24.4                 23.7
                                      (2.20)            (1.99)             (2.07)               (1.95)
Latin America
  RGDP per Worker                     8,059            10,413            10,364                  9,334
                                    (5,109)            (5,565)           (5,173)               (4,217)
  Open                                0.320              0.227             0.273                 0.822
                                    (0.407)            (0.413)           (0.349)               (0.278)
  Mature                                25.2              24.3               23.8                 24.3
                                      (1.47)            (1.20)             (1.92)               (2.24)
Pacific Rim
  RGDP per Worker                     3,995              6,995           10,472                14,612
                                    (2,071)            (4,166)           (6,341)               (9,046)
  Open                                0.490              0.900             0.900                 0.900
                                    (0.375)            (0.316)           (0.316)               (0.316)
  Mature                                27.4              26.8               26.5                 27.9
                                      (2.47)            (3.05)             (3.91)               (4.42)

Mean values, with standard deviations in parentheses. See the Appendix for data sources.
All available data are used, even if no corresponding inequality data are available for some
country-decade pairs.
Table 3
The Unconditional Kuznets Curve


                            Gini Coefficient                          Q5/Q1 Income Ratio
RGDPW                          -7.14E-02        -2.55E-02                 4.77E-03       1.290E-03
                                   (0.31)           (0.13)                   (0.31)          (0.10)
RGDPW2                         -1.34E-02        -9.52E-03                -8.08E-04        -4.22E-04
                                   (2.01)           (1.67)                   (1.87)           (1.16)
  Joint significance              <.0001           <.0001                    <.0001            .0013
  Turning Point                        NA               NA                   $2,952          $1,528
Africa dummy                                         10.64                                     0.614
                                                    (6.22)                                    (5.45)
Latin dummy                                          12.63                                     0.751
                                                   (10.99)                                    (8.94)

R2 adj.                             0.373            0.624                     0.336           0.587
Observations                          223              223                       196             196

The Q5/Q1 income ratio is measured in logs. Absolute t-statistics, in parentheses, are based on
heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors. Data are pooled by decade, with countries contributing
between one and four observations. All specifications include the following dummy variables: (i)
inequality data based on expenditure rather than income; (ii) inequality measured at household rather
than personal level; (iii) inequality data based on gross rather than net income; (iv) socialist
government; and (v) - (vii) decade. See the Appendix for data sources and definitions.
Table 4
The Kuznets Curve, Openness and Cohort Size


                            Gini Coefficient                                           Q5/Q1 Income Ratio
RGDPW                                0.739           0.801            0.580                4.61E-02        5.14E-02      3.07E-02
                                    (3.22)          (3.63)           (2.77)                   (2.90)          (3.51)        (2.29)
RGDPW2                         -2.57E-02        -2.65E-02       -2.01E-02                 -1.38E-03       -1.49E-03      -9.34E-04
                                   (4.16)           (4.23)          (2.74)                    (3.34)          (3.72)         (2.02)
  Joint significance              <.0001           <.0001            .0002                     .0030           .0010        .0441
  Turning Point                  $14,377         $15,113          $14,428                   $16,703         $17,248       $16,435
Open                                 -3.74           -3.71            -1.14                   -0.152           -0.179    -2.04E-02
                                    (2.30)          (2.47)           (0.92)                   (1.50)           (1.93)        (0.24)
Open x Rich                           1.10                                                 2.08E-02
                                    (0.54)                                                    (0.16)
Open x Poor                                           1.58                                                      0.177
                                                    (0.39)                                                     (0.61)
Mature                               -1.15           -1.13           -0.852                -6.57E-2         -6.52E-2      -4.44E-2
                                    (7.65)          (7.95)           (6.89)                   (6.69)           (7.39)        (4.98)
Africa dummy                                                           9.71                                                  0.555
                                                                     (5.81)                                                 (4.95)
Latin dummy                                                            9.02                                                  0.550
                                                                     (6.92)                                                 (5.39)

R2 adj.                             0.554            0.554            0.688                    0.494            0.496        0.627
Observations                          219              219              219                      193              193          193

The Q5/Q1 income ratio is measured in logs. Absolute t-statistics, in parentheses, are based on heteroskedasticity-
corrected standard errors. Data are pooled by decade, with countries contributing between one and four observations.
All specifications include the following dummy variables: (i) inequality data based on expenditure rather than income;
(ii) inequality measured at household rather than personal level; (iii) inequality data based on gross rather than net
income; (iv) socialist government; and (v) - (vii) decade. See the Appendix for data sources and definitions.
Table 5
Stability of Estimates Over Time
                                                                                          Dependent Variable
                                              Gini Coefficient                                                             Q5/Q1 Income Ratio
                                     1960s            1970s            1980s            1990s                     1960s            1970s            1980s            1990s
RGDPW                                  1.20             1.29            0.565            0.175                6.32E-02        9.810E-02         4.05E-02        -1.88E-02
                                     (2.10)           (2.74)           (2.07)           (0.29)                   (0.86)           (2.33)           (2.26)           (0.39)
RGDPW2                          -3.16E-02        -4.32E-02        -2.13E-02        -9.91E-03                 -6.95E-04        -2.92E-03        -1.21E-03         9.55E-05
                                    (2.01)           (1.67)           (4.32)           (0.71)                    (0.29)           (2.44)           (2.45)           (0.09)
  Joint significance                 .0997            .0124            .0029            .4023                     .2799            .0498            .0480            .4894
  Turning Point                   $18,987          $14,931          $13,263           $8,829                   $45,468          $16,798          $16,736                  NA
Open                                  -9.63            -4.55          -0.348             -1.23                    -0.699           -0.178       1.23E-02        -1.02E-02
                                     (2.17)           (1.48)          (0.16)            (0.31)                    (1.69)           (0.88)          (0.10)           (0.03)
Mature                                -1.22            -1.09          -0.734             -1.39                 -8.73E-2         -7.09E-2         -4.76E-2         -8.74E-2
                                     (2.08)           (2.77)          (2.93)            (4.43)                    (1.34)           (2.30)           (3.24)           (3.85)

R2 adj.                              0.539            0.620            0.629            0.399                      0.367            0.553            0.581            0.357
Observations                            34               56               69               60                         28               49               64               52

The Q5/Q1 income ratio is measured in logs. Absolute t-statistics, in parentheses, are based on heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors. Data are pooled by
decade, with countries contributing between one and four observations. All specifications include the following dummy variables: (i) inequality data based on
expenditure rather than income; (ii) inequality measured at household rather than personal level; (iii) inequality data based on gross rather than net income; and (iv)
socialist government. See the Appendix for data sources and definitions.
Table 6
Extending the Basic Model
                                                                          Dependent Variable
                                              Gini Coefficient                                             Q5/Q1 Income Ratio
RGDPW                                  1.04             1.00            0.600                 5.22E-02         4.85E-02         3.03E-05
                                     (4.63)           (4.22)           (2.54)                    (3.43)           (2.92)           (1.74)
RGDPW2                          -3.02E-02        -2.95E-02         -1.94E-02                 -1.40E-03        -1.33E-03        -8.52E-10
                                    (4.54)           (4.20)            (2.88)                    (3.19)           (2.84)           (1.79)
  Joint significance                <.0001           <.0001             .0126                     .0028            .0130            .1893
  Turning Point                   $17,219          $16,949          $15,464                    $18,643          $18,233          $17,782
Mature                                -1.15            -1.09           -0.945                  -8.95E-2       -8.94E-02        -6.34E-02
                                     (6.01)           (5.06)           (6.03)                     (6.74)          (6.19)           (5.26)
Secondary Enroll.                 -6.61E-2         -4.92E-2                                    -5.39E-4        6.67E-04
                                     (1.74)           (1.17)                                      (0.22)          (0.25)
Ind. / Agr. Labor Prod.               0.398            0.370            0.300                   1.80E-2        1.61E-02         8.56E-03
                                     (2.61)           (2.33)           (2.12)                     (2.16)          (1.72)           (1.05)
Arable Land / Pop.                     1.22             1.52            0.657                   9.37E-2             0.114       5.76E-02
                                     (3.16)           (3.52)           (1.82)                     (3.57)           (3.66)          (2.52)
M3 / GDP                                         -1.02E-02                                                    -1.03E-03
                                                     (0.32)                                                       (0.48)
Freedom                                                0.430                                                   2.04E-02
                                                      (1.03)                                                      (0.67)
Africa dummy                                                             8.50                                                         0.50
                                                                       (4.83)                                                       (3.93)
Latin dummy                                                              7.76                                                         0.41
                                                                       (5.50)                                                       (3.49)

R2 adj.                               0.561            0.526            0.643                     0.541             0.502            0.586
Observations                            162              153              164                       141               132              143

The Q5/Q1 income ratio is measured in logs. Absolute t-statistics, in parentheses, are based on heteroskedasticity-corrected standard
errors. Data are pooled by decade, with countries contributing between one and four observations. All specifications include the following
dummy variables: (i) inequality data based on expenditure rather than income; (ii) inequality measured at household rather than personal
level; (iii) inequality data based on gross rather than net income; (iv) socialist government; and (v) - (vii) decade. See the Appendix for
data sources and definitions.
Table 7
How Large are Country Fixed-Effects?

Fraction of Sample Variance Explained by Country Dummies

Dependent Variables
 Gini                                        0.874
 Gap                                         0.878

Explanatory Variables
 RGDP                                        0.932
           2
 RGDP                                        0.895
 Open                                        0.753
 Mature                                      0.874
 Secondary Enroll.                           0.868


 The figures above refer to the R2 obtained when each variable is regressed on a
 constant and a set of country dummies. The calculations are based on annual data.
 Only countries which have four or more complete observations for the Gini coefficient
 and all five explanatory variables are included, to correspond with the data used in the
 fixed-effects estimates reported in Table 4. This left 449 observations, covering 44
 countries. For our Gap variable, there were 387 observations, covering 37 countries.
Table 8
Fixed-Effects Specifications
                                                                           Dependent Variable
                                               Gini Coefficient                                                            Q5/Q1 Income Ratio
LDV                                                                      0.372          0.453                                                        0.296                0.389
                                                                        (4.40)         (5.74)                                                       (4.11)               (6.01)
RGDPW                             3.98E-02              0.405            0.349          0.956                 4.27E-03         1.76E-02         2.78E-02          5.06E-02
                                     (0.30)            (2.33)           (1.43)         (4.08)                    (0.42)           (1.49)           (2.12)            (4.04)
RGDPW2                           -3.09E-03        -8.82E-03         -1.04E-02 -1.81E-02                      -1.93E-04        -4.56E-04        -8.04E-04         -1.13E-03
                                     (1.12)           (2.69)            (2.52)    (3.97)                         (1.03)           (2.11)           (3.43)            (4.22)
  Joint significance                0.3014             .0227             .0029         .0002                    0.4493           0.0902            <.0001                .0001
  Turning point                      $6,440         $22,959           $16,779       $26,409                    $11,062          $19,298           $17,289          $22,389
Open                                                     1.03            0.114        -0.385                                    -5.76E-3        2.13E-02          1.81E-02
                                                       (1.47)           (.196)        (.458)                                     (0.111)          (0.526)           (0.432)
Mature                                                 -0.183           -0.309        -0.462                                    -6.99E-3       -2.33E-02         -2.79E-02
                                                       (2.21)           (2.96)        (4.84)                                       (1.01)          (3.75)            (4.43)
Secondary Enroll.                                   -6.56E-2             -.161        -0.202                                    -2.24E-3       -8.78E-03         -1.17E-02
                                                       (3.00)           (3.89)        (4.41)                                       (1.47)          (3.29)            (4.33)

R2 adj.                               0.909             0.915            0.957         0.921                      0.872             0.880            0.946               0.939
DW Statistic                           1.46              1.47               NA            NA                       1.54              1.53               NA                  NA
Countries                                44                44               23            10                         37                37               21                  10
Observations                            459               449              216           162                        394               387              202                 156

The Q5/Q1 income ratio is measured in logs. Absolute t-statistics, in parentheses, are based on heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors. For the model
without a lagged dependent variable (LDV), the panel was restricted to countries with at least four complete observations. For the LDV model, the panel was
restricted to countries with at least three complete observations in columns three and six, and seven complete observations in columns four and eight. For the
LDV model, note that coefficient estimates and absolute t-statistics (other than for the LDV itself) pertain to the sum of the estimated coefficients for the
current variable value and its first lag. Similarly, the test for the joint significance of RGDPW and RGDPW2 refers to the joint restriction that the coefficients for
RGDPW and its first lag sum to zero, and that the coefficients for RGDPW2 sum to zero. In addition to the fixed country effects, all models also included a set
of year dummies.
Table 9
Regional Counterfactuals
                                     OECD Variable Values                                  Pacific Rim Variable Values
                                      Gini                     Q5 / Q1                      Gini                        Q5 / Q1
                                   Coefficient                  Ratio                    Coefficient                     Ratio
Full Sample
   RGDP per Worker                           -5.11                    -1.40                         0.09                        0.07

   Open                                      -1.23                    -0.47                        -0.73                       -0.28

   Mature                                    -8.71                    -3.56                        -0.61                       -0.31

OECD
   RGDP per Worker                              NA                       NA                         5.19                        1.28

   Open                                         NA                       NA                         0.49                        0.14

   Mature                                       NA                       NA                         8.11                        3.99

Africa
   RGDP per Worker                           -1.89                     0.71                         3.30                        3.39

   Open                                      -2.15                    -1.18                        -1.66                       -0.92

   Mature                                  -13.55                     -7.10                        -5.45                       -3.54

Latin America
   RGDP per Worker                           -4.59                    -1.62                         0.61                        0.69

   Open                                      -0.81                    -0.47                        -0.31                       -0.18

   Mature                                  -13.19                     -7.20                        -5.08                       -3.45

Pacific Rim
   RGDP per Worker                           -5.19                    -1.34                           NA                          NA

   Open                                      -0.49                    -0.18                           NA                          NA

   Mature                                    -8.11                    -3.10                           NA                          NA

The figures above show how inequality would be affected were regional variable values replaced by the values for, respectively, the OECD and the
Pacific Rim. Real GDP per Worker, Open and Mature are averages for the 1990-94 period, as reported in Table 2 . The calculations are based on
the pooled regression estimates, reported in Table 3 , columns 3 and 6. See the Appendix for details as to data sources and variable definitions.
Table 10
The Impact of Demand, Globalization and
Cohort Size on Inequality: 1970s to 1990s
                                              Change, 1970s to 1990s
                                            Gini
                                          Coefficient                         Q5 / Q1 Gap
Full Sample

   RGDP per Worker                                    0.76                                 0.71

   Open                                               0.39                                 0.24

   Mature                                             0.26                                 0.15

OECD
   RGDP per Worker                                   -1.91                                -0.39

   Open                                               0.15                                 0.06

   Mature                                            -0.58                                -0.23

Africa

   RGDP per Worker                                    0.08                                 0.10

   Open                                               0.40                                 0.40

   Mature                                             1.02                                 0.98

Latin America
   RGDP per Worker                                   -0.44                                -0.60

   Open                                               0.88                                 0.88

   Mature                                             0.00                                 0.00

Pacific Rim
   RGDP per Worker                                    2.77                                 2.57

   Open                                               0.00                                 0.00

   Mature                                            -0.70                                -0.36

The figures above show the estimated impact on regional inequality of changes in RGDPW,
Open and Mature, comparing 1970-79 with 1990-94. The figures rely on the coefficient
estimates reported in Table 7, columns 3 and 6, and the regional data reported in Table 2.
Note that these "fitted value" inequality changes are based on all available data for the three
explanatory variables; and cannot be directly compared with measured regional inequality
changes (see Table 1), which are based on shifting sample of fewer countries.
Table 11
The Future: Cohort Size Effects on Inequality

                               1990s                     2025                      2050
Full Sample
 Mature                               27.1                      33.8                      35.8
 Gini Coefficient                     39.7                      34.5                      32.9

 Q5 / Q1 Ratio                         8.9                       6.7                       6.1
OECD
 Mature                               33.8                      38.7                      36.7
 Gini Coefficient                     33.0                      29.6                      31.3
 Q5 / Q1 Ratio                         6.5                       5.4                       5.9
Africa
 Mature                               23.7                      26.8                      33.6
 Gini Coefficient                     46.4                      43.5                      37.8
 Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        12.9                      11.0                       8.1
Latin America
 Mature                               24.3                      33.4                      36.4
 Gini Coefficient                       50                      42.8                      40.3
 Q5 / Q1 Ratio                        13.3                       9.0                       7.9
Pacific Rim
 Mature                               27.9                      36.9                      36.9
 Gini Coefficient                     39.2                      31.4                      31.4
 Q5 / Q1 Ratio                         8.1                       5.3                       5.3

21st-century age distributions are taken from the U.N.'s "medium variant" population
projection. The estimated effects of expected demographic change on inequality are based
on our fixed-effects estimation results (Table 8, columns 4 and 8). Given the LDV
specification, the estimated effects correspond (approximately) to the long-run impact
described in footnote 14. The inequality figures for the early 1990s are based on the available
data for 1990-94, and repeat Table 1, column 4.
Table 12
Population Growth and Inequality: Population Weight and Cohort Size Effects
                                                                                             Inequality Measure
                                                      Gini          Q5 / Q1                     Gini           Q5 / Q1                     Gini          Q5 / Q1
Population Growth Rate                                       4%              4%                        2%              2%                         0%             0%

Population Weight Effects Only
Fixed age tilt: mean                                       32.1              5.1                     32.3              5.2                     32.5               5.3
   log earnings
Fixed age tilt: variance                                   39.7              7.8                     41.4              8.7                     43.1               9.6
   log earnings
Fixed age tilt, mean                                       41.0              8.3                     42.5              9.2                     43.9             10.1
  and variance

Adding Cohort Size Effects
Elas. of substitution = 3.0                                44.3              9.6                     43.9              9.7                     44.0             10.1

Elas. of substitution = 1.5                                49.1            12.5                      45.9            10.7                      44.2             10.1

Elas. of substitution = 1.5,                               45.9            10.7                      40.8              8.3                     38.2               7.2
   lower age tilt in variance

Mature                                                   0.289           0.289                     0.350            0.350                    0.400            0.400

Pop4554 / Pop2029                                          2.84            2.84                      1.75            1.75                      1.07             1.07

Population growth rates refer to the steady state. The surviving population, given any birth cohort size, is based on current U.S. age-specific mortality rates. Given
the size of the surviving cohort, the pseudo-survey "sample" incorporates age-specific probabilities of household headship, computed using average values from the
the U.S. CPS from 1960-94. Importantly, however, simulated cohort size effects are based on the entire s urviving cohort, not t he population of household heads,
assuming 100% labor-force participation. However, basing the pseudo-survey sample on the entire surviving population has little effect on our results. The
simulation age profiles for the mean and variance of log earnings are based on Deaton and Paxson's (1994) estimates for the U.S. The final simulation consider an
upward slope in the age profile of log earning of half that estimated by Deaton and Paxson.
