                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FEDERALISM AND TAKEOVER LAW:
                                    THE RACE TO PROTECT
                                 MANAGERS FROM TAKEOVERS

                                          Lucian Arye Bebchuk
                                              Allen Ferrell

                                           Working Paper 7232
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7232


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         July 1999




We would like to thank Victor Brudney, John Coates, Jesse Fried, Andrew Guzman, Marcel Kahan, Mark
Ramsayer, and participants in the symposium for their valuable comments. For financial support, both authors
are grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School. All
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Allen Ferrell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
that state competition benefits shareholders. 6 Roberta Romano has similarly argued

that state competition ensures that corporate law maximizes shareholder wealth. 7

Indeed, Professor Romano labels the federalist structure of corporate law “the genius
                                  8



        Several years ago one of us pursued the route suggested by Cary and

developed an analysis of the problems produced by state competition. 9 That analysis

suggested that, with respect to a set of important corporate issues, state competition is

unlikely to serve shareholder wealth maximization. 10 Rather, the analysis suggested

that states might have an incentive to provide rules that are preferred by managers and

controllers---and that on these issues the rules preferred by managers and controllers

may well be different from what’s beneficial to shareholders.

        Building on that analysis, we continue in this Article to examine the

contention, articulated by Cary, that there are serious problems with state competition.

Our analysis suggests that state competition suffers from important structural

problems, and that competition among states is therefore likely to produce troubling

6
         See Frank H. Easterbrook, Managers’ Discretion and Investors’ Welfare: Theories and
Evidence, 9 Del. J.Corp. L. 540, 546 (1984); Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Voting
in Corporate Law, 26 J.L.& Ec. 395, 398 (1983); Daniel R. Fischel, The “Race to the Bottom”
Revisited: Reflections on Recent Developments in Delaware’s Corporation Law, 76 Nw. U.L.
Rev. 913 (1982); see generally Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Economic
Structure of Corporate Law 1--40 (1991).
7
         See Roberta Romano, Competition for Corporate Charters and the Lesson of Takeover
Statutes, 61 Fordham L.Rev. 843, 856 (1993); Roberta Romano, The State Competition Debate in
Corporate Law, 8 Cardozo L. Rev. 709, 717 (1987); cf. Roberta Romano, Empowering Investors:
A Market Approach to Securities Regulation, 107 Yale L.J. 2359 (1998).
8
         Roberta Romano, The Genius of American Corporate Law 1 (1993).
9
         See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State
Competition in Corporate Law, 105 Harv. L.Rev. 1435 (1992).
10
         Moreover, state competition for corporate charters might lead to inefficiencies when the
interests of not only shareholders but also third parties are implicated by a legal rule. See id. at
1485--1495. The present discussion will focus on shareholder wealth.


                                                 2
results with respect to some critical aspects of corporate law.                Cary carefully

examined several corporate law issues, such as proxy contests, de facto mergers,

fairness in parent-subsidiary transactions, and directors’ duty of care, all hot issues in

the 1960s.    We will discuss the issues involved in the state competition debate

through the lens of takeover regulation, perhaps the most important issue in corporate

law in the last two decades. 11        We use takeover law as a case study of the

shortcomings of state competition.

       Our analysis is organized as follows. Part I will argue that there are strong

theoretical reasons to believe that states will have incentives to produce a body of

takeover law that excessively protects incumbent managers and restricts hostile

takeovers.    Because managers play a key role in incorporation decisions, states

(especially ones with a large number of already incorporated companies, such as

Delaware) will give substantial weight to satisfying managers’ preferences. To be

sure, in some areas of corporate law, because managers’ and shareholders’ interests

are sufficiently aligned due to various market forces, the rules that managers would

like states to adopt are those that maximize shareholder value. But, we argue, in the

11
         A parallel debate has been taking place concerning competition among jurisdictions in
the international sphere. Some commentators believe that this form of competition is generally
beneficial, see, e.g., Roberta Romano, Empowering Investors: A Market Approach to Securities
Regulation, 107 Yale L.J. 2359 (1998); Stephen Choi & Andrew Guzman, Portable Reciprocity:
Rethinking the International Reach of Securities Regulation, 71 S.Cal.L.Rev. 903 (1998); Stephen
Choi & Andrew Guzman, National Law, International Money: Regulation in a Global Market, 65
Fordham L. Rev. 1855 (1997). Others predict harmful effects resulting from such competition,
see, e.g., Merritt Fox, Retaining Mandatory Securities Disclosure: Why Issuer Choice Is Not
Investor Empowerment (unpublished paper); Merritt Fox, Securities Disclosure in a Globalizing
Market: Who Should Regulate Whom?, 95 Mich. L. Rev. 2498 (1997). While our paper will
focus on competition among states, the analysis also has implications for international
competition among jurisdictions. For reasons explained in Bebchuk, supra, at 1507-08,
international competition and state competition have similar structural problems. Thus, the



                                               3
area of takeovers, this is unlikely to be the case. Because of the value that managers

might place on their independence, managers might prefer rules that excessively

restrict takeovers notwithstanding that such rules might somewhat reduce share value

and make it somewhat more difficult for them to acquire other companies when they

wear the acquirers’ hat.

          Part II analyzes the development of state takeover law and argues that it is

consistent with the above theoretical analysis. States have developed a substantial

body of rules, including both antitakeover statutes and judicial decisions permitting

the use of defensive tactics, that make takeovers more difficult. We suggest that these

rules are quite likely to excessively protect managers. To start with, we show that the

extent to which these rules restrict takeovers has little support in the policy literature

on takeovers. States’ relentless effort to come up with new antitakeover statutes

seems to be motivated more by a desire to make takeovers more difficult than by an

attempt to address in a cost-effective way some valid policy concerns. And the

latitude that states have given to defensive tactics has surpassed what even the

strongest supporters of defensive tactics have advocated. Furthermore, states have

provided managers with more antitakeover protections than shareholders seemed to

have been willing to give them. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, states have

elected to proceed in a way that imposed antitakeover protections without giving them

much choice or say.




implication of our analysis is that international competition would not work well with regard to
rules governing takeovers.


                                               4
       Our analysis of Delaware takeover law highlights the fact that its rules

governing defensive tactics seem to be characterized by unnecessary ambiguity and

unpredictability resulting in frequent litigation. While this aspect of Delaware law

benefits the interests of the Delaware bar, which might be of importance to Delaware,

it is difficult to see how shareholders are benefited by the excessive unpredictability

and vagueness of its rules. Finally, our analysis of state takeover law ends in a

comparison of it to the body of takeover law produced by the British City Code which

is the product of self-regulation by a body that might well have stronger incentives to

care about shareholder interests than do states.     In sharp contrast to what state

takeover law does, the British City Code severely restricts defensive tactics by

incumbents, restricts bidders only to an extent that seems to serve some valid policy

concerns, and overall regulates takeovers through rules that are much clearer and

predictable in application.

       Part III discusses the inability of state competition advocates to square their

position with their own view that state takeover law, including Delaware’s,

excessively protects incumbent managers and excessively discourages bidders.

Indeed some of the fiercest critics of impediments to takeovers, which are as much a

product of state competition for corporate charters as any other aspect of corporate

law, are also the leading state competition advocates. We conclude by expressing our

belief that state competition advocates would be well-advised to reconsider their

position. Pro-state competition scholars’ own criticisms of state takeover law, many

of which we share, demand no less.




                                          5
           I. THE THEORY OF TAKEOVER LAW UNDER STATE C OMPETITION


       As one of us has argued, state competition might have virtues with respect to

some corporate law questions but perform badly with respect to others. 12 According

to that analysis, the issues with respect to which state competition will work poorly

are: (i) issues that are “significantly redistributive” (in that their effect on managers’

or controlling shareholders’ private interests is not insignificant relative to their effect

on shareholder value), (ii) issues that directly affect the strength of market discipline,

and (iii) issues that implicate the interests of not only shareholders and managers but

also third parties. In this Article, we will focus our attention on one very important

area of corporate law: the rules governing takeovers. The argument will be that states

have an incentive to design takeover law that is more restrictive on bidders and more

protective of managers than is in shareholders’ interests.


                            A. The Importance of Managers


       A state’s takeover law will apply to companies incorporated in that state who

become takeover targets. These companies have, almost by definition, sufficient

dispersion of shares such that managers have some measure of “de facto” control.

       Let us begin by explaining why states, in particular Delaware, will care about

managers’ preferences. The reason for this is simple: managers play a pivotal role in




12
    See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State
Competition in Corporate Law, 105 HARV. L.REV. 1435 (1992).


                                             6
determining whether a company reincorporates to another state. 13 If a state wishes to

maximize the number of companies that are incorporated there---the starting

assumption of the “race to the top”/“race to the bottom” debate---the state will take an

interest in both initial incorporation decisions and subsequent reincorporation

decisions.

       Consider Delaware, which has a very large number of companies already

incorporated there. It is critically important to Delaware’s continued success, and any

state in a similar situation, that it retain companies already chartered there.          The

potential loss by Delaware of chartered companies through reincorporation, for any

given period of time, is greater than the potential gain from initial incorporations.

While the number of initial incorporations in any given year is likely to be fairly

limited, the number of companies that Delaware could potentially lose through

reincorporation, i.e. the companies already chartered there, is significant. Moreover,

Delaware will not only be interested in preventing its companies from reincorporating

to another state, but inducing companies chartered elsewhere to move to Delaware. 14

For these reasons, it would not be surprising if Delaware’s corporate law catered, to a




13
        A company cannot reincorporate without the company’s managers deciding to bring a
reincorporation proposal to a shareholder vote. See Robert C. Clark, Corporate Law s 10.2.4 at
416--17 (1986). Moreover, managers in companies with widely dispersed ownership of shares
can have significant influence over the outcome of a shareholder vote through control of the
voting process.
14
        Delaware has been very successful in the market for reincorporations. See Roberta
Romano, Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle, 1 J.L. Econ. & Org. 225, 265-78 (finding that
82% of all reincorporating companies between 1960 and 1982 switched to Delaware); see also
Demetrio Kaouris, Is Delaware a Haven for Incorporation?, 20 Del. J.Corp. L. 965, 1011 (1995)
(finding that out of 255 surveyed companies that changed their corporate domicile between 1982
and 1994, 89% reincorporated to Delaware).


                                              7
significant extent, to the preferences, whatever those preferences may be, of

managers.

         Indeed, the incentive of states, which do not have a large number of chartered

companies, to provide shareholder wealth-maximizing rules, when these harm

managerial interests, is not nearly as strong as one might think. First of all, by

providing rules preferred by shareholders the state will place itself at a disadvantage

in the market for reincorporations with respect to the companies that are currently

chartered there and to those that might otherwise consider reincorporating to that

state.

         But wouldn’t a state that provided rules beneficial to shareholders attract more

initial incorporations as a result?   Not necessarily. It is questionable the extent to

which companies initially incorporating in a state with shareholder wealth-

maximizing rules, when those rules differ from the ones preferred by managers,

would benefit from them in the form of a higher price for securities sold in an initial

public offering. Buyers of securities in a company initially incorporated in such a

state might anticipate that if the state did ever enjoy a significant number of chartered

companies, the state will then have a powerful incentive, much as Delaware does, to

craft its law so as to satisfy managerial preferences. Even if the state were judged

unlikely to make such a mid-stream change in its law, a similar shareholder wealth-

decreasing result might nevertheless be anticipated due to the ability of managers to

reincorporate the company, at a later point in time, in a state that does have rules to

the liking of the managers.




                                            8
       But merely concluding that states, and in particular Delaware, care a great deal

about managers’ preferences does not by itself imply that managers’ and

shareholders’ interests are likely to systematically diverge. This was perhaps the

most underdeveloped aspect of Cary’s position. Pro-state competition scholars are

quick to argue that state competition for corporate charters works well because, due to

market incentives, managers want to do what is in the interests of shareholders. 15

Below we explain why these market incentives may often be insufficient to induce

managers to prefer takeover rules that are more restrictive than what would be

optimal for shareholders.


                        B. Managers’ Preferred Takeover Law


1. Market Incentives


       At first glance one might reason as follows: Since managers want to keep their

jobs and independence, they will surely want to prevent any takeover that does not

receive their approval. It is not possible to jump to this conclusion, however, because

managers also care about share value for several widely noted reasons. And to the

extent that restrictive takeover law would reduce shareholder value, they might prefer

a state that opts for a more permissive approach.

       Among the potential reasons why managers might have a strong interest in

maximizing share value, we address two of the main ones. First, unnecessarily low

15
        See, e.g., Roberto Romano, The Genius of American Corporate Law (1993); Frank H.
Easterbrook and Daniel R. Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law (1991); Ralph K.



                                             9
share value can lead to an increased likelihood of takeover. The greater the difference

between a share’s value and what it could be worth if managers were acting in

shareholders’ interests, the more profitable, ceteris paribus, a takeover will be, and

hence, the more likely it is that one will occur. Second, managers’ compensation and

wealth are often tied, at least to a certain extent, to a share’s price through share

options and share holdings. Insofar as managers are shareholders themselves, they

will have an incentive to make decisions that reflect the interests of shareholders.

       As will be explained, however, these two market constraints are unlikely to be

sufficient, in a number of cases, to cause managers to prefer a permissive takeover

legal regime.


2. The Effect of Restrictive Takeover Law on Managers’ Interests


       As noted, pro-state competition theorists argue that the threat of a takeover

will cause managers to seek the legal arrangement that would be beneficial to

shareholders. The argument is roughly as follows. Suppose there are two legal

arrangements and one produces higher shareholder value compared with the other

one. In that case, managers will prefer the regime which maximizes shareholder

value, because that arrangement also reduces the probability of a takeover. Higher

share value makes takeovers more costly and, as a result, less likely.

       But let us further suppose that of the two regimes, A is the optimal takeover

regime from the perspective of shareholders while B is a somewhat more restrictive

Winter, Jr., State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the Corporation, 6 J.Legal
Studies 251 (1977).


                                            10
arrangement.    Since A is the optimal arrangement, share value would be, by

definition, lower under regime B.      But that does not necessarily mean that the

likelihood of a takeover would be increased by B. To be sure, with a lower share

value, a takeover at the same price would be more profitable. But if B makes it

sufficiently more difficult to do a takeover, then the likelihood of a hostile takeover

would be smaller despite the lower share price.

       It is important to note that making a hostile takeover overall more difficult can

benefit managers in two ways.       First, they might be able to use the protective

arrangement to prevent a takeover altogether, a valuable option since they could then

retain all the private benefits of control that come with independence (including not

losing their jobs).   Alternatively, they can use their increased ability to resist

takeovers so as to benefit themselves in any takeover, perhaps by maximizing the side

payments they receive from an acquirer in a negotiated acquisition.

       However, one might raise the interest of managers in increasing share value

because of their stock options and stock holdings. But the above-mentioned two

effects, which are potentially quite important to managers, can easily dominate this

interest. Consider managers who now have, say, 3% of the company’s stock and

enjoy substantial private benefits of control. 16      If a legal arrangement would

substantially reduce the likelihood of their losing these private benefits of control,




16
        The correlation between managerial pay and performance has been found to be weak.
See Michael C. Jensen & Kevin J. Murphy, Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives,
98 J. Pol. Econ. 225, 237 (1990); CEO Incentives—It’s Not How Much You Pay, But How,
Harv. Bus. Rev., May-June 1990, at 138.


                                           11
then that might well be more important to them than avoiding some reduction in the

value of their existing holdings.17


3. Managers’ Interests in Acquiring other Companies


        Thus far, we have explained why managers of a Delaware company might

prefer that, if their company were to become a target, they enjoy the protection of a

legal regime that restricted takeovers more than is optimal from the perspective of

shareholders. But it might be said that this does not imply that they would prefer that

Delaware have rules that inefficiently restricted takeovers, for such rules would apply

to them regardless of whether their company becomes a target. Such rules may also

apply to companies that they will want to acquire in the future. One might posit that

this creates a countervailing consideration. 18 Because managers can be on both sides

of a takeover, so to speak, they will not favor a takeover law that is too restrictive.

        But this symmetry does not exist.             For several reasons, managers of a

Delaware company will likely care more about how Delaware’s takeover rules would

affect them should their company become a target, than they would about the impact

of Delaware’s takeover law should they wish to acquire other companies.

        First of all, while Delaware law would surely affect them if they become an

acquisition target, Delaware law may or may not affect them should they want to

acquire another company. It will affect them if they want to buy another company

17
        See Melvin A. Eisenberg, The Structure of Corporation Law, 89 Col. L.Rev. 1461, 1510
(1989) (concluding that managerial interests are strongest when their jobs are implicated, thereby
creating an incentive for states to adopt rules that enable managers to keep their positions).
18
        See Romano, The Genius of American Corporate Law 59-60 (1993).


                                               12
that is incorporated in Delaware with dispersed ownership, but it will not affect them

if they go after a company with a controlling shareholder, a company that is closely

held, or a company with dispersed ownership that is incorporated elsewhere. 19

         Second, even assuming that Delaware takeover law would apply each time

they go after a target, there is an asymmetry in the stakes to managers. It very well

might be extremely important to them to retain their own positions and private

benefits of control---here the personal stakes of managers could be quite substantial.

In contrast, it is unlikely to be as important to them to weaken the power of the

managers of a company with dispersed ownership which they might wish to acquire.

Their personal interests are not implicated to anywhere near the same degree; at most

they will have to choose different acquisition targets or to pay a higher acquisition

price (including any side payments to the target’s managers). This asymmetry is

evidenced by the fact that corporations are the primary lobby responsible for the

passage of antitakeover legislation, 20 even though this legislation will presumably

impede their own future acquisitions of corporations falling under the legislation’s

ambit.




19
        In other words, a manager’s decision of where to (re)incorporate has no effect on the
takeover law governing potential acquisitions.      Foregoing (re)incorporating in a state with
antitakeover defenses does not increase the probability that a potential target will do the same.




                                               13
                                      C. Conclusion


       The bottom line of the preceding analysis is that states competing for corporate

charters---and in particular Delaware which is presumably striving to maintain its

dominant role in this market---have an incentive to provide a body of law that makes

takeovers more difficult regardless of whether this is in the interests of shareholders.

We now turn to take a look at Delaware’s takeover law and reflect on whether it’s

consistent with our theoretical conclusions.


                      II. REFLECTIONS ON STATE TAKEOVER LAW


       We start with a qualification---what we provide in this Part is not a full

analysis and evaluation of the development of state takeover law in the last twenty-

five years. This would be too large an undertaking. The literature on takeovers is

voluminous. What we do is to offer a set of observations on the body of takeover law

that Delaware and other states have produced. Our observations are consistent with

the preceding theoretical analysis which indicated that state competition is unlikely to

produce a body of takeover law that is optimal from the viewpoint of shareholders.


                  A. The Pro-Management Tilt of State Takeover Law


1. How States Worked To Make Takeovers More Difficult



20
        See William J. Carney, The Production of Corporate Law, 71 S. Cal. L. Rev. 715, 749--
50 (1998); Roberta Romano, The Political Economy of Takeover Statutes, 73 Va. L. Rev. 111,
121--22 (1987).


                                             14
     States have worked hard, and quite successfully, to make takeovers more difficult.

State takeover law consists of a substantial body of rules---both statutory and judge-

made that significantly impedes hostile takeovers and shields incumbent managers.

The fruits of these efforts are reflected in both rules governing bidders and those

governing the use of defensive tactics. As we will explain, it is the rules concerning

defensive tactics that have erected the most important impediments. But we will also

analyze the rules restricting the activity of bidders both for the sake of completeness

and because they also reflect, though less dramatically, the tendency of states to

substantially restrict takeovers.


        (i) Rules Restricting Bidders


        One popular way among states of protecting managers from unwanted

takeovers is restricting what bidders are able to do. While the Securities Exchange

Act of 193421 and the Securities Act of 1933 22 regulate various aspects of tender

offers, the most important source of restrictions on the activities of bidders have

come, by and large, from state antitakeover legislation. Over a twenty-five year

period, there have been several waves of state antitakeover statutes, easily making

passage of antitakeover legislation one of the top priorities of states in the corporate

law area. Numerous states over the years have enacted antitakeover statutes imposing

a bewildering array of requirements on bidders.

21
        The Williams Act amendments to the Securitie s Exchange Act of 1934 impose various
disclosure and procedural requirements on cash tender offers.
22
        If a portion of the consideration for the target company is securities of the bidder, the
Securities Act of 1933 will often be applicable.


                                               15
        The first state takeover statute was enacted by Virginia in 1968.23 Over the

next thirteen years, thirty-six states followed Virginia’s lead. 24 These statutes often

imposed disclosure requirements on bidders as well as---more burdensomely---

requiring administrative approval for a bid to proceed.                 After the first wave of

statutes’ constitutionality was called into serious question, 25 states enacted a new set

of antitakeover statutes.

        So-called second-generation antitakeover statutes spread rapidly. 26 There were

several types of second-generation antitakeover statutes. “Control share acquisition”

statutes typically require a shareholder vote approving an “acquisition of control” by a

party. Other states adopted “fair price” statutes which prohibit a “second-step”

merger 27 between the bidder and the target company unless a supermajority

shareholder vote approves the merger or the bidder provides a “fair price,” as defined

by the statute, for the remaining shares. In a somewhat similar vein, states also

adopted “redemption rights” statutes, which provide minority shareholders the right to

sell to the bidder shares for their “fair value,” again a price determined by statute.

Some states, including Delaware, adopted a “business combination” statute

prohibiting bidders from engaging in certain business combinations with an acquired




23
         Takeover Bid Disclosure Act, Va. Code ss 13.1-528. 13.1-541.
24
         See Roberta Romano, Law as a Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle, 1 J.L.
Econ. & Org. 225, 234 (1985)
25
         Edgar v. Mite, 457 U.S. 624 (1981).
26
         While we refer to five different types of statutes as second-generation statutes, it is worth
pointing out for purposes of clarity that some commentators have divided these statutes into
several different generations.
27
         A “second-step” merger is a merger between a corporation and a shareholder holding a
significant percentage of the corporation’s stock.


                                                 16
company for a specified period of time. 28              Thirty-seven states adopted second-

generation antitakeover statutes within a mere eight years of the MITE decision. 29

The hard work of states ultimately paid off. They had fashioned antitakeover statutes

that were likely to pass constitutional muster. 30

        The states were still not satisfied. Yet another type of antitakeover statute, the

so-called “constituency statute,” has become popular among states. The focus of

these statutes, however, is somewhat different than the others. They are concerned

with what target management can legally do in frustrating an unwanted bid, not on

what bidders can do. It is to this central issue that we now turn.


        (ii) Rules Governing Defensive Tactics


        The most important impediment to takeovers today is the wide latitude given

to managers to engage in defensive tactics, especially the ability to hide behind a

poison pill. 31 Perhaps the most critical development creating this managerial power



28
        See generally Jesse Choper, John Coffee, and Ronald Gilson, Cases and Materials on
Corporations 1054-1057 (1995) (4th ed.)
29
        Carney, The Production of Corporate Law, 71 S.Cal. L.Rev. at 752-53.
30
        See CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp., 481 U.S. 69 (1987) (upholding Indiana’s second
generation antitakeover statute against a dormant commerce clause challenge).
31
        The Chief Economist for the Securities and Exchange Commission defined a poison pill
as:

[A]ny financial device that when triggered by a particular action (e.g. merging a target’s assets or
acquiring more than some specified amount of the target’s common stock), results in one or a
combination of the following:
        (1) the acquirer is forced to purchase securities from the shareholders of the target firm at
            prices equal to or exceeding their market value
        (2) security holders of the target firm gain rights to exchange stock of the target firm for
            a combination of cash and securities from the target firm exceeding that of the
            surrendered stock (acquirer is generally excluded from this exchange)


                                                 17
was the approval by the Delaware courts of poison pills put in place by

management. 32 After it became clear that managers had the power to erect poison pill

defenses, the key question became (and continues to be): When would managers be

forced to dismantle them in a takeover contest? Delaware law has gradually evolved

so as to allow directors, consistent with their fiduciary obligations to shareholders, to

“just say no” to potential bidders with their poison pill defenses in place.

        Many states have adopted “constituency statutes” that enable directors to

consider the interests of non-shareholder constituencies, such as employees and local

communities, in exercising their authority. 33 Arguably this provides managers with

an even greater ability to formulate a legally acceptable reason not to dismantle a

poison pill or refrain from whatever other defense maneuvers they might wish to

engage in.      It is worth noting that even though Delaware does not have a

“constituency statute” its case law has long permitted managers in evaluating and

responding to a hostile takeover to consider its “impact on ‘constituencies’ other than




        (3) the security holders of the target firm gain rights to purchase securities from the
             target form at prices below market value (acquirer is generally excluded)
        (4) the acquirer must sell securities of the acquiring entity at prices below market value
             to security holders of the target firm
        (5) the acquirer loses substantial voting power of his or her shares relative to other
             security holders of the target firm.
Office of the Chief Economist, The Effects of Poison Pills on the Wealth of Target Shareholders
1, 6-7 (Oct. 23, 1986).
32
        The use of the poison pill to ward of a potential bidder was first approved by the
Delaware Supreme Court in Moran v. Household Int’l, Inc., 500 A.2d 1346 (Del. 1985), a case
which we will discuss in Part II(A)(2)(ii).
33
        Thirty-one states have adopted “constituency statutes” since 1986. See Jesse Choper,
John Coffee, and Ronald Gilson, Cases and Materials on Corporations 1057 (1995) (4th ed.).


                                               18
shareholders (i.e., creditors, customers, employees, and perhaps even the community

generally).” 34



       (iii) The Corporate Fortress



       Considering the cumulative effect of the restrictions states have placed on the

activities of bidders as well as managers’ ability to erect and maintain antitakeover

defenses, especially the poison pill, it is obvious to even the most casual observer that

managers have substantial power to block takeovers.               Companies are today

surrounded by high walls that can be very costly for bidders to breach against a

determined target management. As a result of these legal developments, the impact

on the operation of the market for corporate control has been far-reaching.

       As one would expect, states have varied somewhat in how far they have gone

in this direction. As pro-state competition scholars have emphasized, Delaware,

despite offering managers substantial protection against unwanted acquisitions, has

not fortified the corporate castle as much as other states have. But for our purposes,

what is important is not the differences among states, which are, on the whole, small

compared to the long road toward restricting takeovers that almost all states have

traveled. What is important is the aggregate product of state competition and how

that differs from the body of rules that would maximize shareholder wealth.

Accordingly, we now offer some observations on why the impediments to takeovers

that states have so vigorously created are excessive.

34
       Unocal, 493 A.2d at 955; see also Time v. Paramount, 571 A.2d 1140, 1153 (Del. 1990)


                                            19
2. The Weak Policy Basis for State Antitakeover Law


        Being academics, we start with the observation that the powerful antitakeover

position taken by Delaware does not appear to have a strong basis in the extensive

literature examining the desirability of different types of takeover regulation from the

perspective of shareholders. Before proceeding, we want to emphasize that this is just

one observation and not the basis for our view that Delaware has gone too far. Of

course, the best arrangement could, in fact, be one that receives little support in

academic circles. Even if powerful antitakeover protections are justified, we will

argue in subsections (3) and (4) below that they should have been afforded to

managers in a manner much different than they were. But a natural place to begin the

analysis is to see how Delaware’s antitakeover position has fared in policy debates.



        (i) Rules Restricting Bidders



        In this Section we will examine the policy basis for the arrangements

introduced by state antitakeover statutes. As we have seen, while these statutes have

made takeovers more difficult, their impeding effect is likely less than that of the

rules governing defensive tactics. Our problem with takeover statutes, however, is

not so much with the magnitude of the difficulties they pose for takeovers. Instead, as

explained below, our problem is that these statutes seemed to have been created to a




(stressing this language in Unocal)


                                          20
large extent for the purpose of making takeovers more difficult rather than to address

legitimate policy concerns.

       We start with the observation that states have consistently come up with very

different types of antitakeover statutes, focussing on various issues and using different

techniques. When a particular type of statute was found to be constitutionally suspect

or to provide little impediment to takeovers, they simply went back to the drawing

board and adopted another type of statute. The first generation focussed on the tender

offer process, a similar focus to that of the Williams Act. When these statutes’

constitutionally were called into question in MITE, states simply went to the drawing

board having in mind that a statute regulating a company’s internal affairs would

likely be permissible under the decision’s rationale. They tried then to use this

opening to impede takeovers, without interfering in the takeover process directly, by

altering the powers that an acquirer would have following a takeover. When various

second-generation statutes---many of which, as explained below, have a plausible

policy rationale---were upheld against constitutional challenges but did not seem to

pose a substantial impediment to tender offers shareholders would want to accept,

states went back to work. They came up with a new and different set of statutes. The

one common denominator to all the antitakeover statutes is that they all seek to make

takeovers, in one way or another, more difficult.

       As has already been mentioned, for some second-generation statutes one could

at least find a legitimate policy rationale: the need to address the pressure-to-tender

problem that shareholders sometimes confront when considering a tender offer. The

pressure-to-tender problem results from shareholders’ incentive to tender their shares

                                           21
to a bidder out of fear of ending up with low-value minority shares in the event that

other shareholders tender and the offer succeeds.              Shareholders will have this

incentive even if they all reach the conclusion that their shares would be worth more

if the tender offer did not succeed. 35

        One type of second-generation statute that some states adopted, referred to

earlier, is the “control share acquisition” statute. This statute could conceivably be

justified as addressing the pressure-to-tender problem as it required shareholders to

vote on whether a bidder can acquire control of a company. Such a vote might

prevent a coercive offer from proceeding and, thus, benefit shareholders. 36 This type

of statute provides shareholders with direct input as to whether an acquisition should

proceed. In sharp contrast, many of the more formidable defensive tactics, as we

shall see, are so potent precisely because they prevent shareholders from ever

deciding for themselves the merits of a tender offer. 37

        Another type of second-generation statute that addressed the pressure to tender

problem is the “redemption rights” statute.          This statute typically ensures that the

post-tender offer value of minority shares will not fall below the offer price. This

again would eliminate the pressure to tender. Tender offers that shareholders do not

find attractive would not be able to succeed through a bidder exploiting a


35
        See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Toward Undistorted Choice and Equal Treatment in Corporate
Takeovers, 98 Harv. L. Rev. 1695 (1985); see also Lucian Bebchuk, The Pressure to Tender: An
Analysis and Proposed Remedy, 12 Del. J.Corp. L. 911 (1987); Brudney & Chirlstein, Fair
Shares in Corporate Mergers and Takeovers, 88 Harv. L. Rev. 297, 336-37 (1974).
36
        See CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp. of America, 481 U.S. 69 (1987) (“By allowing [ ]
shareholders to vote as a group, [Indiana’s control share acquisition statute] protects them from
37
        See infra Part II(A)(3)-(4).


                                               22
shareholder’s pressure to tender for fear of being stuck with less valuable minority

shares.

          So it is fair to say that many second-generation antitakeover statutes responded

to a concern that the literature had identified as important. One might have thought

that states would rest content with their “control share acquisition” or “redemption

rights” statutes. To the extent that the pressure-to-tender problem was effectively

addressed by these statutes, the only tender offers that would be able to succeed are

the ones shareholders want. Moreover, while these second-generation statutes would

arguably frustrate all offers shareholders would not want to succeed, they probably

would not substantially deter offers shareholders would want to take. 38 But states did

not stop here. Tellingly, states continued to add more restrictions on bidders which

do not seem designed to address specific concerns over the operation of the takeover

process.

          Take, for example, the “business combination” statutes. Delaware has one, 39

along with thirty other states. 40 These statutes typically restrict a successful bidder’s

ability to engage in a wide range of transactions with an acquired company, such as

mergers, liquidations, sales of assets and stock issuances.41 These statutes might also

prevent some takeovers which shareholders would want. They could conceivably

reduce the potential efficiency gains resulting from the bidder acquiring control to the


38
        See Ronald Gilson and Bernard Black, The Law and Finance of Corporate Acquisitions
553-558 (1995) (supplement)
39
        Del. Gen. Corp. Law s 203.
40
        See Jesse Choper, John Coffee, and Ronald Gilson, Cases and Materials on Corporations
1055 (1995) (4th ed.)
41
        See, e.g., Del. Gen. Corp. Law s 203(c)(3).


                                             23
extent that those gains would require, say, effecting a merger between the bidder and

the target.

       Some observers argue that the costs imposed on bidders by Delaware’s

                        statute, and similar statutes, are not all that large and thus, by

themselves, should not greatly curtail takeovers. 42 But our point does not depend on

how large the costs are. Assuming that just having fewer hostile takeovers is not an

end in itself, these statutes are not an effective instrument for addressing any valid

concern. The only justification that could be given for these statutes is that, by

defending minority shares in the aftermath of a takeover, they prevent coercion and

unequal treatment of shareholders.      A “control share acquisition” statute or a

“redemption rights” statute would clearly be superior in accomplishing these goals. A

state could fulfill these goals in a complete way without preventing efficient

takeovers. In contrast, “business combination” statutes carry the potential cost of

preventing some desirable acquisition offers.

       Reviewing what states have done legislatively in restricting bidders causes one

to suspect that states really care about making takeovers more difficult rather than

merely eliminating particular distortions in the takeover process. This impression is

powerfully reinforced by looking at state rules governing defensive tactics. We now

turn to this subject.




42
        See,. e.g., Ronald Gilson and Bernard Black, The Law and Finance of Corporate
Acquisitions 558-573 (1995) (supplement)


                                          24
       (ii) Rules Governing Defensive Tactics



       The use of defensive tactics by managers raises an obvious conflict of interest

problem. There is no question that allowing managerial discretion to use defensive

tactics entails costs. This has led some commentators to support a ban on defensive

tactics. While other commentators have supported the use of some tactics to address

particular threats and distortions, they did not want managers, given the severe

conflict of interest problem, to be granted an open-ended license. But this is the

direction in which state laws have moved.

       The discussion in this Section will focus on the most powerful impediment to

takeovers---the ability of managers, at least in a wide range of circumstances, to “just

say no” to potential bidders while keeping in place a poison pill defense. There can

be no question that the use of defensive tactics by managers presents a serious

problem, because of the inherent conflict of interest faced by managers in the

takeover context. After all, managers’ private interests, including their very jobs, are

directly implicated.   There is always the danger that managers will oppose a

shareholder value-enhancing offer in order to maintain their corporation’s

independence. As the Delaware Supreme Court has repeatedly emphasized, there is

always the “omnipresent specter that a board may be acting primarily in its own
                        43



       There is a large body of literature that argues that managers should be

completely prohibited from engaging in defensive tactics---a literature which includes




                                            25
contributions by leading advocates of state competition. 44             Those who oppose

defensive tactics do not ignore the possibility that abusive takeover tactics might

result in a bad takeover outcome. For example, there is the concern, discussed earlier,

that shareholders will be pressured-to-tender due to the fear of being left holding

minority shares with a value lower than the bid price.45            But those who oppose

defensive tactics can point to legal arrangements that would address such problems.

The pressure to tender problem, for example, can often be resolved by having a

shareholder vote on a tender offer.46 There is no need, on this view, to use the costly

remedy of giving managers the power to use defensive tactics and, thus, to have some

veto power over acquisitions.

       While both of us share the above view, some commentators favor giving

managers power to use defensive tactics in order to address abusive takeover tactics.

For instance, Reinier Kraakman and Ronald Gilson, in trying to explain and

rationalize Delaware’s early cases applying Unocal’s proportionality test, suggested

that defensive tactics, including retaining the pill in the face of a hostile tender offer,

should pass judicial review insofar as they address two particular threats: so-called

structural and substantive coercion. 47 They argued that a pill should be retained only


43
        Unocal Corp. v. Mesa Petroleum Co., 493 A.2d 946, 954--55 (Del. 1985).
44
        See generally Roberta Romano, A Guide to Takeovers: Theory, Evidence and
Regulation, 9 Yale J. on Reg. 119 (1992); Ronald Gilson, A Structural Approach to Corporations:
The Case Against Defensive Tactics in Tender Offers, 33 Stan. L. Rev. 819 (1981); Frank H.
Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Proper Role of a Target’s Management in Responding to a
Tender Offer, 94 Harv. L. Rev. 1161 (1981).
45
        See, e.g., Lucian A. Bebchuk, Toward Undistorted Choice and Equal Treatment in
Corporate Takeovers, 98 Harv. L. Rev. 1695 (1985).
46
        Id. at 1747-52.
47
        See Ronald Gilson and Reinier Kraakman, Delaware’s Intermediate Standard for
Defensive Tactics: Is There Substance to Proportionality Review?, 44 Bus. Law. 247 (1989).


                                              26
if either: (i) the offer is structured in a coercive way, or (ii) the managers can make

some showing (by, say, relying on an investment banker’s opinion) that the

independent value of the target significantly exceeds the offer consideration. The

point worth emphasizing is that even commentators who endorse the use of defensive

tactics to address abusive takeovers do not wish that managers have an open-ended,

unlimited power to “just say no.”

       It is interesting to note that even Martin Lipton, inventor of the pill and

champion of takeover defenses, writing in the 1980s did not go so far as to argue that

managers should always have the ability to frustrate hostile tender offers. In a 1987

article, Lipton justified defensive tactics by pointing to a list of particular takeover

abuses, each of which he discusses at length. 48 He does not at any point argue that

managers should be allowed to “just say no” when the identified abuses are not

present.

       But the Delaware courts have left the reasoning of all these commentators,

even those sympathetic to some types of defensive tactics, far behind, instead

endorsing a much more expansive license for managerial use of poison pills and “just
           49
                This was done in stages. Initially, Delaware law seemed to be willing to

allow tactics only in response to particular well-defined threats. But later on, without

much in terms of providing explicit justification, Delaware went well beyond this.


Gilson and Kraakman in this article endorsed the approach taken by Chancellor Allen in City
Capital Assocs. v. Interco, Inc., 551 A.2d 787 (Del. Ch. 1988). That approach entails allowing
antitakeover devices in the case of coercive behavior by the bidder.
48
        See Martin Lipton, Corporate Governance in the Age of Financial Corporatism, 136 U.
PA. L.Rev. 1 (1987).
49
        See, e.g., Joseph A. Grundfest, Just Vote No: A Minimalist Strategy for Dealing with
Barbarians Inside the Gates, 45 Stan. L. Rev. 857 (1993).


                                             27
       The first seminal Delaware cases, decided in the mid-1980s, which dealt with

managers’ ability to use defensive tactics to defeat hostile tender offers, were Unocal

Corp. v. Mesa Petroleum Co. 50 and Moran v. Household Int’l, Inc.51 In both cases,

the Delaware Supreme Court was careful to both examine the particular threat to

shareholders that would have existed without managerial use of the defensive tactic in

question and whether the defensive tactic that was used addressed that particular

threat. Only then did the court conclude that the use of the defensive tactic was

appropriate. In Unocal Corp. v. Mesa Petroleum Co., the Delaware Supreme Court

reviewed a selective self-tender offer by a target corporation that was being offered as

a way of defeating a hostile tender offer. In explaining why the target management

had not violated their fiduciary duties to shareholders, the court repeatedly

emphasized the fact that the board reasonably believed that the hostile tender offer

was a “grossly inadequate two-tier coercive tender offer” and that the self-tender offer

was “reasonably related to the threats posed.” 52 In Moran v. Household Int’l, Inc. ,

the Delaware Supreme Court approved the use of another defensive tactic by

managers: the erection of a poison pill defense. The court relied on the fact that the

plan was mild and would therefore not deter bidders. Rather, the poison pill at issue

merely provided reasonable protection against a coercive two-tier tender offer. 53




50
       493 A.2d 946 (Del. 1985).
51
       500 A.2d 1346 (Del. 1985).
52
       493 A.2d at 956, 958..
53
       500 A.2d at 357.


                                          28
Moreover, the court pointed out that once a bidder did arrive on the scene, a decision

not to dismantle the pill at that time would be reviewable by the Delaware judiciary. 54

        After these decisions, the Chancery Court began to develop a jurisprudence

limiting the use of defensive tactics so as to protect shareholders not only from

coercive hostile tender offers but also from managerial abuse of these tactics. For

example, in AC Acquisitions Corp. v. Anderson, Clayton & Co.,55 the Chancery Court

concluded that the target board’s selective self-tender offer was itself coercive and,

therefore, not reasonable. 56 The Chancery Court followed this up with its decision in

City Capital Associates v. Interco Inc. 57 There, the court forced a target board to

redeem its poison pill in the face of a non-coercive tender offer the board believed

was too low. 58 Indeed, in the course of its analysis, the court approvingly cited Gilson

and Kraakman’s interpretation of the Unocal standard. 59 Later that same year, the

Delaware Chancery Court in another case forced a target board to redeem its poison

pill in the face of a noncoercive tender offer. 60      Unfortunately, this searching inquiry

of managerial use of defensive tactics, and whether shareholders were being well-

served by them, was not to last.



54
        See id.
55
        519 A.2d 103 (Del. Ch. 1986).
56
        See id. at 113.
57
        551 A.2d 787 (Del. Ch. 1988).
58
        The Chancery Court forcefully explained that “To acknowledge that directors may
employ the recent innovation of ‘poison pills’ to deprive shareholders of the ability effectively to
choose to accept a noncoercive offer . . . would, it seems to me, be so inconsistent with widely
shared notions of appropriate corporate governance as to threaten to diminish the legitimacy and
authority of our corporation law.” Id. at 799-800.
59
        See id. at 796 n.8.
60
        See Grand Metropolitan Public Limited Co. v. The Pillsbury Co., 1988-1989 Transfer
Binder, Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) 94,104 (Del. Ch. 1988).


                                                29
       Perhaps the key turning point in creating a much more expansive license for

managerial use of defensive tactics was the Delaware Supreme Court’s decision

several years later in Paramount v. Time, 61 wherein the court went out of its way to

explicitly disavow the approach of the Chancery Court in Interco. 62 The Delaware

Supreme Court stressed that the all-cash, all-shares tender offer for Time by

Paramount threatened the target management’s business plan (here, merging with

Warner)---a threat it found to be legally cognizable. 63 In contrast to what one might

have thought from Unocal and Moran, and the Chancery Court cases building on their

analysis, the Time court made very clear that the use of defensive tactics are not

limited to situations where the tender offer is coercive---which Paramount’s offer

clearly was not---or when management has particular, defensible reasons to believe

the offer is inadequate. 64 The potential discretion this line of reasoning provides

managers is sweeping.

       Until this decision, Delaware was arguably in line with those commentators,

such as Professors Kraakman and Gilson, who endorsed defensive tactics in response

to particular, well-defined threats. 65 Beginning with Paramount v. Time, Delaware

courts have, however, increasingly tolerated, although this is not much acknowledged,

the open-ended use by managers of defensive tactics far more drastic than the one at




61
       571 A.2d 1140 (Del. 1990).
62
       Id. at 1153.
63
       Id.
64
       Id. at 1152-53.
65
       See ft. 47 & text.


                                          30
issue in Moran, without requiring, in any meaningful way, a showing of structural or

substantive coercion. 66

        This important leap was made by the Delaware courts without much

justification. This development also had little support in the literature, at that time or

since. Now it is always possible that Delaware law, notwithstanding the lack of

articulated policy justifications, is in fact the legal regime that is beneficial to

shareholders and reflects what shareholders want. In the end, what’s important is not

what some academics believe but what actually serves the interests of shareholders.

        And this brings us to our next two critical observations: that Delaware, as well

as other states, has adopted stronger antitakeover protections than those shareholders

at the time were willing to voluntarily provide; and that states have imposed these

arrangements on shareholders in a way that left them with little choice or say.


3. States Granted to Managers What Shareholders Were Not Willing to Give


        It is worthwhile to stress that impediments to takeovers, to the extent that they

are favored by shareholders, can be adopted through charter provisions. In the late

1970s and early 1980s managers did indeed push for various antitakeover charter

amendments. 67 But it became increasingly clear that informed shareholders were


66
        In Unitrin, Inc. v. American Corp., 651 A,2d 1361 (Del. 1995), for instance, the
Delaware Supreme Court upheld a target corporation’s repurchase of its stock, which was
designed to defeat a hostile tender offer. The court pointed out that the bidder could always
conduct a proxy contest. This analysis seemed to give short shrift to the interests of shareholders
in having the ability to agree to the terms of the competing tender offer and the difficulty of
conducting a successful proxy contest.
67
        See Ronald Gilson, The Case Against Shark Repellent Amendments: Structural
Limitations on the Enabling Concept, 34 Stan. L. Rev. 775 (1982).


                                                31
willing to vote only for “mild” antitakeover arrangements---ones aimed at addressing

the pressure-to-tender problem but not going much beyond this.68

       Already in the 1980s, Roberta Romano described how managers were

successful in getting antitakeover protections from states more severe than those they

could receive from shareholders. 69 If this was true then it has become even more so

since. The protections from takeovers which managers have been afforded by states

have only grown stronger. 70


4. States Imposed Antitakeover Rules on Shareholders


       States could have taken the approach of making it easier for companies to have

takeover protections should shareholders approve. This approach would likely have

pleased state competition advocates who often place great emphasis on the

importance of permitting shareholders to choose the legal regime that governs the

corporation in which they invest. States, however, have almost universally shunned

this approach.

       In the takeover context, shareholders did not appear interested or willing to

restrict takeovers much beyond arrangements needed for eliminating the pressure to

tender. Despite this, Delaware, along with other states, imposed its antitakeover

arrangements on shareholders ex post in a way that left them little choice.




68
        Id. at 826-27.
69
        See Roberta Romano, The Political Economy of Takeover Statutes, 73 Va. L. Rev 111,
129--30, 147-48 (1987).
70
        See discussion in Part II(A)(1).


                                           32
        (i) The Imposition of Legislative Antitakeover Protections


        Consider the antitakeover statute adopted by Delaware. 71 Tellingly, Delaware

did not do follow its earlier approach concerning limitations on directors’ liability.

In the aftermath of Smith v. Von Gorkom, 72 Delaware changed its corporate code so as

to allow companies to adopt charter provisions that limit directors’ liability. 73 In

contrast, shareholders were not given the option of adopting the antitakeover

protections contained in Delaware’s “business combination” statute by approving a

charter provision to that effect. Instead, the Delaware statute afforded managers these

protections unless the corporation opts out of it by charter amendment. Why did

Delaware adopt opt-in limitations on liability but opt-out limitations on takeovers?

        The difference between opt-in and opt-out is of critical significance. This is

because a charter amendment must be brought to a shareholder vote. As a result,

shareholders cannot opt out of the Delaware statute unless the directors want this to

happen. 74 And since managers generally prefer to have antitakeover protection, there

is no reason for them to opt-out. In short, the Delaware takeover statute has followed




71
         See 8 Del. Code s 203. Delaware’s antitakeover statute, with certain exemptions, bars an
acquirer from conducting a second-step merger with the target for a period of three years after the
target’s acquisition.
72
         488 A.2d 858 (Del. 1985),
73
         See 8 Del. Code s 102(b)(7) permits the certificate of incorporation to contain “a
provision eliminating or limiting the personal liability of a director to the corporation or its
stockholders for monetary damages for breach of . . . [duty of care].”.
74
         See 8 Del. Code s 242(b) (shareholders cannot propose charter amendments on their
own).


                                                33
an enabling approach for the managers, not the shareholders---it’s the managers who

can have an antitakeover arrangement if they want it (which they generally do). 75

        Most states have adopted a similar approach in deciding not to condition

legislative antitakeover protections on shareholder consent. 76 Indeed, some states do

not even allow for opting-out of their takeover statute (such as Wisconsin’s

antitakeover statute Judge Easterbrook confronted in Amanda Acquisition Corp. v.

Universal Foods Corp., 877 F.2d 496 (7th Cir)). But practically, the difference

between allowing opting-out and not allowing opting-out is usually not all that

significant. As long as managers control the opting-out process, we are often going to

have the antitakeover arrangement preferred by managers regardless of shareholders’

interests.


        (ii) The Imposition of Poison Pills


        The introduction of more and more potent poison pills, and their approval by

Delaware courts and the courts of other states, has changed the landscape of

takeovers. Poison pills have altered fundamentally the allocation of power between

managers and shareholders.




75
         Professor Romano’s suggestion that the opting-out structure of Delaware’s takeover law
saves on the transaction costs that would be incurred by forcing corporations to opt-in, see
Romano, The State Competition Debate in Corporate Law, 8 Cardozo L. Rev. 709, 729 (1987), is
a fairly insignificant consideration in light of the harm resulting from the increased ability of
managers to thwart value-maximizing takeovers at the expense of shareholders.
76
         See Carney, The Production of Corporate Law, 71 S.Cal. L.Rev. at 752 (describing as the
very purpose of state antitakeover statutes the provision of “takeover defenses without the
necessity of [a shareholder] vote”).


                                               34
        What poison pills did was use the formal power that managers have to issue

securities. This power was originally given to facilitate the raising of capital. 77 The

creators of the poison pill, however, used this power to design securities not with a

view to raising capital but rather with the sole purpose of preventing acquisitions

managers wish to block.

        There is no question that the introduction of poison pills in the 80s could not

have been anticipated in the 1970s, 1960s, or 50s. It took huge managerial demand

for antitakeover protection, coupled with the creative legal ingenuity of Martin Lipton

and his colleagues, for poison pills to be invented and implemented on a widespread

basis. Shareholders buying shares in Delaware companies earlier on simply could not

have anticipated poison pills and the reallocation of power they would cause.

        And a drastic reallocation it is indeed. As long as they are not redeemed by

managers, poison pills typically prevent shareholders from having access to an offer.

For this reason, they have had a dramatic effect on the takeover picture and the

division of power between shareholders and managers.

        Our point here is not that this reallocation is necessarily bad. Let’s grant for a

moment that it might be beneficial to shareholders. The important point is that this

was a major reallocation, which had not been anticipated earlier. If states wanted to

ensure that this was in shareholders’ interests and not just in managers’ interests, they

would have required that this reallocation of power first enjoy shareholder consent.

77
         8 Del. Code s 157 states that:
         Subject to any provisions in the certificate of incorporation, every corporation may create
and issue, whether or not in connection with the issue and sale of any shares of stock or other
securities of the corporation, rights or options entitling the holders thereof to purchase from the



                                                35
        Shareholder consent could have been required in any number of ways. Courts

developing the doctrines governing the use of the poison pill could have required,

given the inherent conflict of interest, that pills be ratified by the shareholders either

right away or within a certain period of time.             Or a court could have required

managers to redeem a pill when shareholders express a clear preference for them to

do so---say, by tendering en masse to a non-coercive bid. Or, at the minimum, courts

could, in such circumstances, have required the managers to carry a heavier burden of

demonstrating in a meaningful way the benefits of maintaining the pill. Similarly,

state corporate statutes could have been amended to condition the use of poison pills

on the adoption of a charter provision allowing managers to do so.

        But this is not what Delaware and other states have done. Delaware has

imposed on the shareholders of Delaware corporations an arrangement whereby

managers enjoy a much greater level of protection from takeovers than they had

before without requiring shareholders’ consent or giving them some practical way of

getting out of an undesired arrangement.

        This is all consistent with the mid-stream problem discussed in Part I. 78

Delaware cares a great deal not only about new incorporations but also about

maintaining the large stock of companies it currently has. Managers play a crucial

role in how successful Delaware is in maintaining its current position. The need to

satisfy the preferences of managers of existing chartered corporations has proved to

be an important force in the development of Delaware’s law.

corporation any shares of its capital stock of any class or classes, such rights or options to be
evidenced by or in such instrument or instruments as shall be approved by the board of directors.



                                               36
              B. The Pro-Uncertainty Tilt of Delaware Antitakeover Law


       Besides predicting that states will tend to adopt corporate rules whose

substantive content benefits shareholders, the pro-state competition position also

entails that these rules would likely be formulated in a way that similarly maximizes

shareholder wealth.     Roberta Romano, one of the strongest supporters of state

competition, suggested in her earlier writings that one of the advantages of Delaware

law is its certainty and predictability. 79 It is important to realize that this dimension is

not the same as where the law stands substantively. For example, a body of law can

restrict takeovers greatly in either a predictable or fuzzy way. And, similarly, if the

law is permissive, this can again be done in a predictable or fuzzy way. That is, one

dimension is roughly where the line is drawn, and the other dimension is how clearly

that line is drawn.

       Other things being equal, predictability is desirable. It reduces uncertainty and

the amount of litigation. It is for these reasons that Romano viewed it as a virtue and

suggested that Delaware law’s certainty and predictability has enabled it to remain

dominant in the competition for corporate charters despite widespread copying of

Delaware law by other states. 80     The problem, however, is that Delaware law does

not enjoy this virtue of predictability and certainty.             Delaware courts have

consistently filled Delaware jurisprudence with principles that are open-ended and


78
       See supra Part I(A).
79
       See Roberta Romano, Law as Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle, 1 J.L.
Econ. & Org. 225, 273--79, 280--81 (1985); Roberta Romano, The State Competition Debate in
Corporate Law, 8 Cardozo L. Rev. 709, 720--25 (1987).
80
       See 1 J.L. Econ. & Org. at 226.


                                             37
unclear. 81 The principles throughout Delaware law contain terms which call for a

case-specific assessment by the court. Moreover, there is always some room for the

chancery court’s equitable intervention. Any plaintiffs’ lawyer knows that it would

be difficult to attack successfully a freezeout or to get a derivative suit to pass the test

formulated in Aronson v. Lewis. 82 But the outcome is never certain.

       There are reasons to believe that this is no accident.             Delaware might

purposely be maintaining a legal regime that encourages litigation. 83 Delaware’s

corporate lawyers, an important interest group in Delaware, benefit from more, rather

than less, litigation. Thus, regardless of where Delaware law stands substantively,

Delaware has an incentive and, consequently, the tendency to draw the line in a way

that is more fuzzy and litigation-inducing, than what would be good for shareholders.

       The pro-uncertainty tilt of Delaware’s takeover law is as apparent as it is in

other areas. Delaware could have given managers a great deal of power to “just say

no” while circumscribing very clearly the boundaries of what managers can and

cannot do. But, no, Delaware has chosen to do it in a way that leaves a fair amount of




81
         See generally Ehud Kamar, A Regulatory Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in
Corporate Law, 98 Col. L.Rev. 1908, 1913-23 (1998); J. Coates, “Fair Value” as an Avoidable
Rule of Corporate Law: Minority Discounts in Conflict Transactions, 107 U.Penn. L.Rev. ___
(1999) (forthcoming) (describing uncertain nature of Delaware law on discounts in fair value
determinations).
82
         473 A.2d 805 (Del. 1984).
83
         See Ehud Kamar, A Regula tory Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in Corporate Law,
98 Col. L.Rev. 1908, 1913-23 (1998); Douglas M. Branson, Indeterminacy: The Final Ingredient
in an Interest Group Analysis of Corporate Law, 43 Vand. L. Rev. 85 (1990); Jonathan R. Macey
& Geoffrey P. Miller, Toward an Interest-Group Theory of Delaware Corporate Law, 65 Texas L.
Rev. 469 (1987).


                                             38
uncertainty as to where exactly the line is drawn. 84 Characteristically of Delaware,

the court’s requirement of a very case-specific investigation, always keeps the door

open, at least a bit, to judicial intervention. 85 It is no coincidence how frequently

takeovers result in litigation.


                         C. Comparison to the British City Code


        We would like to end our observations on state takeover law by comparing it

to the regulatory arrangement created by Britain’s City Code on Takeovers and

Mergers. 86 British regulation of takeovers is interesting because it is basically in the

hands of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, a nongovernmental body, which

administers and revises the City Code. The City Code and its implementation is an

example of a system of regulation that is not imposed from the outside by a detached

governmental body but rather by a group that has strong connections to interested

parties. The chair of the panel is chosen by the Bank of England with other members

representing such groups as the insurance industry, pension funds, investment banks,

clearing houses, British industry and the London Exchange.87

        The British City Code contains a body of arrangements that is very different

from U.S. state takeover law when measured along the two dimensions the earlier

84
        See, e.g., Unocal, 493 A.2d 946, and Revlon, Inc. v. McAndrews & Forbes Holdings,
Inc., 506 A.2d 173 (Del. 1986) (court emphasized the need to conduct a very case-specific
investigation to determine whether a manager acted improperly in rebuffing a takeover attempt).
85
        See, e.g., Unitrin, Inc. v. American Gen. Corp., 651 A.2d 1361, 1374 (Del. 1995)
(describing the Unocal test as a “flexible paradigm that jurists can apply to the myriad of ‘fact
scenarios’ that confront corporate boards.”)
86
        See generally P. Begg, Corporate Acquisitions and Mergers (1991) (3d ed.).




                                               39
discussion has focussed on---the extent to which regulatory arrangements protect

managers, and the extent to which they generate confusion and litigation due to a lack

of clarity.

        On the first dimension, the City Code differs sharply from U.S. state takeover

law on managerial defensive tactics. In particular, the Code contains a sweeping

prohibition on defensive tactics unless shareholder consent is obtained.                    General

Principle seven of the City Code states that

        At no time after a bona fide offer has been communicated to the board
        of the offeree company, or after the board of the offeree company has
        reason to believe that a bona fide offer might be imminent, may any
        action be taken by the board of the offeree company in relation to the
        affairs of the company, without the approval of the shareholders in
        general meeting, which could effectively result in any bona fide offer
        being frustrated or in the shareholders being denied an opportunity to
        decide on its merits. 88

This general prohibition is reflected in Rule 21 of the City Code, which specifically

prohibits a target board from engaging in a list of certain defensive tactics without

shareholder approval89---a list which the Panel has made clear is not exhaustive. 90


87
        DeMott, Current Issues in Tender Offer Regulation: Lessons from the British, N.Y.U.L.
945, 954 (1983).
88
        P. Begg, Corporate Acquisitions and Mergers at A7.4 (emphasis added).
89
        Under Rule 21, a target boards may not unilaterally:
        (a) issue any authorized but unissued shares;
        (b) issue or grant options in respect of any unissued shares;
        (c) create or issue, or permit the creation or issue of, any securities carrying rights of
            conversion into or subscription for shares;
        (d) sell, dispose of or acquire, or agree to sell, dispose of or acquire, assets of a material
            amount;
        (e) enter into contracts otherwise than in the ordinary course of business.

Id. at A7.22
90
         See, e.g., Consolidated Gold Fields PLC (Takeover Panel, May 9, 1989), at 14
(concluding that the commencement of litigation against the bidder by a target board was
“frustrating action” in violation of General Principle 7)


                                                 40
       It is not the case that the City Code ignores the problems that takeovers might

pose. To prevent the possible pressure to tender problem, the Code provides that, if

an offer is successful, non-tendering shareholders will get a second opportunity to

tender, 91 much like state “redemption rights” statutes. But given that it’s possible to

enable shareholders to make an undistorted choice by having such an arrangement,

the Code does not leave any room for defensive tactics.

       Turning to the certainty/uncertainty dimension, the British regulatory

arrangement seems to provide more certainty and less room for litigation than those

under state law. The clear prohibition on the use of defensive tactics contained in the

City Code is one such example. It is not a “flexible” balancing test tailor-made for

endless litigation. 92 Indeed, a major concern of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers,

as well as others involved in London’s financial markets, is that the European Union

might pass takeover regulation that will enable targets to engage in strategic takeover

litigation so common in the United States and so rare in Great Britain. 93

       The reasons why the Code went in such a different direction might lie in the

different incentives its designers had from those who crafted U.S. state takeover law.

Presumably those responsible for the City Code gave less weight to managerial

interests because of the close connection at least some of them had with the interests

of shareholders. Moreover, corporate managers operating in a federal system such as

the United States have significantly more influence as they can reward states that


91
        Rules 91.-9.5. See P. Begg, Corporate Acquisitions and Mergers at A7.14-A7.15.
92
        Another example is the Code’s rigid timetable for the completion of a tender offer. A
takeover bid must be completed in no more than 102 days.
93
        See, e.g., Financial Times, Defending the Code (Nov. 4, 1997), p.12


                                             41
cater to their interests and punish those that do not through their incorporation and

reincorporation decisions.

       The British regulatory system is an example of a national system of regulation

that both addresses possible defects in the takeover process and ensures that

shareholders, not management, have the ultimate say on whether a takeover

proceeds. It accomplishes this without the degree of uncertainty and pervasive

takeover litigation that characterizes U.S. state takeover regulation.   The British

experience suggests that the federalist structure of corporate law might not be as

powerful a force for desirable corporate rules as some pro-state competition

advocates contend.


         III. TAKEOVER LAW AND THE S UPPORTERS OF STATE C OMPETITION


       So far we have argued that state takeover law is consistent with the theory of

state competition, outlined in Part I, which views such competition as problematic.

We now make our point in another way---by showing how supporters of state

competition are unable to square their position on state competition with their views

on the type of takeover regulation that maximizes shareholder value.

       As will become clear, the leading advocates of state competition are also

vigorous supporters of a robust market for corporate control. As a result, there is a

deep tension in their views. We begin, in Section A, by analyzing the reasoning of

four prominent proponents of state competition and how they try to reconcile their

respective positions on state competition and takeovers. In Section B, we will argue



                                         42
that their attempts at reconciling these two positions are unconvincing. We suggest

that a more productive path would be for them to reconsider their position on state

competition in light of their own arguments concerning the substantial benefits

takeovers can create for shareholders.


              A. The Dilemma Facing Supporters of State Competition


       The most prominent supporters of state competition---Ralph Winter, Frank

Easterbrook, Daniel Fischel and Roberta Romano---also simultaneously advocate a

legal regime that facilitates, rather than frustrates, takeovers. The hostility of state

law to takeovers, therefore, poses a serious problem. What would explain the poor

record of states in the takeover area without undermining their general position on

state competition? Assessing how successful they are in reconciling their facially

inconsistent positions will go a long way in determining how convincing their views

are on the desirability of state competition. Accordingly, we will examine these pro-

state competition scholars’ arguments.


1. Ralph Winter


       Ralph Winter formulated the classic response to Cary’s contention that state

competition results in a “race for the bottom” that harms shareholders. 94 He built his

critique on the observation that a corporation chartered in a state with an inefficient



94
       Ralph K. Winter, Jr., State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the
Corporation, 6 J. Legal Studies 251, 256 (1977).


                                          43
corporate code will have a lower rate of return on investment as a result. 95

Companies with sub-par rates of return will have greater difficulty raising capital, 96

have less success in the product market, 97 and be more likely to be the target of a

takeover.98 The consequences of inferior returns created by inefficient corporate rules

reduce managers’ private benefits of control, including their job security. 99

Managers, accordingly, have a strong incentive to ensure that the legal regime

governing the operations of their corporation result in shareholders receiving the

greatest possible return on their investment.        In other words, in Winter’s view,

managers will maximize shareholder value out of self-interest. 100

       At the same time, however, Winter expressed his general belief that a regime

that facilitated takeovers maximized corporate profits. 101         Profit-maximization is

obviously what shareholders, as residual claimants, typically want. Not surprisingly,

he was critical of state antitakeover statutes and, indeed, attributed part of the high

cost of takeovers to the comparatively regulatory light-handed federal law (the

Williams Act 102) regulating tender offers. There was much for Winter to object to.

Some “first-generation” state antitakeover statutes went so far as to prevent

acquisitions of companies, which had their principle place of business in the state,

unless a state official approved it.

95
        See Ralph K. Winter, Jr., The ‘Race for the Top’ Revisited: A Comment on Eisenberg, 89
Col. L.Rev. 1526, 1526 (1989).
96
        Ralph Winter, State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the Corporation, at
257.
97
        Id. at 264.
98
        Id. at 264--266.
99
        Id. at 264, 266.
100
        Id.
101
        Id. at 288.


                                             44
       In explaining how existing state antitakeover law, which he disapproved of

based on its effect on shareholder wealth, was consistent with his defense of state

competition, Winter made several points---points that, as we shall see, have often

been repeated by others. He stressed that Delaware’s antitakeover statute, by far the

most important state statute on the subject, was relatively innocuous. 103            More

importantly, Winter claimed that whether federal regulation was appropriate in the

takeover context was an issue “quite different” from the arguments raised by Cary. 104

Since existing state antitakeover statutes typically had extraterritorial application---

they applied to companies even if they were not chartered in the state---these laws,

accordingly, implicated a “chartering issue in only a peripheral sense.” 105 Indeed, the

extraterritorial features of antitakeover statutes, Winter believed, substantiated his

basic contention that states competing for corporate charters have strong incentives to

provide efficient corporate rules.106

       This last explanation, based on state antitakeover statutes’ extraterritorial

application, is obviously inadequate to explain the reaction of states to the Supreme

Court’s decision in MITE, 107 which called into serious question the constitutionality

of these statutes. After this decision, the vast majority of states, including Delaware,

quickly passed new antitakeover legislation that was confined to companies chartered

in the state. State antitakeover law, as a result, can no longer be cabined from the rest

102
       15 U.S.C. s 78m(d)-(e); 78n(d)-(f).
103
       Ralph Winter, State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the Corporation, at
289.
104
       Id. at 270.
105
       Id. at 289.
106
       Id.
107
       457 U.S. 627 (1981).


                                            45
of state corporate law in the way that Winter suggested. On the other hand, his other

two arguments---that state antitakeover law somehow raised different issues than

other aspects of corporate law and the reliance on Delaware’s regulatory light-touch--

-are ones that remain popular to this day with pro-state competition scholars.


2. Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel


       Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel are also strong, even passionate,

believers in state competition for corporate charters. Thus, in their academic work,

they presume that doctrines produced by state competition are efficient.108 However,

like Winter, they are vigorous supporters of takeovers and, as a result, strongly

oppose the use of any and all defensive tactics by target management,109 because

regulation that allows managers to impede takeovers is unjustified and socially

wasteful.

       The inconsistency in their position is even more obvious than was the case

with Winter. Easterbrook and Fischel have consistently argued, over a period of

some fifteen years in numerous articles, that state competition generally produces

efficient corporate rules. 110 Yet on this important issue state competition produces the


108
        See, e.g., Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Voting in Corporate Law, 26 J.L.&
Ec. 395, 398 (1983).
109
        See, e.g., Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Proper Role of a Target’s
Management in Responding to a Tender Offer, 94 Harv. L. Rev. 1161 (1981).
110
        See, e.g., Frank H. Easterbrook, Managers’ Discretion and Investors’ Welfare: Theories
and Evidence, 9 Del. J.Corp. L. 540 (1984); Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Voting in
Corporate Law, 26 J.L.& Ec. 395, 398 (1983); Daniel R. Fischel, The “Race to the Bottom”
Revisited: Reflections on Recent Developments in Delaware’s Corporation Law, 76 NW. U.L.
Rev. 913 (1982); see generally Frank H. Easterbrook and Daniel R. Fischel, The Economic
Structure of Corporate Law 1--40 (1991).


                                              46
opposite of what they strongly believe are desirable legal arrangements. To their

credit, they candidly acknowledge the problem state antitakeover legislation creates

for their position, describing it as “embarrassing.” 111     The dilemma they face is

painfully reflected in Amanda Acquisition Corp. v. Universal Foods Corp., 112 where

Judge Easterbrook, while considering the constitutionality of a state antitakeover

statute, forthrightly acknowledged the tension between his belief in both state

competition and the folly of antitakeover regulation.

       However, Easterbrook and Fischel, at the end of the day, are only willing to

concede that state antitakeover regulation reveals that state competition is not perfect.

State competition, they argue, creates efficient rules over a period of time. We must

be patient and recognize that the “long run takes time to arrive.” 113 They identify the

shortcoming in state competition, at least in the short-run, with respect to takeover

legislation as this: states that adopt antitakeover laws are not penalized as much as

perhaps they should be by competition from other states as investors will realize that

any state can pass antitakeover legislation mid-stream. 114 State antitakeover law, we

are assured, is a “special,” although important, case. 115

       Like Winter before them, Easterbrook and Fischel point to Delaware’s

antitakeover statute. They stress that it is relatively mild compared to those of other




111
       See Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law
221 (1991).
112
       877 F.2d 496 (7th Cir), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 955 (1989).
113
       Id. at 507.
114
       Id. at 222.
115
       Id. at 212.


                                            47
states. 116 This is used to substantiate the assertion that state competition, even in the

takeover context, creates powerful incentives for states to enact efficient regulation.


3. Roberta Romano


       Roberta Romano is another leading supporter of state competition. While

avoiding taking a stand on the issue in her initial writings, she now characterizes state

competition for corporate charters as the “genius of American Corporate Law.” 117

Her belief in state competition is as strong as anyone’s. Indeed, she has recently

argued that securities law should be recast, based on the American corporate law

model, so as to allow competition between chartering jurisdictions. 118

       Also, like Winter, Easterbrook and Fischel, Romano views legal arrangements

enabling managers to erect antitakeover defenses as inefficient. 119 She acknowledges

the “dismal track records of most states in takeover regulation.” 120 Is Romano any

more successful in resolving the conflict?

       In the course of defending the consistency of her position, Romano

emphasizes that Delaware has been slow to adopt antitakeover legislation, even

though it typically has been a leader in most major corporate law reforms. Moreover,

its antitakeover statute is not as draconian as other states, such as Pennsylvania’s


116
        Id. at 222--223
117
        See Roberta Romano, The Genius of American Corporate Law 1 (1993)
118
        Roberta Romano, Empowering Investors: A Market Approach to Securities Regulation,
107 Yale L.J. 2359 (1998).
119
        See, e.g., Roberta Romano, A Guide to Takeovers: Theory, Evidence and Regulation, 9
Yale J. on Reg. 119 (1992) (concluding that almost all state antitakeover law is unwarranted and
harmful).
120
        Id. at 859.


                                              48
disgorgement statute.121 Furthermore, Romano spends a great deal of time arguing

that, whatever the imperfections of state regulation, any federal takeover law is likely

to be worse.

       This last defense is hardly a ringing endorsement of state competition. Rather

than showing the “genius” of American Corporate law, it is rather an argument that

we must live in a highly imperfect world. We find it hard to imagine that Romano, or

indeed the other pro-state competition scholars we have discussed, would oppose a

hypothetical federal statute that sharply limited the ability of states to restrict

takeovers. Whether this is a realistic possibility is besides the point. Support for such

a statute would underline the fact that state competition suffers from serious

shortcomings. What, if anything, should be done about these shortcomings is another

analytical question.


               B. Why Supporters of State Competition Should Reconsider


       One type of reaction by state competition supporters, as we have seen, views

state takeover law as an anomaly, an exception, or an imperfection. This is most

explicit in Easterbrook and Fischel’s writings. The sentiment here seems to be that

even a process that has strong structural reasons to function well can fail from time to

time, and these failures do not imply that the process is not a good one.

       But it is not clear that one can brush aside takeover law as an anomaly or an

isolated failure, and comfortably continue to believe that state competition is such a

121
        See Roberta Romano, Competition for Corporate Charters and the Lesson of Takeover
Statutes, 61 Fordham L. Rev. 843, 855 (1993).


                                           49
great process. To start with, takeovers might well have been the most important issue

with respect to which state corporate law has had to develop a position in the last

twenty years.

       If states have produced bad takeover law, this was not a fluke, a one-time

isolated mistake. We are talking about a gradual process developing over quite a few

years, in many steps and decisions and with much attention and occupation by state

officials along the way. There were several waves of antitakeover statutes, 122 all

representing the persistent attempts by states to place impediments in front of

takeovers with little or no support in the academic literature. And as for judicial

decisions, this involved not one case, but rather an issue that has been visited and

revisited over many years. If state competition has persistently produced bad, even

indefensible, results concerning the most important corporate issue of recent times,

how can we be confident that it performs well elsewhere?

       All this means is that it is hard to brush this away as an anomalous exception

and continue to think state competition can reliably produce good results.

Easterbrook and Fischel’s explanation of why states have adopted inefficient takeover

legislation, the fact that these were mid-stream legislative changes, 123 is in no way

limited to takeovers. Mid-stream changes are possible with respect to any legal rule,

not just takeover regulation, that managers might wish to change. Moreover, mid-

stream changes are not only possible through a state changing its corporate code, due,




122
       See supra Part II(A)(1)(i)
123
       Supra Part II(A)(4).


                                         50
say, to campaign contributions, but by a corporation reincorporating to another state

as well.

       Another common reaction by supporters of state competition is to point out

that Delaware has not been as extreme as some other states in its antitakeover statute.

This is true. But through case law, and in particular the approval of the poison pill,

Delaware has erected formidable barriers to takeovers.         Delaware’s antitakeover

position has had, as it typically does, a central and very influential role. The use of

poison pills is now very widespread. The debate is over the body of law produced by

state competition. And while states differ somewhat in the extent to which they

restrict takeovers, they all by and large go much further in that direction than Winter,

Easterbrook, Fischel, and Romano would approve of.

       While the pro-state competition view has a serious problem accounting for

existing state takeover law, needing to rely on excuses and anomalies, the view that

Cary held, and that we are advocating, has no problem whatsoever explaining this.

Our concern with the possible shortcomings of state competition for corporate

charters is not only consistent with the state takeover law that we observe but helps

explain why state law has evolved in the regrettable direction that it has.          By

reconsidering their largely unqualified endorsement of state competition, supporters

of state competition can gain both a better explanation of why states have adopted

restrictive takeover rules and retain their belief in the efficiency of a more permissive

legal arrangement.




                                           51
                                   IV. C ONCLUSION


       This Article has sought to highlight the problems involved in state competition

for corporate charters. On some important issues, states might have incentives to

provide rules that are attractive to managers but not shareholders. Takeover law is

one important area in which state competition might well have produced a body of

law that excessively restricts takeovers. Takeover law is one important area in which

state competition is likely to fail. There are strong theoretical reasons to expect that

state competition will work to produce a body of corporate law that excessively

protects incumbent managers.       The development of state takeover law, we have

argued, is consistent with this view. It should lead the many who offer unqualified

support for state competition to reassess their position.




                                            52
