NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON CRISIS PREVENTION:
LESSONS FROM MEXICO
AND EAST ASIA
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 7233
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7233

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

This paper is a revised version of a paper presented at the Brookings-World Bank Conference
on “Financial Markets and Development: Preventing Crises in Emerging Markets,” March 2627, 1999. I am indebted to Rajesh Chakrabarti, Kyongchul Kim and Alejandro Jara for
assistance. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexicao and East Asia
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 7233
July 1999
JEL No.F32, F34
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a comparative analysis of the East Asian and Mexican crises, and draws
lessons for the emerging economies. Although much of the discussion concentrates on East Asia and
Mexico, I also draw on the history of some previous crisis episodes. I argue that in spite of the efforts to
understand the anatomy of currency crises, there are still a large number of controversial and unresolved
issues. More to the point, I argue that some of the lessons extracted from these crises are based on a
misreading of the historical record. As a result, some of the policy implications that have emerged from this
debate are, to say the least, questionable. In particular, I make two points: First, I argue that, in general,
current account ratios have limited usefulness in determining a country’s financial health. Although I fall
short of taking the position that the current account is completely irrelevant, I do argue that a rigid
interpretation of current account ratios may be highly misleading. Second, I argue that the rapidly growing
popularity of controls on capital inflows as a device for reducing external vulnerability is rooted in a
misreading of the recent history of external crises.

Sebastian Edwards
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1

“But now, ah now, to learn from crises…”
Walt Whitman
I. Introduction

The East Asian currency crises rocked the conventional wisdom. All of a sudden the world seemed
to be on its head. Yesterday’s “miracle” countries became today’s pariahs, and policies that were supposed
to be emulated by every emerging nation, and that were pushed with unrestricted enthusiasm by the
multilateral institutions, became questionable. The news is replete with stunning stories about bankruptcies,
questionable loans, dwindling international reserves, weak banks and plunging currencies. Rescue packages
had to be put together in a haste, and the International Monetary Fund had to coordinate bailout after bailout.
Figures 1 through 3 present a picture of the East Asian crisis as seen from the perspective of exchange rates,
interest rates and stock markets.
To be sure, most observers were aware that Thai finance companies were not completely healthy,
and that in Indonesia the succession from Suharto was far from resolved. But the scope and depth of the
crises shocked even veteran East Asian analysts. Business executives across the world asked themselves
how come their staff-- or those highly regarded consultants, for that matter -- did not forewarn them of the
impeding collapse of the region.
By mid 1998 market participants were asking where the next crisis would erupt. Russia and Brazil,
with large fiscal deficits and overvalued exchange rates, became obvious candidates, and eventually joined the
ranks of crises nations. The Russian debacle was particularly traumatic, inflicting heavy losses on a number
of large financial institutions. When the Russian moratorium was announced, investors scrambled for cover
and safety. The demand for liquidity soared, yields on the US long bond dropped to an all-time low, and
interest rate spreads widened significantly, seriously straining the financial markets in the United States and
other industrialized countries. The near collapse of Long Term Capital Management, and its subsequent
rescue by a group of investment houses coordinated by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, clearly
captured the remarkable degree of integration of world financial markets.
By early 1997 a “consensus view” on the causes of the Mexican crises had developed in policy
circles. A direct byproduct of this “consensus” was the identification of a set of vulnerability indicators that
were supposed to act as early signals of an impending balance of payments crisis. Surprisingly, however,
East Asian analysts tended to ignore these Mexican lessons and, thus, underestimated the dangers of a serious
collapse in the region. In the aftermath of the East Asian meltdown, there has been a renewed effort by
private sector analysts, policy experts, journalists, and academics to better understand the causes behind
currency crises. These studies have reinforced, and in some cases amplified, the conclusions previously

2

reached by analyses of the Mexican crisis, and have concentrated on the role of large external imbalances,
volatile capital flows, weak banking systems, loss in confidence, and overvalued exchange rates. 1
The purpose of this paper is to provide a comparative analysis of the East Asian and Mexican crises,
and to draw broad lessons that would be helpful to the Latin American nations and other emerging economies.
Although much of the discussion concentrates on East Asia and Mexico, I also draw on the history of some
previous crisis episodes. I argue that in spite of the efforts to understand the anatomy of currency crises,
there are still a large number of controversial and unresolved issues. More to the point, I argue that some of
the lessons extracted from this crisis are based on a misreading of the historical record. As a result, some of
the policy implications that have emerged from this debate are, to say the least, questionable. In particular, I
make two points: First, I argue that, in general, current account ratios have limited usefulness in determining
a country’s financial health. Although I fall short of taking the position that the current account is completely
irrelevant, I do argue that a rigid interpretation of current account ratios may be highly misleading. Second, I
argue that the rapidly growing popularity of controls on capital inflows as a device for reducing external
vulnerability is rooted on a misreading of the recent history of external crises, and in particular on a
misunderstanding of some key Latin American experiences.
The paper is organized as follows: Section I is the introduction. In Section II I discuss what I have
called, for lack of a better term, the “consensus view” on the Mexican crisis, and I investigate the extent to
which the lessons from this consensus view were applicable to the East Asian nations. In this section I also
discuss the way in which the developments in East Asian during 1997-98 have, in turn, affected this
“consensus view” on crisis prevention. In section III I discuss the relationship between current account
deficits and currency crises. Section IV is devoted to a discussion of the effectiveness of capital controls.
Finally, in section V I deal with some unresolved issues, and I emphasize Latin American lessons, from the
1980s debt crisis, on corporate and financial restructuring. There is also a data appendix with some key data
from East Asia and Latin America.

II. Lessons from the Mexico and East Asia: The Emergence of a “Consensus View”

The Mexican meltdown was followed by abundant post-mortems and a few mea-culpas. The IMF
and the World Bank tried to explain their involvement in the episode, the financial sector convened wise-men
commissions, and the U.S. Senate investigated the U.S. Treasury’s role in the unleashing of the crisis.
Grandiose phrases were uttered, and everyone agreed that a greater degree of vigilance was needed to avoid
major crises in the future. In retrospect it may be tempting to argue that most of this was lip service, and that
international bureaucrats and Wall Street professionals went on with their business, leaving the Mexican crisis
behind as a bitter experience that had affected that year’s bonuses and had somewhat bruised their

3

reputations, but that would not be repeated in the foreseeable future. They were wrong. Merely thirty
months later the East Asian “tigers” began to crumble in a way that, in more than one respect, resembled the
Mexican saga.
In spite of some differences of opinion, by late-1996 and early-1997 somewhat of a consensus on the
main policy lessons from the Mexican crisis had emerged. Although not every author subscribed to every one
of them, I would argue that the following list constitutes what can be called the generally accepted consensus
view from Mexico:2

•

Pegged (or very rigid) exchange rates are dangerous; real exchange rate overvaluation may be lethal.

•

Very large current account deficits matter, even when they are financed with private funds, and
when public finances are under control.

•

Portfolio capital flows can be highly volatile. In particular, short term capital flows may be highly
destabilizing. Issuing foreign-currency denominated debt to defend the currency may prove to be
extremely costly in the eventuality that the exchange rate peg has to be abandoned. Moreover, central
banks should avoid sterilizing international reserve losses in the context of rigid exchange rates.

•

Banks should be supervised closely; weak banks invite contagion. The existence of weak banks will
reduce the authorities’ ability to use interest rates as a macroeconomic tool, and is likely to amplify a
currency crisis.

•

Transparency in financial operations is important to build confidence among investors. Timely and
accurate information is of essence.

Naturally, these lessons are related among themselves and should not be viewed in isolation; nor should
they be considered as a rigid list of “necessary” or “sufficient” conditions for a crisis to erupt. The way to
think about them is as a set of factors that, according to a large number of analysts, played a critical role in
the unleashing of the Mexican events and that, thus, should be watched closely in other emerging countries.
As mentioned, and as it will become clear in the discussion presented below, not every analyst placed the
same emphasis on everyone of these factors, and some observers even disagreed with some of the lessons
listed above.
In the rest of this section I elaborate briefly on each of these five Mexican lessons, and I discuss whether
they were applicable to the case of the East Asian nations. I also discuss the way in which this consensus view
has evolved in light of the East Asian, and subsequent crises of the 1990s (Russia and Brazil). In sections III
and IV of the paper I focus in greater detail on two lessons that, in my opinion, can be potentially misleading –
the role of large current account deficits, and capital inflows-induced destabilization.

4

II.1 On the dangers of rigid exchange rates and real exchange rate overvaluation .
The Mexican crisis brought to the core of the policy debate the merits of rigid nominal exchange
rates, both in the short and long runs. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, and after a period of relative
disfavor, rigid exchange rates made a comeback in academic and policy circles. A number of authors argued
that fixed, or predetermined, nominal exchange rates provided an effective device for guiding a disinflation
program and maintaining macroeconomic stability.3 According to this view, a prerequisite for a successful
exchange rate-based stabilization program, is that the country in question has its public finances in order.
Mexico had done this as early as 1988, the year that exchange rate-based stabilization program known as the
Pacto de Solidaridad was implemented in full force. 4
A recurrent problem with exchange rate-based stabilization programs – and one that affected the
countries of the South American cone during the early 1980s -- is that inflation tends to have a considerable
degree of inertia. That is, domestic prices and wages will continue to increase even after the nominal
exchange rate has been fixed. This, in turn, will result in a decline in exports’ competitiveness, as domestic
costs will rise at a faster pace than proceeds from exports. Eventually, as was the case in Mexico between
1988 and 1994, this perverse dynamics will generate a serious degree of real exchange rate overvaluation, a
slowdown in exports, and a very large current account deficit. Dornbusch (1997, p. 131) has made this point
forcefully within the context of the Mexican crisis:
“Exchange rate-based stabilization goes through three phases: The first one is very
useful…[E]xchange rate stabilization helps bring under way a stabilization…In the second phase
increasing real appreciation becomes apparent, it is increasingly recognized, but it is inconvenient to
do something…Finally, in the third phase, it is too late to do something. Real appreciation has come
to a point where a major devaluation is necessary. But the politics will not allow that. Some more
time is spent in denial, and then – sometime – enough bad news pile up to cause the crash.”
An additional complication is that under rigid exchange rates, negative external shock can result in a
costly adjustment process. In principle, in a country with fixed exchange rates the authorities should react to
a negative shock – a worsening of the terms of trade or a decline in capital inflows -- by tightening monetary
and fiscal policies, until external balance is re-established. A direct consequence of this is that economic
activity will decline significantly, and the rate of unemployment will tend to increase sharply. Whether in the
real world this process is allowed to play its way, depends largely on political economy factors. In their
analysis of the Mexican crisis, Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1995 p. 71) argue that it is “hard to find cases
where governments have let the [adjustment process under fixed exchange rate] run its course.” This,
according to them, reduces the degree of credibility of pegged exchange rate regimes, and provides a good
argument for adopting more flexible ones.

5

As may be seen in Table 1, in spite of Mexico’s negative experience with a rigid exchange rate
regime, all five of the East Asian nations had a rigid -- de facto, pegged or quasi pegged -- exchange rate
system with respect to the US dollar. Whereas this system worked relatively well while the US dollar was
relatively weak in international currency markets, things turned to the worse when, starting in mid 1996, the
dollar began to strengthen relative to the Japanese yen. Naturally, as the dollar appreciated relative to the yen,
so did those currencies pegged to it. This strengthening of the East Asian currencies squeezed
competitiveness of exports, and fed back into larger current account imbalances.
The Mexican crisis reaffirmed the importance of avoiding overvalued exchange rates -- that is, real
exchange rates that are incompatible with maintaining sustainable external accounts. In the spring 1994
meetings of the Brookings Institution Economics Panel, Rudi Dornbusch argued that the Mexican peso was
overvalued by at least 30 percent, and that the authorities should rapidly find a way to solve the problem. In
that same meeting, Stanley Fischer, soon to become the IMF's First Deputy Managing Director, expressed his
concerns regarding the external sustainability of the Mexican experiment. Internal U.S. government
communications released to the U.S. Senate Banking Committee during 1995 also reflect a mounting concern
among some U.S. officials. Several staff members of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for example,
argued that a devaluation of the peso could not be ruled out.5 In their analysis of the Mexican crisis and its
sequel during 1995, Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996) emphasized the role of real exchange rate
overvaluation; according to their computations, during the 1990-94 period the Mexican peso was
overvalued, on average, by almost 29 percent (see their table 9). A thorough analysis by Ades and Kaune
(1997), using a detailed empirical models that decomposed fundamentals’ changes in permanent and
temporary, indicates that by the fourth quarter of 1994 the Mexican peso was overvalued by 16 percent.6
After the Mexican debacle, academic and private sector analysts redoubled their efforts to understand
real exchange rate behavior in emerging economies. Arguably, one of the most serious efforts was
undertaken at Goldman-Sachs (G-S), where a dynamic model based on modern time series techniques was
developed to evaluate the appropriateness of real exchange rates in 12 countries. The first version of this
model, released in October of 1996, indicated that the real exchange rate was overvalued in Indonesia, the
Philippines and Thailand. Subsequent releases of the model incorporated additional countries, and suggested
that the Korean won and the Malaysian ringgit were also overvalued. In mid 1997, Goldman-Sachs
introduced a new refined version of its model; according to these new estimates, in June of 1997 the
currencies of Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand were overvalued, as were the
currencies of Hong Kong and Singapore. In contrast, these calculations suggested that the Taiwanese dollar
was undervalued by approximately 7 percent. Although according to G-S, in June 1997 the degree of
overvaluation was rather modest in all five East Asian-crisis countries, it had been persistent for a number of

6

years: in Indonesia the real exchange rate had been overvalued since 1993, in Korea in 1988, in Malaysia in
1993, in the Philippines in 1992, and in Thailand since 1990.
According to Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996) by late 1994 the real exchange rate picture in the
East Asian countries was mixed and looked as follows: While the Philippines and Korea were experiencing
overvaluation, Malaysia and Indonesia had undervalued real exchange rates, and the Thai Baht appeared to be
in equilibrium. In a recent study Chinn (1998) used a standard monetary model to estimate the
appropriateness of nominal exchange rates in East Asia before the crisis. According to his results, in the first
quarter of 1997 Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand had overvalued exchange rates, while Korea and the
Philippines were facing undervaluation.
Although in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis a broad consensus emerged on the perils of real
exchange rate overvaluation, there was less of an agreement on what type of nominal exchange rate policy
emerging countries should follow. Some authors argued that after a short initial period with a rigid exchange
rate, a crawling peg should be adopted. This position was taken by Dornbusch (1997, p 137), who argued
“crawl now, or crash later,” and by Bruno (1995 p.282) who said, in general, that “[t]he choice of the
exchange rate as the nominal anchor only relates to the initial phase of stabilization.” A similar position was
taken by Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1995) who argued that “[t]he effectiveness of exchange rate pegging is
probably higher in the early stages of an anti-inflation programme…” Goldstein (1998 p. 51), maintained that
“all things considered, moving toward greater flexibility of exchange rate at an early stage (before the
overvaluation becomes too large) will be the preferred course of action…”
Others, however, have pointed out that most emerging markets are in a position to adopt a floating
exchange rate. 7 For example, in a May 1995 World Bank paper on “Managing Capital Flows in East Asia,”
Wang and Shilling (1995, p. 54) went as far as saying that one of Mexico’s main lessons was that
“[e]xchange rates should be flexible and combined with an appropriate monetary and fiscal policy so that the
current account deficit does not grow to unsustainable levels.” Another group – rather small in the months
that followed the Mexican crisis, but growing rapidly since the East Asian debacle --, maintained that the
Argentine experience since 1991 suggests that, within the context of a currency board, overvaluation may be
corrected through improvements in productivity (Bartley 1997).
After the East Asian, Russian and Brazilian crises, economists’ views on nominal exchange rate
regimes began to evolve quite rapidly. Fixed-but-adjustable regimes have been losing adepts, while the two
extreme positions –- complete fixity through a currency board or dollarization, and floating rates are gaining
popularity. From a policy stand point, one of the more difficult issues is designing an “exit strategy,” that
would allow countries with a rigid exchange rate regime to make a transition towards a more flexible one
(Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz 1996).

7

II.2 Very large current account deficits matter
In 1990 the international financial markets rediscovered Mexico, and large amounts of capital began
flowing into the country. As a result, Mexico could finance significant current account deficits -- in 1992-94
they averaged almost 7% of GDP. When some analysts pointed out that these deficits were very large, the
Mexican authorities responded by arguing that, with the fiscal accounts under control, there was no reason to
worry. The implicit notion was that current account deficits are a matter of concern only when they coexist
with large fiscal imbalances. In 1993 the Bank of Mexico went as far as maintaining that:

“...the current account deficit has been determined exclusively by the private sector’s
decisions...Because of the above and the solid position of public finances, the current account deficit
should clearly not bee a cause for undue concern. (p. 179-80)”
At the light of the Mexican crisis a large number of analysts maintained that this argument, sometimes
referred to as Lawson’s doctrine, is seriously flawed. In an address to the Board of Governors of the InterAmerican Development Bank, Larry Summers (1996), the US Undersecretary of the Treasury, said “current
account deficits cannot be assumed to be benign because the private sector generated them.” This position
has also been taken by the IMF. In evaluating the role of the Fund during the Mexican crisis, the Director of
the Western Hemisphere Department and the Chief of the Mexico Division wrote: “large current account
deficits, regardless of the factors underlying them are likely to be unsustainable (Loser and Williams, 1997, p
268). Secretary Summers went as far as saying that “close attention should be paid to any current account
deficit in excess of 5% of GDP, particularly if it is financed in a way that could lead to rapid reversals.”
In the 1994 Brookings Panel session on Mexico, Stanley Fischer supported the view that large
current account deficits are dangerous. He argued that:

“the Mexican current account deficit is huge, and it is being financed largely by portfolio investment.
Those investments can turn around very quickly and leave Mexico with no choice but to
devalue…And as the European and especially the Swedish experiences show, there may be no
interest rate high enough to prevent an outflow and a forced devaluation” (1994, p. 306).
The issue, of course, is that current account deficits are financed by the sale of domestic securities
to foreigners. This means that the current account position a country can maintain over the medium run will
be determined by the pace at which foreigners want to accumulate that country’s financial liabilities (bonds,
CDs, bank debt, stocks and so on). If foreigners lose confidence in the country, they will rapidly reallocate
their portfolio, generating massive capital outflows forcing the country to go through an adjustment process.

8

Immediately following the Mexican crisis the view that under most circumstances -- and even if
public finances are under control --, current account deficit can rarely exceed 4 to 5 percent of GDP gained
considerable popularity among private sector analysts. This view is clearly captured by Milesi-Ferreti and
Razin (1996):

“What persistent level of current account deficits should be considered sustainable? Conventional
wisdom is that current account deficits above 5% of GDP flash a red light, in particular if the deficit
is financed with short-term debt…”
And according to Ades and Kaune (1997) the threshold number level that usually triggers concern among
analysts is 4% of GDP. A number of authors, however, argued that the fact that Mexico had had a large
current account deficit in 1990-94 should not be generalized to most – or not even the majority – of
developing countries. This view was taken, for example, by Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996) who found
out that, contrary to popular accounts, high current account deficits did not explain the turmoil of 1995. A
similar perspective was taken by Calvo and Mendoza (1996), and Frankel and Rose (1996).
In spite of these disagreements, the concern with large current account deficits was serious enough
for a number of investment banks to attempt estimating a sustainable level of current account deficit for the
major emerging economies. According to the Goldman-Sachs’ model, in late 1996 Malaysia and Thailand
were running current accounts deficits that exceeded – but not by too much – their sustainable levels. In
Indonesia, Korea and the Philippines the actual current account deficits were below what was estimated to be
sustainable (see the discussion in section III for details).8
Whether “large” current account deficits were in fact a central cause behind the East Asian debacle
continues to be a somewhat controversial issue. After analyzing the available evidence, in a recent
comprehensive study Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1998) analyze the period leading to the East Asian crisis,
and argue that there is some support for the position that large current account deficits were one of the
principal factors behind the crisis. According to them, “as a group, the countries that came under attack in
1997 appear to have been those with large current account deficits throughout the 1990s. (emphasis in the
original, p. 7).” And then, they add in a rather guarded way, “prima facie evidence suggests that current
account problems may have played a role in the dynamics of the Asian meltdown (p. 8).” Radelet and Sachs
(1998) have also argued that large current account deficits were an important factor behind the crisis. And,
commenting on the eruption of the crisis in Thailand the Chase Manhattan Bank (1997) also argued that large
current account deficits had been a basic cause behind the crises.
There are some problems with this view, however. Perhaps the most important one is that, as may
be seen from Table 2, with the exceptions of Malaysia and Thailand the current account deficits were not

9

very large. Take for instance the 1990-96 period: for the five crisis countries the deficit exceeded the
arbitrary 5% threshold in only 12 out of 35 possible times. The frequency of occurrence is even lower for
the two years preceding the crisis: 3 out of 10 possible times. Some authors have attempted to analyze the
magnitude of these deficits using formal solvency criteria. However, as I argue in section III of this paper,
even when solvency- based models are used, simple ratio analyses are bound to generate misleading results.

II.3 Short term portfolio capital flows can be highly volatile
Perhaps one of the most difficult issues in designing a market-oriented reform program refers to the
sequencing of policies. A key question in the sequencing debate has been whether the opening of the capital
account should take place early on in the process, or if some form of impediments to capital mobility should
be retained until the liberalization of trade has been consolidated and the domestic banking sector is strong
enough (Edwards 1984). Mexico lifted capital controls in late 1989, rather early in its reform process, and
before the banking sector had been privatized. Between 1990 and December 1993 massive volumes of short
term capital moved into the country; foreigners’ investments in the Mexican stock market increased from less
than US$5 billion to more than US$54 billion; during that same period, foreigners holdings of Mexican
government securities increased by almost US$50 billion.
After the assassination of PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio in March, 1994, there was
a significant slowdown in capital inflows into Mexico. The authorities’ faced this situation by following a
three-part strategy. The exchange rate was allowed to climb to the top of the band, interest rates on short
term peso denominated securities were allowed to increase somewhat, and an increasingly larger volume of
dollar-linked securities – the infamous Tesobonos – were issued. Throughout the year the Bank of Mexico
sterilized the losses of international reserves in an almost one-to-one fashion.9 The increase in interest rates
was timid, as the authorities feared that that policy could generate two non-desirable effects: first, it would
slow down the recovery in an election year, and second, and more important, a significant hike in interest
rates would have impacted negatively on an already weakened domestic banking sector (Edwards 1998a). As
the year progressed, the issuing of Tesobonos became the principal element of Mexico’s strategy. By the
second half of the year, many wary foreign investors began to withdraw their funds from Mexico. Towards
the end of the year, sensing a growing disequilibrium, domestic residents moved large volumes of funds out
of the country. On December 19, with the level of international reserves dangerously low Mexico broadened
the band. A few days later it became apparent that the new band was not sustainable, and the peso was
floated.
After the devaluation the large volume of Tesobonos came back to haunt Mexico, and magnified the
effects of the devaluation. As the value of the peso plunged, it became increasingly difficult for Mexico to

10

pay its foreign obligations. During the first eight months of 1995 more than US$15 billion of Tesobonos were
maturing, and without access to new monies Mexico moved dangerously close to defaulting on its official
debts. It was only after the U.S. Treasury and IMF massive assistance packages that an orderly workout
could be achieved.
Between 1995 and 1997 almost every post-mortem on Mexico emphasized the role of volatile capital
flows in the unleashing of the crisis. Birdsall, Gavin and Hausman (1997), for example, have argued that “the
Mexican crisis illustrates the dangers of short term debt.” A similar position was taken by Sachs, Tornell and
Velasco (1996), and by Calvo and Mendoza (1996). Although the analytical stories behind these papers are
somewhat different – some emphasize a self fulfilling panic, while others concentrate on herd behavior – the
bottom line in all of them is unmistakable: if there is a change in investors’ sentiments, capital flows can be
reversed suddenly, generating major dislocations and, even, a major crisis.
The initial reaction to the belief that capital flows were at the center of the crisis was somewhat
guarded. Gavin, Hausmann, and Leiderman (1996) argued that, under some circumstances, it would make
sense to implement policies aimed at slowing down capital inflows. The cases of Chile and Colombia were
mentioned as possible examples on how to manage large inflows of capital. Others argued that the way in
which capital inflows were intermediated made a big difference and that banks, through which most flows
were channeled into the domestic economy, should be regulated closely. Not surprisingly, this was the view
taken by the U.S. Treasury.
Interestingly enough, the most influential analyses on the role of capital inflows had been written
before the crisis. In a series of papers Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993, 1995). argued that very large
capital inflows created three type of problems for policy makers. First, capital inflows induce a real exchange
rate appreciation; second, it is possible that they are not intermediated efficiently, generating a misallocation
of resources; and third, sudden reversals in the flows may lead to a crisis. After contemplating a series of
policy measures the authors’ concluded that a pragmatic approach to managing capital inflows would possibly
work best:
“[T]here are grounds to support a policy intervention mix based on the imposition of a tax on short
term capital imports, on enhancing the flexibility of exchange rates, and on raising marginal reserve
requirements on short term bank deposits.” (1995, p. 380)
While individual countries’ experiences differed, short term portfolio funds were
substantial in most of East Asia during 1995-97. For example, and contrary to the cases of most emerging
economies, Indonesia lifted capital controls very early on, allowing short term capital to move in and out of
the country with little impediments. Thailand, on the other hand, established in 1993 a government-run

11

institution (the BIBF) to help attract foreign capital. Malaysia maintained some form of controls on short term
(portfolio) movements until 1996, at which point they were somewhat eased.
Korea was, at least in paper, an exception among the East Asian countries. For a long time the
Korean authorities were skeptical of lifting controls on short term capital, arguing that their inherent volatility
would generate major dislocation. This reluctance towards allowing a higher degree of capital mobility was,
in fact, a difficulty in Korea’s negotiations to join the OECD. Interestingly enough, and in spite of the
reluctance to open the stock market to foreign funds, Korea allowed its banks to borrow very heavily and at
very short maturities, from international banks. By the end of 1996, for example, Korean banks had
borrowed US$67 billion from OECD banks, of which US$50 billion is estimated to have had a maturity of less
than one year. What made things even worse was that by 1996 most of these monies were being used to
shore up Korean conglomerates whose extravagant investments had gone bad.10
According to the Bank of International Settlements, by the end of 1996 short term (less than a year)
lending by industrialized countries’ banks to the East Asian nations was reaching extremely high levels. In
Korea, for example, short-term bank loans from the advanced nations exceeded two times the volume of
(gross) international reserves. In Indonesia, short term foreign banks’ loans exceeded gross international
reserves by more than one third. In late 1997 total short term debt exceeded total reserves in Malaysia by
more than 60 percent. These figures are not very different from those from Mexico in 1994. Taiwan, on the
other hand, offers a sharp contrast; by early 1997, short term debt to foreign banks was less than 20 percent
of international reserves.
It is difficult to find an evaluation of the East Asian crisis that does not ascribe a central role to large
capital flows in the region’s debacle. Most authors’ have emphasized the fact that short term capital is
particularly volatile, and that in a world with high capital mobility losses in confidence massive portfolio
reallocation and large losses in reserves. (See Goldstein 1998, Chote 1998, Fischer 1998). An important
lesson from these crises is that international reserve management is key in preventing currency crises.
Traditionally, analysts have measured the adequacy of a country’s international reserves by comparing them
to the annual volume of imports. This measure is, of course, irrelevant in a world were capital can move
freely. As Edwards (1989), Calvo and Mendoza (1996) and Sachs and Radelet (1998), among others, have
argued, the appropriate way to measure reserves is in relation to the domestic stock of money (M1 or M2).
See table 3 for the evolution of the M1 to reserves ratio in a number of East Asian countries.
Although large capital inflows were on almost everyone’s list of causes of the Mexican crisis, by
early 1997 there were no massive calls for imposing capital controls on inflows. Even though views differed,
as in the case of other policies, the consensus seemed to recognize the importance of sequencing arguments:
the capital account should be opened once some key objective of reforms – such as fiscal stabilization, trade

12

reform, and the implementation of modern supervision -- had been attained. The Asian crisis changed all of
that, and in its wake the calls for controlling capital mobility have rapidly increased. These proposals have
come from academics, journalists, international civil servants and financiers. Some, such as Krugman
(1998b) have argued that countries that are affected by a crisis should contemplate imposing temporary
controls on capital outflows. This policy would allow the country in question to lower interest rates and
restructure its economy in an orderly fashion. A more popular proposition, however, relates to imposing
controls on capital inflows as a way of preventing currency crises. A growing number of authors have
claimed that the example of Chile – where between 1991 and 1995 capital inflows were subject to a one-year
reserve requirement --, shows that restrictions on capital inflows (ands especially short term flows) may
reduce a country’s degree of vulnerability (Massad, 1998, Ito 1999, Rodrik 1998). I discuss this issue in
greater detail in section IV of this paper.

II.4 Banks and other financial institutions should be supervised closely
What made the Mexican crisis so severe was that it went beyond the exchange rate sphere, engulfing
the banking system. In 1991 the Mexican government began to privatize the 19 banks that had been
nationalized in 1982-83, during the debt crisis. The privatization process was completed in 1992, with every
bank being sold at several times its book value. At the time this was hailed as a great success, even though it
actually should have been a matter of concern. The new owners -- mostly large industrial and commercial
conglomerates, but also (as we later learned) illegal cartels -- knew very little about banking and decided not
to inject new capital into the recently acquired banks (Edwards 1998a).
During the early 1990s Mexico’s newly privatized banks were eager to get into new lines of business,
including housing loans, consumer credit and reversed mortgages. The abundance of foreign capital
permitted a remarkable credit expansion during 1991-94, when bank loans increased in real terms at an annual
rate in excess of 25%. The bad news was that at the same time the ratio of past due loans to total loans more
than doubled, from 4 to 8.3% of bank’s portfolio.
Mexico found out that it was not easy to effectively and rapidly create a solid bank regulatory
framework. The lack of trained personnel -- including inspectors and accountants -- slowed down the
process, as did the rivalry between different government institutions with overlapping responsibilities. When
the peso crisis erupted in December 1994, the supervisory system was still seriously underdeveloped and
Mexico’s financial sector was in a very weak position. Moreover, the type of policies that could have help
avert the exchange rate crisis -- the tightening of monetary and fiscal policy in 1994, for example-conceivably would have made bank’s financial health even weaker, by increasing the number of bankruptcies.

13

Birdsall, Gavin and Hausmann (1997 p. 289) argue that the main policy lesson from Mexico is that
“policy-makers need to keep a vigilant eye on the banking system. In particular, they should ‘lean against the
wind’ of lending booms, to ensure that bank lending does not grow too rapidly, and they should ensure that
banks are robust enough to weather the shocks to which they will inevitably be exposed.” Similar points
were made by Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1995), and Hale (1997), among others. In 1996 U.S.
Undersecretary of the Treasury, Larry Summers argued that to the extent that bank supervision was
appropriate, there would be no need for emerging countries to restrict capital mobility:

“[C]ountries should be very cautious about imposing capital controls with the objective of
discouraging capital inflows…It is appropriate for supervisory authorities to think about reserve
requirements and new regulations, and to be prepared to respond aggressively to changes in the
pattern of capital inflows, through improvements in regulation and supervision” (1995, p. 55)
As in Mexico, the banking sector in every East Asian country was weak and poorly supervised. In
Indonesia, for example, a number of banks -- many of them owned by relatives and close associates of
President Suharto -- had systematically financed questionable projects and, in a way that resembled Mexico’s
experience merely three years earlier, had fueled a remarkable real estate bubble. The weakness of many of
the East Asian banks was well known to international analysts. In May 1997, for example, Standard & Poor’s
lowered the ratings of the government-controlled Thai Finance Corporation (IFCT), and in June of that year
financial analysts estimated that in Thailand non-performing assets of the financial system were reaching 12 to
15 percent of loans (see Table 4).
It was also well known that many Korean banks were having trouble getting paid by their clients. As
some of the medium size chaebols ran into financial difficulties, Korean banks rolled over their debts at the
same time as they increased their short term borrowing from international banks. The extent of supervision
of Korea’s banks was so weak that they were basically free to speculate in the international financial markets.
In fact, throughout most of 1997 many of the Korean banks borrowed short term in Yen, in order to
purchase Brazilian and other Latin American Brady bonds! As early as November 1996, Goldman Sachs
expressed its concern over the health of Korea’s banks, giving them the next to worst rating in its
vulnerability analysis. And according to Merrill Lynch, by late 1997 the Korean “banking system’s equity
capital has been effectively wiped out.” (Merrill Lynch, South Korea, 23 December 1997).
In spite of these clear signs of weaknesses many analysts dismissed the possibility of a major
collapse in Korea. This perception was based on two factors: First, given, the existence of implicit insurance
and a long history of government intervention in the financial sector, it was believed that the banks would be
bailed out by the government. Of course, what people missed was that already in 1996 short term external

14

debt of Korean banks was already twice the country’s stock of international reserves. Second, there was the
notion that because Korea had capital controls, the health of bank’s was not as important as in other
countries. As I argue in greater detail in section IV below, this has become a generalized and dangerous myth
among some policy analysts.
Starting in the second half of 1997, and largely as a result of the mounting difficulties in other
countries in the region, international banks became increasingly reluctant to roll over their Korean loans. As
the local banks could not come up with the required foreign exchange to repay their debts, they had to turn to
the Bank of Korea. In a move that proved to be a fatal mistake, the Bank of Korea used up most of its
(already low) international reserves in an effort to shore up domestic banks and avoid a major crisis. As
reserves dwindled, more foreign creditors pulled out of the country, unleashing a perverse vicious circle.
The East Asian crisis greatly strengthened the view that a weak banking sector can generate
tremendous damage in an emerging economy in the process of liberalizing (Ito 1999, Radelet and Sachs 1998,
Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini 1998). Everyone agrees on this one: bank supervision is of the essence. How
supervision should be implemented in countries with weak institutions is another matter. In fact, as Mexico’s
experience showed, even when the authorities understand the importance of supervision, it may take a long
time to actually have a new system in place. 11 There have been some new and specific proposals aimed at
protecting the health of banks in countries with a limited regulatory capacity. These range from the
imposition of 100% reserves banking to having a majority presence of foreign-owned banks (Garber 1998).
It is likely, however, that their implementation will be hampered by political economy factors.

II.5 Information and Transparency are of the Essence
A post mortem of the Mexican crisis sponsored by the Council of Foreign Relations and undertaken
by an independent task force chaired by John Whitehead concluded that in the period leading to the crisis full
financial information was not forthcoming to all investors. A round table organized by the Group of Thirty
under the telling title “Mexico: Why Didn’t Wall Street Sound the Alarm?” reached a similar conclusion.
The IMF agreed with this conclusion, and vowed to design a modern information gathering system
that would help avoid unpleasant surprises in the future. In a 1995 paper on Mexican lessons co-authored by
the Director of the IMF’s Western Hemisphere Department and the chief of the Fund’s Mexico division it
was argued that it was essential to establish “stricter requirements concerning the regular and timely
submission of key economic and financial data to the fund and of standards for the publication of the kinds of
economic data needed to enable markets to work more efficiently.” To this effect the IMF established the
Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) program whose purpose is to “enhance the availability of

15

timely and comprehensive statistics and therefore contribute to the pursuit of sound macroeconomic policies;
the SDDS is also expected to contribute to the improved functioning of financial markets.”
In spite of these initiatives, the East Asian countries did little to truly improve the flow of information
and data availability, or to enhance the degree of transparency of government actions. Independent country
risk evaluators continued to make a point of the lack of transparency and heightened corruption in many East
Asian nations. For example, when evaluating corruption, the International Country Risk Guide systematically
gave poor marks to Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand and only marginally better marks to Korea and
Malaysia.
Most East Asian analysts were aware that the quality of available data was poor and that the degree of
transparency was deplorable. In fact, little was known on the true quality of banks’ portfolios, or on the
volume of loans granted to the dominating conglomerates. Moreover, there was virtually no reliable
information on the banking system’s -- and in the case of Thailand, on the central bank’s – off-balance sheet
positions, including the astonishingly large sales of dollars in the futures market. Worse yet, as in the case of
Mexico, the rating agencies largely failed to anticipate the increasing weaknesses of the East Asian economies.
For instance, Standard & Poor’s did not change its rating on Thailand until August 1, 1997; Indonesia, in
turn, was not downgraded until December 31, 1997! How to actually improve the dissemination of
information continues to be a difficult issue that would-be international architects will have to tackle in the
months to come.

II.6 Some Complications and the Multiplicative Nature of the Vulnerability Factors
The history of financial collapses indicates that, in addition to the financial factors discussed above,
many emerging economies face two serious complications. The first is the presence of fiscal imbalances. In
this case the government will be forced either to print money, or to attract – usually through very high
domestic interest rates – foreign funds in order to close the gap between government revenues and
expenditures. As the recent Brazilian crisis has shown, both alternatives, however, are short term solutions
and cannot be sustained in the longer run. At some point international reserves will either be depleted or the
high interest rates policy will backfire by slowing down the economy, and igniting a series of bankruptcies.
To the extent that the public believes that politically this stance is not sustainable, it will move its funds out of
the country, helping generate additional distress and eventually a crisis.
Many analysts had thought that fiscal imbalances was a required element in a currency crisis. Not at
all. Once again, a careful reading of financial history would have suggested that there have been numerous
currency collapses in countries that have had control over public sector finances. The Chilean crisis of 1982

16

and the Mexican meltdown of 1994 are, perhaps, the better known ones, but certainly not the only ones (on
Chile see Edwards and Edwards 1991; on other crises see Edwards and Santaella 1993).
The second complication is political. If the country faces political upheaval and social turmoil,
international investors will become skittish and will withdraw from the market at the first signs of financial
stress. This in turn -- and especially in the presence of the vulnerability factors discussed above -- is likely to
unleash a series of events that could, sooner rather than later, end up in a major run against the currency.
The foreign investors stampede following the assassinations of Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo
Colosio’s and PRI’s Secretary General Ruiz Massieu provided a clear underscoring to this principle. In at
least two East Asian countries -- Indonesia and Korea -- there were significant political uncertainties during
1997. Although under “normal” circumstances these problems would not have ignited a crisis, they proved to
be decisive in an environment where many of the financial variables discussed above were showing
weaknesses.
The relationship between vulnerability factors is highly complex and subject to numerous feedback.
Overvalued exchange rates, for example, slow down exports, encourage imports and generate larger current
account deficits. As a result, domestic interest rates will have to rise in order to attract the foreign capital
required to finance this deficit. Higher interest rates, in turn, will hurt local companies, and will increase the
ratio of non performing bank loans. The banks, and sometimes the government, will react to this picture by
rolling over questionable loans, hiding their true financial situation, and by issuing more dollar denominated
debt. As additional foreign funds pour in, the extent of overvaluation becomes more severe, and the vicious
circle is reinforced.
Many country-risk models used by financial analysts have tended to ignore the highly complex ways
in which these factors interact. Instead, these models compile lists of vulnerability indicators, adding them up
in a mechanical fashion. By neglecting the multiplicative nature of these factors, traditional approaches are
bound, as in the case of East Asia, to miss many of the early distress signals. The problem is that, in spite of
their sophisticated statistical models, financial analysts tend to ignore history -- and more specifically,
comparative history -- when evaluating a country’s prospects and vulnerabilities. By concentrating almost
exclusively on the country’s immediate past (24 to 36 months), standard statistical approaches – including
value at risk analysis -- neglect other country’s experiences, including events that have led to major crises.
Moreover, most existing models used to evaluate country risk take a “linear” or “additive” view of the world,
and ignore the fact that “vulnerability factors” are multiplicative, feeding into each other and reinforcing
themselves.

17

III.

How Useful are Current Account Ratios as External Sector Indicators?

During the last three decades there has been a considerable evolution in economists’ views
regarding the current account. In an important article, titled “Does the Current Account Matter?”,
Corden (1994) makes a distinction between the “old” and “new” views on the current account.
According to the former, “a country can run a current account deficit for a limited period. But no
positive deficit is sustainable indefinitely.” (Corden 1994, p. 88). The “new” view, on the other hand,
makes a distinction between deficits that are the result of fiscal imbalances and those that respond to
private sector decisions. According to the extreme version of this new view “an increase in the current
account deficit that results from a shift in private sector behavior – a rise in investment or a fall in savings
– should not be a matter of concern at all (p. 92).”
As mentioned in the preceding section, in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis many analysts argued
that the “new” view was seriously flawed. While some, such as Bruno (1995), argued that large deficits
stemming from higher investment were not particularly dangerous, others maintained that any deficit in
excess of a certain threshold – say, 4% of GDP – was a cause for concern. Partially motivated by this
debate, Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1996) developed a framework to analyze current account sustainability.
Their main point that the “sustainable” level of the current account was that level consistent with solvency.
This, in turn, means the level at which “the ratio of external debt to GDP is stabilized (Milesi-Ferreti and Razin
1998).”
The basic idea behind this type of sustainability analyses is captured by the following simple analysis.
As mentioned, solvency requires that the ratio of the (net) international demand for the country’s liabilities
(both debt and non-debt liabilities) stabilizes at a level compatible with foreigners’ net demand for these claims
on future income flows. Under standard portfolio theory, the net international demand for country j liabilities
can be written as:

δ j = α j ( W - W j ) - ( 1 - α jj ) W j ;

(1)

where α j is the percentage of world’s wealth (W) that international investors are willing to hold in the form
of country j’s assets; W

j

is country j’s wealth (broadly defined), and α

jj

is country’s j asset allocation on

its own assets. The asset allocation shares α j and α jj , depend, as in standard portfolio analyses, on
expected returns and perceived risk. Assuming that country’s j wealth is a multiple λ of its (potential or full
employment) GDP, and that country’s j wealth is a fraction β j of world’s wealth W, it is possible to write
the (international) net demand for country’s j assets as:12

18

δ j = {α j θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) } λ jj Y j ;

(2)

where, Y j is (potential) GDP, and θ j = ( 1 - β j ) / β j .
Denoting, [{α

δj=

j

θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) } λ jj ] = γ *j , then,
γ *j Y j .

(3)

Equation (3) simply states that, in long run equilibrium, the net international demand for country j assets, can
be expressed as a proportion γ *j of the country’s (potential or sustainable) GDP. The determinants of the
factor of proportionality are given by (3) and, as expressed, include relative returns and perceived risk of
country j, and other countries.13
In this framework, and under the simplifying assumption that international reserves don’t change, the
“sustainable” current account ratio is given by:14
( C/Y ) j = { g j + π * j ) [{α
where g

j

j

θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) } λ jj ],

(4)

is the country’s sustainable rate of growth, and π * j is a valuation factor (approximately) equal to

international inflation.15 Notice that if {α

j

θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) }< 0, domestic residents’ demand for foreign

liabilities exceed foreigners’ demand for the country’s liabilities. Under these circumstances the country will
have to run a current account surplus in order to maintain a stable (net external) liabilities to GDP ratio.
Notice that according to (4) there is no reason for the “sustainable” current account deficit to be the same
across countries. In fact, that would only happen by sheer coincidence. The main message of (4) is that
“sustainable” current account balances vary across countries and depend on whatever variables affect
portfolio decisions, and economic growth. In other words, the notion that no country can run a sustainable
deficit in excess of 4%, 5% of GDP, or any other arbitrary number is nonsense.
Using a very similar framework to the one developed above, Goldman-Sachs has made a serious
effort to actually estimate long run sustainable current account deficits for a number of countries (Ades and
Kaune 1997). Using a 25-country data set G-S estimated the ratio of external liabilities foreigners are willing to
hold -- γ *j in the model sketched above --, as well as each country’s potential rate of growth. Table 5
contains G-S’s estimates of γ *j, while Table 6 presents their estimates of long run sustainable current
account deficits. In addition to estimating these steady state imbalances, G-S calculated asymptotic
convergence paths towards those long run current accounts. These are presented in table 6, under the
heading “short run sustainable balances.” Several interesting features emerge from these tables. First, there
is a wide variety of estimated long run “sustainable” deficits. Second, with the notable exception of China –
whose estimated “sustainable” deficit is an improbable 11% of GDP –, the estimated levels are very modest,
and range from 1.9 to 4.5% of GDP. Third, although the range for the “short run sustainable level” is
broader, still in very few countries it exceeds 4% of GDP. Fourth, the estimates of the ratio of each country

19

external liabilities foreigners are willing to hold -- γ *j in the model sketched above --, exhibit more variability.
Its range (excluding China) goes from 31.5 to 64.6% of GDP.
Although this type of analysis represents an improvement with respect to arbitrary current account
thresholds, it is subject to a number of serious limitations, including the fact that it is exceedingly difficult to
obtain reliable estimates for the key variables. In particular, there is very little evidence on equilibrium
portfolio shares. Also, the underlying models used for calculating the long term rate of growth tend to be
very simplistic.
The most serious limitation of this framework, however, is that it does not take into account, in a
satisfactory way, transitional issues arising from changes in portfolio allocations. These, however, can have a
fundamental effect on the way in which the economy adjusts to changes in the external environment. For
example, the speed at which a country absorbs surges in foreigners’ demand for its liabilities will have an
effect on the sustainable path of the current account (Bacchetta and van Wincoop 1998).
The key point is that even small changes in foreigners’ net demand for the country’s liabilities may
generate complex equilibrium adjustment paths for the current account. These current account movements
will be necessary for the new portfolio allocation to materialize, and will not generate a disequilibrium – or
unsustainable – balance. However, when this equilibrium path of the current account is contrasted with
threshold levels obtained from models such as the one sketched above, analysts could (incorrectly) conclude
that the country is facing a serious disequilibrium.
In order to illustrate this point, assume that equation (5) captures the way in which the current
account responds to change in portfolio allocations. In this equation γ *t is the new desired level (relative to
GDP) of foreigners’ (net) desired holdings of the country’s liabilities; γ *t-1 , on the other hand, is the old
desired level.
(C/Y) t = (g + π *) γ *t + β ( γ *t - γ * t-1 ) - η ( (C/Y) t-1 - (g + π *) γ *t ),
where, as before, γ * = [{α

j

(5)

θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) } λ jj ]. According to this equation short term deviations of

the current account from its long run level can result from two forces. The first is a traditional stock
adjustment term (γ * t - γ * t-1 ), that captures deviations between the demanded and the actual stock of assets.
If (γ * t >* γ t-1 ), then the current account deficit will exceed its long run value. β is the speed of adjustment,
which will depend on a number of factors, including the degree of capital mobility in the country in question,
and the maturity of its foreign debt. The second force, which is captured by - η ( (C/Y) t-1 - (g + π *) γ *t
), in equation (5) is a self-correcting term. This term plays the role of making sure that in this economy there
is, at least, some form of “consumption smoothing”. The importance of this self correcting term will depend
on the value of η . If η = 0, the self correcting term will play no role, and the dynamics of the current

20

account will be given by a more traditional stock adjustment equation. In the more general case, however,
when both β and η are different from zero, the dynamics of the current account will be richer, and
discrepancies between γ * t and γ *t-1 will be resolved gradually through time.
As may be seen from (5), in the long run steady state, when (γ * t = γ *t-1 ), and (CY)t-1 = (C/Y), the
current account will be at its sustainable level, (g + π * ) [{α

j

θ j - ( 1 - α jj ) } λ jj ]. The dynamic

behavior for the net stock of the country’s assets in hands of foreigners, as a percentage of GDP, will be
given by equation (6).

γ t = ( γ t - 1 + (C/Y) t ) / ( 1 + g + π * )

.

(6)

The implications of incorporating the adjustment process can be illustrated with a simple example
based on the Goldman-Sachs computations presented above. Notice that according to the figures in Table 5,
by the end of 1996 there was a significant gap between foreigners’ desired holdings of Mexican and Argentine
liabilities: while the Mexican ratio stood at 38.3% of the county’s GDP, the corresponding figure for
Argentina was 48.4%. Assume that for some reason – a reduction in perceived Mexican country risk, for
example – this gap is closed to one half of it initial level, and that the demand for Mexican liabilities increases
to 43% of Mexican GDP.
Figure 4 presents the estimated evolution of the sustainable current account path under the
assumptions that Mexican growth remains at 5% and that world inflation is zero – both assumptions made by
G-S. In addition it is assumed that β = 0.65, η = 0.45, and that the increase in γ * is spread over three years.
The results from this simple exercise are quite interesting: first, as may be seen, the initial level of
the sustainable current account level is equal to 1.9% of GDP, exactly the level estimated by G-S (see Table
6). Second, the current account converges to 2.15% of GDP, as suggested by equation (5). Third, and
more important for the analysis in this section, the dynamics of the current account is characterized by a
sizable overshooting, with the “equilibrium path” deficit peaking at 3.5% of GDP. If, on the other hand, it is
assumed that the increase in γ * takes place in one period, the equilibrium deficit would peak at 5%, a figure
twice as large as the new long term sustainable level.
What makes this exercise particularly interesting is that these rather large overshootings are the result
of very small changes in portfolio preferences. This strongly suggests that in a world where desired portfolio
shares are constantly changing, the concept of a sustainable equilibrium current account path is very difficult
to estimate. Moreover, this simple exercise indicates that relying on current account ratios – even ratios
calculated using current “sustainability” frameworks – can be highly misleading. These dynamic features of
current account adjustment may explain why so many authors have failed to find a direct connection between
current account deficits and currency crises.

21

The analysis presented above suggests two important dimensions of adjustment and crisis prevention.
First, current account dynamics will affect real exchange rate behavior. More specifically, current account
overshooting will be associated with a temporary real exchange rate appreciation. The actual magnitude of
this appreciation will depend on a number of variables, including the income demand elasticity for
nontradables and the labor intensity of the nontradable sector. In order for this dynamic adjustment to be
smooth, the country should have the ability to implement the required real exchange rate depreciation in the
second phase of the process. This is likely to be easier under a flexible exchange rate regime than under a
rigid one. Second, if foreigners’ (net) demand for the country’s liabilities declines – as is likely to be the case
if there is some degree of contagion, for example –, the required current account compression will also
overshoot. In the immediate run the country will have to go through a very severe adjustment. This can be
illustrated by the following simple example: assume that as a result of external events – a crisis in Brazil, say
– the demand for Argentine liabilities declines from the level estimated by G-S --48.4% of GDP -- to a 40% of
GDP. While the long run equilibrium current account, as calculated by G-S, would experience a very modest
decline from 2.9% to 2.4% of GDP, in the short run the adjustment would be drastic. In fact, the simple
model developed above suggests that after two years the deficit would have to be compressed to
approximately 0.5 % of GDP.16
The fact that the simple analysis of current account ratios can be misleading does not mean that the
current account is an irrelevant variable. Indeed, within the spirit of the framework presented above, it is
possible that the current account deficit is not compatible, even after considering a plausible dynamic path,
with a stable liabilities to GDP ratio. Moreover, if the economic structure of the country is overly rigid, the
current account overshooting discussed above may generate serious dislocations that could, on their own,
affect portfolio allocation unleashing a vicious circle.

IV.

Do Controls on Capital Inflows Reduce Vulnerability?

In the aftermath of these crises a number of influential academics have argued that globalization has
gone too far and that, in the words of MIT’s Paul Krugman (1998b p. 74), “sooner or later we will have to
turn the clock at least part of the way back: to limit capital flows for countries that are unsuitable for either
currency unions or free floating.” Discussions on the new international financial architecture have focused on
two type of controls on cross border capital movements: controls on (short term) capital inflows, similar to
those implemented in Chile between 1991 and 1998; and, controls on capital outflows, of the type Malaysia
imposed in mid 1998. While the former have remained massively unpopular among economists – a significant
exception being Krugman (1998b) --, the latter have rapidly grown in popularity.

22

Some observers have argued that Chile’s approach to capital movements has been effective in
reducing a country’s vulnerability to speculative spells, and in reducing the real exchange rate “deprotection”
effect of large capital inflows. It has also been argued that these restrictions have allowed Chile’s monetary
authorities to maintain greater control over monetary policy in the face of large capital inflows (Massad 1998).
Joseph Stiglitz, the World Bank’s Chief economist has been quoted by the New York Times (Sunday
February 1, 1998) as saying: “You want to look for policies that discourage hot money but facilitate the flow
of long-term loans, and there is evidence that the Chilean approach or some version of it, does this.” This
view has recently been endorsed by Ito (1999). In this section I evaluate Chile’s recent experience with
capital controls on inflows. I argue that the evidence does not support the current enthusiasm for this policy,
and that the relative absence of contagion effect on Chile is due to its sturdy banking regulation and not to its
capital controls policy.17
Chile’s most recent experience with restrictions on capital inflows began in 1991, and lasted until
September, 1998. This policy took two basic forms: minimum stay requirements for direct foreign
investment flows, and non remunerated reserve requirements on other forms of capital inflows. Initially, 20%
of capital entering into the country had to be deposited at the central bank for one year; during this period this
deposit earned no interest. The rate of the deposit was increased to 30% in May of 1992, it was then reduced
to 10% in July of 1998, and totally eliminated in September of 1998.
In evaluating Chile’s recent experience with capital restrictions I have focused on three issues: First,
is there evidence that capital controls have affected the composition of capital flows? Second, is there
evidence that the imposition of restrictions to capital mobility has affected the dynamic response of the real
exchange rate to capital flows shocks? The importance of this question stems from the fact that the
restrictions were deliberately imposed to reduce the real exchange rate deprotection associated with the surge
in capital inflows (Valdes-Prieto and Soto 1996). In fact as documented extensively in Section II of this
paper, this real exchange rate deprotection effect of capital inflows is considered a major force behind the
East Asian crisis. I tackle this question by estimating a series of unrestricted VARs on quarterly data, and
analyzing the real exchange rate impulse response functions. And third, is there evidence that the impositions
of the unremunerated reserve requirements affected in a significant way the relationship between Chile’s and
international interest rates? More specifically, I inquire whether these restrictions affected the time series
process of interest rate differentials (corrected by expected devaluation) in Chile. In general one would
expect that impediments to free capital mobility would affect both the speed at which interest rate differentials
decline as well as the level to which they converge. I address this third question through the analysis
estimation of a series of univariate equations using a time-varying coefficients techniques.

23

IV.1 Chile’s Controls and the Composition of Capital Inflows
In a recent study Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996) have calculated the tax-equivalence of Chile’s
unremunerated reserve requirement on capital inflows, and have evaluated their effect on a number of
variables including real exchange rates. These authors have concluded that these restrictions have not been
(fully) evaded, and that for a 180 days loan their annual tax equivalence has fluctuated between 1.29 and 4.53
percent. The implicit tax equivalence of longer term funds has been, since mid 1992, proportional, with
loans with longer maturities paying a lower implicit tax (see also Cowan and de Gregorio 1998). According to
Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996) these capital restrictions altered the composition of capital inflows: they
discouraged short term capital inflows, but had no significant effects on the aggregate volume of capital
entering the country.
In Table 7 I present data on the composition of capital flows into Chile between 1988 and 1997. As
may be seen there has indeed been a marked change in the composition of capital inflows, with shorter (that
is less than a year) flows declining steeply relative to longer term capital. The fact that this change in
composition happened immediately after the time when the capital restrictions were imposed supports the
view that the controls policy has indeed affected the composition of inflows. These data also show that, with
the exception of a brief decline in 1993, the total volume of capital inflows into the country continued to
increase. In the rest of this section I analyze the effect of (net) flows and capital controls on real exchange
rates and on interest rate differentials.

IV.2 Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rates in Chile
One of the fundamental purposes – if not the main purpose -- of Chile’s restrictions on capital
inflows has been to reduce their volume and, in that way, their pressure on the real exchange rate. According
to a recent paper co-authored by a former senior Ministry of Finance official, “growing concerns about
inflation and the exchange rate pressure of capital inflows have led policy-makers to introduce specific capital
controls (Cowan and De Gregorio 1998).” Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996), on the other hand, have argued
that the imposition of these restrictions in mid 1991 responded to the authorities attempt to balance two policy
objectives: the reduction of inflation and maintaining a competitive real exchange rate. According to these
authors by implementing these unremunerated reserve requirements the authorities hoped to reduce – or at
least delay -- the real exchange rate appreciation effects of these flows, at the same time as being able to
maintain a higher differential between domestic and international interest rates (corrected by expected
devaluations). This higher differential, in turn ,was expected to help achieve the anti-inflationary objective. In
this subsection I evaluate the real exchange rate objective, while in the next I address the interest rate
differential objective.

24

I used two approaches to evaluate the real exchange rate objective of Chile’s capital controls policy.
First, using quarterly data I estimated a series of VARs for two different subsamples – one with and one
without capital controls – and evaluated the real exchange rate impulse response to capital inflows
innovations. Under an effective policy one would expect that the real exchange rate response to a capital
flow innovation would be less pronounced – especially in terms of its dynamics – in the period with controls.
Second, I used the longer period VARs (1987-96) estimates to evaluate the impulse response to a shock to the
tax equivalence of the unremunerated reserve requirement.18
Figure 5 contains the impulse response functions for the log of the real exchange rate for the
complete period (1981-96), a subperiod with no restrictions on capital inflows (1981-91:2), and a subperiod
when the capital restrictions have been into effect (1991:3-96). The same data definitions as in the preceding
section were used. Figure 6, on the other hand, contains the real exchange rate response to an innovation to
the (implicit) tax on capital inflows.19 Two important facts emerge from these figures. First, the effect of the
capital innovation on the (log) of the real exchange rate are extremely similar across periods. As may be seen,
the maximum appreciation is almost the same in the with-restrictions period and in the period where there
were restrictions to capital inflows. However, the (log) of the real exchange rate returns to equilibrium
somewhat faster in the with restrictions period. This result is confirmed by the impulse response function in
Figure 6.20 As may be seen an innovation to restrictions on inflows results in a slight real depreciation. The
effect however is short lived, and disappears after four quarters. The ordering of the variables is, as usual,
important. In determining the ordering, one could be tempted to argue that capital controls are exogenous.
This, however, could be misleading since in Chile, as in other emerging markets, the extent and coverage of
controls have been adjusted in response to changes in the magnitude of capital flows. For this reason,
alternative orderings – including one were allowed to respond endogenously – were considered. Overall, the
results under alternative orderings confirm the results from Figure 6. The variance decomposition of the
forecast errors of the (log of the) real exchange rate, not presented here due to space considerations (results
available on request), confirms that the restrictions on capital inflows have not been effective in affecting the
real exchange rate behavior: the capital restrictions variable explains no more than 3 percent of the forecast
error.
Although these results are subject to some limitations – the experience with capital restrictions is
rather short, limiting the availability of data points – they do provide preliminary evidence suggesting that the
impact of this policy on the real exchange rate has been very limited and short lived. These results confirm
previous findings by Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996), who using a very different technique and a shorter
sample to estimate a real exchange rate equation for Chile concluded that “the unremunerated reserve

25

requirement does not affect in any way the long run level of the real exchange rate…[I]n addition…these
reserve requirements have an insignificant effect on the real exchange rate in the short run (p. 99).”

IV.3 Controls on Inflows and the Independence of Monetary Policy
Since the mid 1980s Chile’s monetary authorities have used interest rate targeting as one of the main
– if not the main – anti-inflationary tool (Fontaine 1996). More specifically, as a way to reduce inflation the
central bank has systematically attempted to maintain relatively high interest rates. This policy, however,
became increasingly difficult to sustain during the late 1980s and 1990s when, as a result of Chile’s improving
stance in international financial markets, higher domestic rates started to attract increasingly large volumes of
capital. A fundamental objective of the capital restrictions policy in effect since 1991, then, has been to allow
the country to maintain a higher interest rate. According to Cowan and de Gregorio (1998), “capital controls
allowed policy makers to rely on the domestic interest rate as the main instrument for reducing
inflation…[T]he reserve requirement has permitted maintaining the domestic interest rate above the
international interest rate, without imposing excessive pressure on the exchange rate (p.16)”. In this
subsection I use monthly time series to investigate formally the way in which capital restrictions have, in fact,
affected interest rate differentials, and thus the ability to perform independent monetary policy, in Chile.
In the absence of restrictions to capital mobility, and under the assumption of risk neutrality and in
the absence of country risk, the uncovered interest arbitrage condition will hold, and deviations from it would
be white noise and unpredictable. The speed at which these deviations from interest arbitrage are eliminated is
an empirical question, but in a well functioning market it would expected to happen very fast. The existence
of restrictions to capital mobility and of country risk, however, alter this basic equation in a fundamental way.
In this case there will be an equilibrium interest rate differential (δ ):

δ t = rt - r*t - E∆et = k + R + ut

(7)

Where rt is the domestic interest rate, r*t the international interest rate for a security of the same maturity,
E∆e is the expected rate of devaluation, k is the tax equivalence of the capital restriction, R is the country risk
premium, and ut is an i.i.d. random variable. As in the case of free capital mobility, if at any moment in time
the actual interest rate differential exceeds (k + R), there will be incentives to arbitrageurs to move funds in
and/or out of the country. This process will continue until the equilibrium interest rate differential is reestablished. The speed at which this process takes place will, in principle, depend on the degree of
development of the domestic capital market, as well as on the degree of capital mobility existing in the country
in question. Countries with stiffer restrictions will experience slow corrections of deviations from the
equilibrium interest rate differential (Edwards and Khan 1985, Dooley 1995,1997). Additionally, as equation
(7) shows, the degree of capital restrictions (that is, k) will also affect the value towards which the interest

26

rate differential will converge.
In a world with changing policies, k is not constant through time. In fact, as has been documented
in the preceding sections, the value of k has changed markedly in most Latin American countries during the
last few years. With other things given, it would be expected that the imposition (or tightening) of capital
restrictions will have two effects on the behavior of the interest rate differential. First it will increase the
value towards which this differential converges; second, it will reduce the speed at which this convergence
takes place. This means, under stricter restrictions on capital mobility the monetary authority gains greater
control over domestic interest rates in two ways: first, it can maintain a higher interest rate differential – that
is, the steady state value of δ will be higher than what it would have been otherwise – and second, δ can
deviate from its long run equilibrium for longer periods of time. In this subsection I construct and use
quarterly and monthly data on interest rate differentials for Chile to investigate the way in which the
imposition and tightening of capital restrictions affected their behavior.
A problem with equation (7) is that there are no long reliable series on expectations of devaluation. In
order to address this problem I construct a series of expected devaluations as the one step ahead forecasts
obtained from an ARMA process for the actual rate of devaluation. After identifying the possible processes,
several plausible representations were estimated. Finally, those that provided the better forecasts – measured
according to standard criteria – were used. In the case of quarterly data I used an ARMA(2,1), while for
monthly data I used an AR(1) to construct the expected devaluation series.
As a first step, unrestricted VARs estimated on quarterly data were used to estimate impulse response
functions of interest rate differentials to a one standard deviation innovation of themselves. Figure 7 presents
these impulses for two sub-samples: 1986-91 when there were no capital restrictions, and 1991-96, when the
restrictions were in place. As may be seen, in both periods the deviation of δ from its equilibrium tended to
disappear quite rapidly. This adjustment process seemed to have been somewhat faster in the period with no
capital restrictions. As may be seen from the figure, during this early period δ has essentially gone back to
trend after 2 quarters; for the later period, the adjustment is cyclical, after 4 quarters there is still a slight
differential. This result is, in some ways, what one would have expected: in a period of capital restrictions
interest rate differentials are somewhat more sluggish that in periods with no controls. A potential problem
with this interpretation, however, is that during part of the earlier period (1986-87) Chile was still facing a
very severe foreign credit constraint, and had very limited access to international capital markets.
Unfortunately, due to the brevity of the experiments we are analyzing, the issue of “restrictions” vs. “access”
cannot be addressed in an adequate way using quarterly data. Monthly data, however, allow us to use
additional information and explore the behavior of interest rate differentials further.
In order to investigate the dynamic behavior of interest rates further I estimate the following equation

27

using a Kalman filter time varying parameter technique:

δ t = α t + β t δ t-1 + ut ,

(8)

where α t and β t are time varying parameters assumed to follow a random walk (Hamilton 1994). To the
extent that β lies inside the unit circle, δ will converge to (α / (1 - β )). In the absence of controls and with a
zero country risk premium, we would expect (α / (1 - β )) ≅ 0, with interest rate differentials converging to
zero. Moreover, in this case, we would expect that β would be very low, with interest rate differentials
disappearing very rapidly. With country risk and capital restrictions, however, α would be different from
zero, β will be rather high, and interest rate differentials will converge to a positive value. This means, then,
that if the restrictions have been effective in increasing the authorities’ ability to undertake independent
monetary policy, we would expect that α t and/or β t would be higher in the period with capital controls.
The results obtained are presented in figure 5. As may be seen the estimated coefficient for the
intercept declines throughout the period, capturing the fact that Chile’s country risk was declining.
Moreover, the estimated value of the coefficient of lagged interest rate differentials indicates that it did not
increase after the imposition of controls and, thus, that the speed at which interest rate differentials corrected
themselves was not affected by this policy.
All in all, the results presented in this section suggest that the restrictions on capital inflows imposed in
1991 did not have a significant effect on interest rate behavior in Chile. They did not affect their level, nor did
they affect their dynamic behavior. This means that, contrary to the authorities’ goals, capital controls did
not give them greater control over monetary policy. These findings are consistent with the results reported
by Calvo and Mendoza (1998), who found out that the decline in Chile’s inflation has been largely unrelated to
the authorities’ attempts at targeting interest rates. According to Calvo and Mendoza’s (1998) VAR analysis
the main forces behind Chile’s disinflation have been the real appreciation of the peso and (indirectly) a benign
external environment, including positive terms of trade.

V.

Open Issues and some Concluding Remarks

One of the most important characteristics of the East Asian crisis is that a large number of corporations
became, literally overnight, insolvent. In fact in almost every country there has been a substantial net wealth
loss, which if not properly addressed can seriously undermine the working of the economy. Ideally the East
Asian nations would implement a scheme that would allow simultaneously for:

•

Corporate restructuring, and especially corporate recapitalization;

•

Extinction of dollar denominated debts issued by Indonesian entities;

•

Increased direct foreign investment.

28

In this section I discuss a debt-to-equity swap (DES) mechanism that, if properly managed, could
indeed help achieve these three objectives. A scheme similar to the one proposed here was used very
successfully in Chile during the1980s.
Four entities usually participate in a successful DES operation:

•

The original holder of the emerging country debt. This would usually (but not always) be a foreign bank;
for illustrative purposes we will refer to it as “the foreign bank”.

•

The original issuer of the debt, usually a corporation in the country in question, which we will call “the
debtor.”

•

A foreign company eager to invest in this particular emerging country, if it can find an attractive deal.
We will call it the “foreign investor”.

•

And a local firm (or project) that is an attractive investment target for the “foreign investor”. We call it
“the project”.

A DES operation is the characterized by the following steps:
1.

The “foreign investor” buys from the “international bank” a note originally issued by the “debtor”. This
transaction takes place in the secondary market and will almost always involve a discount. That is, the
“foreign investor” pays less than 100 cents to the dollar for the Indonesian debt. If the discount is
assumed to be d, then the foreign investor will only pay (1-d) per nominal dollar of the debt. At this
point, then, the “international bank” (or foreign supplier, for that matter) has unloaded an unwanted debt;
this is now in the hands of the “foreign investor.”

2.

The “foreign investor” goes to the debtor country and locates the “original debtor”, or issuer of the note.
The investor, then, offers the “original debtor” a discount f , if the latter prepays the debt fully in local
currency (say, rupiah). Once this is done the “foreign investor” has rupiahs in hand, and the “original
debtor” has seen its balance sheet position improved, since it has only paid (1 - f) for each dollar retired.

3.

At this point the “foreign investor” uses the rupiah proceeds form the sale of the debt to the “debtor’ to
make an investment in “the project.” This operation is considered to be DFI and, thus, is subject to all
the legal provisions – in terms of taxation, remittance of profits and so on – governing direct foreign
investment.

As a result of this DES operation the following has happened:
1.
2.
3.

The “international bank” has unloaded an Indonesian debt it did not want to carry in its books;
The “original debtor” has prepaid in rupiah and at a discount (f) a debt originally denominated in dollars.
The “foreign investor” has been able to participate in an Indonesian investment “project.”

29

The main attraction of this operation is that it has taken place without the debtor country using any foreign
exchange, and thus, without any pressure on the value of the rupiah.
The successful implementation of this type of scheme is likely to require some legal reform. What is
clear, however, is that for it to work it would be necessary that in the debtor countries restrictions on foreign
ownership should be lifted immediately.
Some comments on DES mechanisms based on Chile’s experience are in order:

•

The difference between the discount given by the “international bank” to the “foreign investor”, and the
discount given by the “foreign investor” to the “original debtor” represents the pecuniary incentive to the
new investor to participate in the scheme.

•

From a financial point of view this “discount differential” plays a role similar to that of a subsidized
exchange rate: it allows foreign investors to fund their investments in more favorable terms, i.e. with
lower disbursements. However, this mechanism does not imply any fiscal cost: the “subsidy” is paid by
the original creditors , when they decide to sell their loans at a discount.

•

Interested foreign investors had to sign a contract with the Government stipulating that they had the right
to access the foreign exchange market to remit profits and capital, only after stipulated grace periods
expired. This restriction is needed to avoid a massive outflow of foreign exchange (or undue pressures
over the exchange rate) by creditors interested in using debt to equity swaps as a means of speeding up
amortizations of rescheduled debts.

•

In Chile, care was taken to avoid the destabilizing effects over currency and financial markets of massive
portfolio adjustments eventually triggered by the program. On the one hand resident investors were not
allowed to buy foreign exchange to participate in the program, except under a strict quota set by the
Central Bank. Rights to participate in portions of the quota were auctioned of twice a month. On the
other hand an excessive appetite for the program by foreign investment, that could stress the local
financial market (because debtors would crowd it in search for funding for the required prepayments),
was regulated by the two markets discounts referred to above. In the case of Indonesia we suggest that
the government establishes two quotas for participating in this program: one for local entities and one for
foreigners. The size of these quotas should be adjusted periodically (every two weeks, say), in order to
make sure that the foreign

A debt-to-equity swap program along the lines proposed here was extremely successful in Chile.
Starting in 1985, it helped to cut medium and long term foreign debt by 25% in just four years. As a result,
highly indebted companies and banks were able to regain solvency and access to capital markets. Foreign
investment helped recapitalize companies and banks and brought back life to depressed asset markets. In time

30

direct investment, production and employment surged. Although the program was only one element of a
broader strategy aimed at re launching the Chilean free market model, there is ample consensus that it played a
key role not only for its direct effects, but as a catalyst of a new area of creative solutions.
The East Asian countries are also facing a serious internal debt problem, as many local corporations
owe very large amounts of money to local banks and/or suppliers. This type of situation usually imposes high
costs to society, including:

•

the ongoing recession becomes deeper through payroll cuts, and the closure of otherwise profitable

companies;

•

domestic banks suffer large losses, risking the credibility of the financial system, the value of

financial savings and the working of the payments system;

•

huge amounts of fiscal resources are used to rescue local banks and/or debtors.

In facing this internal debt situation it is helpful to distinguish between cases where the banking sector
is not at risk and cases where banks insolvency is an issue.

Case A: Corporate sector becomes (partially) insolvent, with no risk to the banking sector

Consider the case of a local (e.g. Indonesian) corporation that is unable to service its debts. Assume
further that the main creditor is another local corporation. A debt workout program will typically include
some of the following options:

• the conversion of the debt into ordinary shares – either common or preferred stock --; this
amounts to a “plain vanilla” debt to equity swap;

• the conversion of the debt into non-voting shares or subordinated debt;
• the reduction of the present value of the debt through its long term rescheduling at below market
interest rates (for example, its conversion into zero coupon bonds); or

• some combination of the above.
In principle, these options are available to private sector debtors and creditors, so no government
intervention is to be called for. However, the following issues should be taken into account to make sure an
efficient working of a market-based solution:

31

•

bankruptcy laws and procedures have to be improved, otherwise troubled debtors (such as

Company A) may well find in their advantage to muddle through, dragging on a de facto default
situation;

•

for the same reason, financial information procedures should be improved, in order to avoid

bankrupt companies from running up their debts;

•

the tax implications of this type of debt workout should be analyzed carefully, as they are

open to abuse.

Case B: Banking sector is endangered by general domestic corporate insolvency

Assume that many domestic corporations are deeply in debt with local banks. If corporate insolvency
is generalized, banks’ capital may very well be at risk. As it is well known, banks operate with high leverage
and are, thus, exposed to substantial losses from debt conversions as those suggested here. Therefore, what
was initially though to be an internal debt problem, may in deed become a banking problem.
The basic guidelines for recapitalizing a banking system are the following:

•

depositors and other creditors should be assure early on that they do not stand to loose at all.

The only exception to this principle is when a clear, partial guarantee system has been in place long
before the crises;

•

as a result of voluntary decisions some class of creditors, specifically, large foreign ones,

may be persuaded to assume short term losses and help in the recapitalization of banks, through debt
to equity swaps as those discussed above;

•

original shareholders should bear the bulk of the loss. If they are willing to put new money

so as restore their bank’s health, they should be encouraged to, provided they have not been involved
in fraudulent or grossly incompetent behavior.

•

if losses are too large to be absorbed by original shareholders, it may be advisable to

intervene the bank, increase its capital base with public resources and resell it as soon as possible.

Of course, bank recapitalization programs tend to be very costly. From amacroeconomic point of
view, they typically involve a stepwise increase in public debt. In fact, international evidence from Argentina,
Chile, Mexico, Venezuela and other countries suggest fiscal costs to rang from 15% to 30% of annual GDP. I
t is crucially important that these costs are absorbed in such a way as not destabilize money supply and
macroeconomics stability.

32

A bank debt restructuring program may be an important vehicle for minimizing fiscal costs and for
avoiding excessive discretionality.
The mechanisms discussed above are, of course ,not free from costs and potential dangers. We
strongly believe, though, that the continuation of the present trend of imploding financial crisis is even more
dangerous. Crisis situations do often demand exceptional and risky solutions. Moreover, we feel that these
mechanisms can be designed so as to minimize such risks. The following three costs/dangers need to be
addressed:

•

Inflationary pressures are to be avoided. Government intervention through exchange rate guarantees and/
debt to equity swaps may involve monetary creation and thus exacerbate inflation. Such would be the
case if the exchange rate guarantee involved a significant subsidy with respect to market rates or if debtto-equity swaps were to trigger unwelcome exchange rate or interest rate movements. The architecture
of the programs has to be such that these risks are minimized. Moreover, to a certain extent monetary
creation can be sterilized through the placement of Central Bank debt in the local market, as done in Chile,
for example.

•

Fiscal impact has to be limited. The sterilization of the monetary impact of the proposed programs may
end up creating a fiscal problem. But one should not over react to this. To begin with, the problem
already exists from the moment a large number of banks and companies become insolvent, and massive
government help will be needed to face that situation. But in addition, after a long period of sound fiscal
policies, Asian countries typically have relatively low public debt ratios and, thus, can afford a prudent
accumulation of long term government or Central Bank debt. It is our view, anyway, that the
mechanisms here proposed, if carefully implemented, do not pose undue fiscal risks.

•

Moral hazard. Extreme care has to be applied not to create precedents and expectations that would induce
market players to take excessive financial risks. In normal situations regulators have to make sure that
risks are “fairly” priced: that is, that risk taking is not somehow subsidized. In the present critical
circumstances, the problem is that excessive risk perceptions bring the opposite result: nobody is willing
to undertake real and/or financial investments. This is the very reason why at this point some
government intervention is desirable. But government intervention runs the risk of being perceived as a
lifesaver that is permanently available, thus encouraging future imprudence. To minimize this danger, the
programs here proposed have to: (a) be of a “closed nature”; that is, they should not be available to
future debtors (the entry deadline drawn in stone, so to say, to avoid yielding to unavoidable lobbying for
extensions and redefinitions of elegibility criteria). And (b), the programs should be build so as to include
“prices” to be paid by their beneficiaries (for example, exchange rate guarantees applied to future possible
devaluations, and not to previous ones; debt to equity swaps require creditors to accept a discount,

33

debtors to prepay and foreign investors to lock in their investments for relatively long periods). Of
course, the art of good design is to find those prices that while preventing abuse, make the programs
workable.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that in order for these schemes to operate effectively and as
designed, it will be fundamental for the East Asian countries to implement legal and structural reforms. These
should be aimed at:

•

Improving the legal and regulatory environment. Transparency is of essence;

•

Adopting GAAP accounting standards, that would allow investors to extract meaningful information from
corporate balance sheets information.
The exact extent of these required reforms should be determined once the different schemes

presented here move into the actual implementation phase.

34

Annex 1:
Mexico’s FICORCA

In March 1983, six months into the debt crisis, the Mexican government created an institution to
provide forward exchange coverage to Mexican debtors. This institution was known by its acronym
FICORCA, and its first Chief Executive was Mexico’s current President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon.
From all practical purposes, FICORCA was a success story:

•

Almost 1,350 corporations took part in the program.

•

Almost US$ 12 bn of foreign debt were covered by FICORCA’s different programs.

We believe that a scheme based on this experience could be helpful in East Asia.
FICORCA offered four basic programs that were distinguished by the debt covered and by the way in which
the debtors financed their participation ion the program. Table 1 summarizes the four programs. We believe
that for the case of East Asia the more appealing program would be one that offers complete coverage – both
principal and interests – and is financed by a government loan.

35

TABLE 1
Coverage of Exchange Rate Risk
Under Mexico’s FICORCA Program

Cash payment (in Mexican pesos)

Only Principal Payments Covered by
Program

Principal and Accrued Interest
Payments Covered by Program

•

Program took place through
authorized banks, which acted as
intermediaries only.
Firm with dollar denominated debt
bought dollars up front, at a
subsidized exchange rate; subsidy
ranged from 25% to 35%,
depending on the terms of the
restructured debt (6 to 8 years).
Foreign exchange for interest
payments bought in free market
At the end of the grace period, the
bank delivered to the creditor the
US$ required to make the principal
payments

•

Debtor firm obtained credit in pesos
from FICORCA, at “market”
nominal interest rate
Firm used proceeds from loan to
buy (from participating bank)
dollars at a subsidized exchange
rate; subsidy ranged from 25% to
35%, depending on the terms of the
restructured debt.
At the end of the grace period, the
bank delivered to the creditor the
US$ required to make the principal
payments

•

•

•
•

Loan obtained, in pesos, by

•

original debtor in order to make
payment

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

Program took place through
authorized banks, which acted
as intermediaries only.
Debtor firm used pesos to
buy, up front, dollars at
“official” exchange rate to
cover principal and interest
payments
Debtor firm earned interest
(libor + 200 bps) on
undisbursed balance
Bank made payments to
creditor according to agreed
upon schedule

Debtor firm obtained credit in
pesos from FICORCA, at
“market” nominal interest rate
Firm used proceeds from loan
to buy (from bank) dollars at
“official rate”
Debtor firm earned interest
(libor + 200 bps) on
undisbursed balance
Bank made payments to
creditor according to agreed
upon schedule

36

Annex 2
Debt-to-debt Swaps to H edge Foreign Exchange risk:
An application of the Chilean Model

In this annex we describe the way in which a Chile-style foreign exchange cover would work in a
country such as Indonesia.
Let Corporation A be a local (Indonesian) company with a foreign exchange-denominated loan with
an International Bank (IB). The loan might originally have been a short term or medium term financial liability,
but due to the crisis is subject to the rescheduling negotiated between the Government and creditor banks.
Although this will benefit Corporation A by lengthening the maturity of its liability, it has the disadvantage of
keeping it exposed to exchange risks. Corporation A, as many other foreign exchange debtor, no longer
wants to hold such exposure. The following mechanism allows it to obtain longer maturities without
additional exchange risk.

A. The Mechanism (see figure 1)

1.

Corporation A and its bank, IB, sign a new debt contract rescheduling its foreign exchange debt
under the terms negotiated by the Government (i.e., 8 years maturity, 3 years grace period).

2.

The Central Bank (CB) (or other public agency, such as a Debt Restructuring Facility), sells to
Corporation A an amount of foreign exchange equal to the principal of the rescheduled debt.
The transaction is carried at the going market exchange rate.

3.

Corporation A deposits with the CB the purchased foreign exchange. The deposit has exactly the
same terms (maturity and interest rates) than the rescheduled debt. Partial or total withdrawals
are only allowed under condition stated in 4.

4.

As a counterpart, Corporation A gets a rupiah-denominated loan from CB. The maturity of this
loan exactly matches that of the rescheduled debt. But it can be prepaid any time without cost.
Prepayments allow Corporation A to withdraw the deposit described in 3. Such withdrawal can
only be done in rupiah, at the going exchange rate.

5.

Interest rates of the rupiah loan are set so as to match the real interest rate charged on the
rescheduled debt (i.e., its nominal rate, typically stated as LIBOR plus a SPREAD, minus the
inflation rate of the correspondent currency). Two alternative formulas may be offered:

(a)

The principal is indexed to local inflation and interest rates (R) are thus:
R=LB + SP- P*,

37

where LB stands for LIBOR of the currency of denomination of the loan, SP for the
spread charged by banks on rescheduled debt and P* for the annual inflation (as measured
by CPI or WPI) of such currency.
(this option was used in Chile and LIBOR and foreign currency inflation were US ones).

(b)

The principal of the loan is not indexed to local inflation, but then interest rates (I) are:
I=LB + SP - P* + P,
where P is the annual rate of local inflation.

Interest payments are dated so as to match those of the rescheduled debt and the deposit.
6.

Company A will then end up having doubled its liabilities, holding in its books the foreign
exchange denominated rescheduled debt plus a local currency loan with the CB of equal initial
size. The former, though, will be matched with a deposit of same amount, term, currency and
rates with the CB. Since interest rates and exchange risks associated to this deposit get canceled
out by those of the foreign exchange loan, Company A ends up facing no exchange risk and
paying a net interest rate equivalent to that described in 5 above.

7.

As a consequence of the simultaneous issuing of a foreign exchange deposit and the granting of
a local currency loan, the CB assumes full exchange risks associated to any further depreciation.
Note that conditions defined under 5 above, allow CB to be compensated by local inflation, so it
will stand to lose only if the local currency were to depreciate over and above local inflation. If
the opposite happens CB would benefit, as long as Company A does not exert its option to
prepay the loan and withdraw the deposit, thus reverting to the initial foreign exchange exposure.

B. Results

Company A has been allowed to convert a short or medium term liability, denominated in foreign
currency, and thus subjected to high perceived risk, into a source of long term funds denominated in local
currency and at a reasonable cost. The real cost of funds to Company A would be equivalent to LB + SP P*. If LB is 6%, SP is 250 bps and P* (US inflation) is 2%, the real interest rate paid by Company A would
amount to 6.5% over a local currency denominated loan. As a counterpart the Government, through the CB
or other designed agency picks the full exchange risk associated to any future depreciation of the local
currency over and above the local inflation rate. If the local currency were to appreciate in real terms, this
would benefit the Government, as long as Company A does not exert its right to prepay and thus reverting to
the initial situation.

38

Annex 2
Debt-to-equity Swap:
An application of the Chilean Model

In this annex we provide a detailed explanation of the proposed debt to equity swap mechanism.
Consider the case where a foreign investor (FI) is interested in investing in a troubled emerging
economy, such as Indonesia, as long as asset prices are perceived to be a “bargain”. The following
mechanism allows FI to be compensated for the excessive risk it perceives of investing into Indonesia,
without generating an asset price destabilization or depression. A similar mechanism was successfully applied
in Chile after the 1982 debt crisis, and is considered one of the key ingredients of Chile’s subsequent
impressive recovery.

A. The Mechanism (see figure 2)

1.

FI buys from a foreign bank a rescheduled Indonesian loan. If the original lender (i.e. the foreign
bank) feels the conditions of the loan do not fully compensate its credit risk, it will be willing to
sell the loan at a discount. In the case of banks the discount will typically be equal to loan
provisions. If “d” is the discount, every dollar loan face values could be bought at (1-d) dollars.

2.

FI approaches the issuer of that debt -- say, Corporation A -- and negotiates a prepayment of the
debt. Prepayment is in rupiah, at the going market exchange rate. Corporation A will be willing
to prepay this obligation only if it is offered an attractive discount; that is, if for every dollar of
original debt it is allowed to pay, say, (1-f) dollars. (Notice that this assumes that the original
debtor cannot, or is not allowed, to prepay in foreign exchange, because if so the whole debtrestructuring process would break down.

3.

With the proceeds of the prepayment FI buys or increases the capital of Corporation B, its target
investment. Notice that given th ediscounts involved in the two previous steps, the amount of
funds available to be invested is equal to (1-f)/(1-d) for every dollar of original debt. Note that
corporations A and B may be the same entity. In such case, the debt is converted into equity
without prepayment and the discount is included in the price of the corresponding capital
increase.

4.

FI’s investment is given foreign investment treatment. This means that through a contract with
the Government it is given the right to remit profits and capital, after a given grace period. In
Chile, grace periods were 4 years for profits and 10 years for capital. These periods have to be
made consistent with expected repayments of rescheduled debts so as to avoid a capital outflow.
Remittance rights have to be completely secured, at the most favorable future exchange rate

39

available at the corresponding date, thus isolating them from any future rescheduling, payment
suspension or capital controls.
5.

If FI wanted to invest the equivalent of K dollars, through this mechanism it ends up having to
disburse only M dollars, where:
M= K (1-d)/(1-f).
Therefore, if d=30% and f=20% (as seen in Chile), for every dollar of final investment, 0.875
(=0.7/0.8) dollars of disbursement are needed: an upfront 12.5% cut in capital costs.

6.

As indicated in point 2, it is crucial to limit the access to the program to those investors with
direct access to foreign exchange (like foreign investors). Notice that if local residents
(including original debtors) could benefit from the discount “d”, they would massively demand
foreign exchange and cause a steep depreciation of the currency. In essence this would mean
the breakdown of the debt rescheduling process. In order to avoid this outcome Chile imposed
exchange controls throughout the period under which this mechanism operated. However, local
residents were allowed to operate in a similar, but limited, program; the Central Bank determined
a maximum quota of restructuring available to local firms.

B. Results of the Scheme

Trough a debt-to-equity swap FI is able to fund investment projects at considerably lower capital
costs. Conceptually this result is equivalent to the purchase of the corresponding assets at a discount (as
would alternatively happen through asset price deflation or depreciation). The mechanism plays the role of a
catalyst for FDI and foreign equity purchases, thus helping improve the business climate, while fostering
investment and employment. Local firms benefit from a debt reduction, prepaying foreign debts at a
discount. Some companies (not necessarily foreign exchange debtors) may be partially or totally sold to
foreign investors attracted by the capital cost advantage and thus see their market value bid up. The source
of these benefits is the discount at which rescheduled debts are sold (d), so the bill is in the end paid by those
creditors that are willing to take a loss and exit, rather than stay and share the (uncertain and risky) harvest of
the (eventual) recovery.

40

Figure 1
International Bank

Rescheduled
foreign
exchange loan
(pays LB+SP)

Corporation A
rupiah
loan
(pays LB+
P-P*)

Central Bank
or
Government Agency

foreign
exchange
deposit
(earns
LB+SP)

41

Figure 2
International Bank
rescheduled
debt
(US $ 1,250)

purchase of debt
(US $ 875)

Foreign Investor

prepayment
of debt
(US $ 1,000)

Corporation A
(debtor)

Corporation B
(investment recipient)

Memorandum:
Investment to be made (K):
Discount accepted by lender (d):
Discount accepted by debtor(f):
Required disbursement (M) :

Investment
(US $ 1,000)

US $ 1,000
30%
20%
M = 1,000(0.7/0.8) = 875

42

Table 1:Vulnerability and Crises :Mexico and Asia
Large Current

Rigid

Overvalued

Weak Banks?

Large

Account?

Nominal

Real Exchange

Portfolio

Exchange

Rates?

Flows?

Rates?
Mexico, 1994

Thailand, 1997

Yes, exceeded

Yes

Yes

Yes, non-performing

6.5% of GDP

loans high, weak

(1992-4)

supervision

Yes, exceeded 8%

Yes

Yes

of GDP (1995- 96)

Yes

Yes, finance houses

Yes, BIBF

very weak

channeled
short term
flows

Malaysia, 1997

Yes, exceeded

Yes

Yes

Yes, weak supervision

Yes

No

No

Yes, bad portfolio very

Yes

6.5% (1995-96)
Korea,

Moderate,

1997

averaged 4% of

large ; concentrated

GDP (1996 - 97)

on conglomerate
sector

Indonesia,

Moderate,

Yes, crawling

1997

averaged 3.5% of

band

Yes

Yes, exceeded 4%

1997

of GDP (1995 - 96)

Yes

conglomerate

GDP (1995 - 96)
Philippines,

Yes. They financed

questionable projects
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

43

Table 2 : Current Account, BOP Definition (% of GDP)

Korea
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
China
Taiwan

1990
-0.69
-2.82
-2.03
-6.08
8.33
-8.50
3.09
4.74

Source: Corsetti et al. (1998).

1991
-2.83
-3.65
-8.69
-2.28
11.29
-7.71
3.27
4.39

1992
-1.28
-2.17
-3.74
-1.89
11.38
-5.66
1.33
1.69

1993
0.30
-1.33
-4.66
-5.55
7.57
-5.08
-1.94
1.6

1994
-1.02
-1.58
-6.24
-4.60
16.12
-5.60
1.26
1.66

1995
-1.86
-3.18
-8.43
-2.67
16.81
-8.06
0.23
1.61

1996
-4.75
-3.37
-4.89
-4.77
15.65
-8.10
0.87
3.45

1997
-1.85
-2.24
-4.85
-5.23
15.37
-1.90
3.24
2.35

44

Table 3: M1 to Foreign Reserve Ratio

Korea
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Hong Kong
Taiwan
China

1990
1.50
1.73
0.96
1.14
0.30
0.57
NA
0.99
4.95

Source: Corsetti et al. (1998).

1991
2.16
1.48
0.93
1.21
0.28
0.50
0.45
0.98
3.87

1992
1.84
1.30
0.81
1.05
0.28
0.48
0.46
1.18
10.30

1993
1.79
1.44
0.69
1.13
0.29
0.48
0.45
1.27
12.99

1994
1.57
1.58
0.84
1.01
0.26
0.47
0.40
1.28
4.74

1995
1.54
1.53
1.07
1.19
0.26
0.43
0.35
1.32
4.07

1996
1.44
1.21
1.16
0.89
0.25
0.44
0.35
1.42
3.45

1997
1.81
1.62
1.46
1.24
0.26
0.52
0.23
1.55
3.24

45

Table 4: Non-Performing Loans as of 1996
(% of Total Lending)

Korea
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore

8.0
13.0
10.0
14.0
4.0

Source: BIS Annual Report.

Thailand
Hong Kong
China
Taiwan

13.0
3.0
14.0
4.0

46

Table 5: External world’s desired holding of a country’s liabilities (% of GDP)
Country

Argentina
Bulgaria
China
Czech Republic
Hungary
Indonesia
Malaysia
Morocco
Peru
Poland
Russia
Thailand
Venezuela
Source: Goldman Sachs.

Desired Holding

48.4
42.8
129.2
31.3
31.3
53.9
53.9
31.9
48.4
55.4
38.3
64.6
38.3

Country

Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
India
Korea
Mexico
Panama
Philippines
Romania
South Africa
Turkey

Desired Holding

38.3
48.4
38.3
31.3
47.2
55.4
38.3
38.3
57.1
38.3
38.3
38.3

47

Table 6: Sustainable Current Account Deficit (SCAD) (% of GDP)

Argentina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Czech Republic
Ecuador
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Russia
South Africa
Thailand
Turkey
Venezuela
Source: Goldman Sachs.

1997 CAD (Expected)
2.7
4.5
-2.6
3.7
-1.4
4.8
8.6
2.0
4.0
1.8
3.0
3.8
4.1
1.7
1.8
6.1
5.1
4.2
3.8
0.5
-2.8
1.8
5.4
1.2
-4.6

SCAD
3.9
2.9
0.4
4.2
12.9
2.6
2.1
-0.5
0.8
3.8
4.0
4.9
4.9
2.1
0.3
0.8
3.3
4.5
4.7
2.3
2.5
3.0
6.0
2.1
2.2

Steady State SCAD
2.9
1.9
2.4
2.9
11.1
1.9
1.3
1.3
1.3
2.8
3.4
3.6
3.4
1.9
1.3
1.9
2.9
3.8
3.6
1.9
1.9
1.9
4.5
1.9
1.9

48

Table 7 : Capital Inflows (gross) to Chile

Year

Short term
loans

Percentage
of total

Long term
loans

Percentage
of total

Total

Deposits*

1988

916,564

96.3

34,838

3.7

951,402

--

1989

1,452,595

95.0

77,122

5.0

1,529,717

--

1990

1,683,149

90.3

181,419

9.7

1,864,568

--

1991

521,198

72.7

196,115

27.3

717,313

587

1992

225,197

28.9

554,072

71.1

779,269

11,424

1993

159,462

23.6

515,147

76.4

674,609

41,280

1994

161,575

16.5

819,699

83.5

981,274

87,039

1995

69,675

6.2

1,051,829

93.8

1,121,504

38,752

1996

67,254

3.2

2,042,456

96.8

2,109,710

172,320

* Deposits in the Banco Chile due to reserve requirements

49

Figure 1: The Asian Currency Crisis
60

45

50

40

40

35

30

30

20
1/03/97

5/23/97 10/10/97 2/27/98 7/17/98 12/04/98

25
1/03/97 5/23/97 10/10/97 2/27/98

THAILAND

16000

2000

14000

1800

12000

7/17/98 12/04/98

PHILIPPINES

1600

10000
1400
8000
1200

6000

1000

4000
2000
1/03/97

5/23/97 10/10/97 2/27/98 7/17/98 12/04/98

800
1/03/97 5/23/97 10/10/97 2/27/98

INDONESIA

KOREA

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1/03/97 5/23/97 10/10/97 2/27/98 7/17/98 12/04/98
MALAYSIA

7/17/98 12/04/98

50

Figure 2: The Asian Crisis through the Interest Rate Lens
30

18

25

16

20
14
15
12
10
10

5
0
1/03/97

12/19/97

8
1/03/97

12/04/98

12/19/97

THBTRP1

12/04/98

PHTMEDP

70

30

60

25

50
20
40
15
30
10

20
10
1/03/97

12/19/97

5
1/03/97

12/04/98

12/19/97

IDDEP1M

KOCD91D

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
1/03/97

12/19/97
MYIBK1M

12/04/98

12/04/98

51

Figure 3: The Asian Crisis through the Stock Market Lens
700

700

600

600

500
500
400
400
300
300

200
100
1/03/97

12/19/97

200
1/03/97

12/04/98

12/19/97

TOTMKTH

120

160

100

140

80

120

60

100

40

80

20
1/03/97

12/19/97

60
1/03/97

12/04/98

12/19/97

TOTMKID

TOTMKKO

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
1/03/97

12/04/98

TOTMKPH

12/19/97
TOTMKMY

12/04/98

12/04/98

52

FIGURE 4: On the equilibrium Path of
The Current Account Deficit: A Simulation Exercise

0.44
0.43
0.42
0.41
0.40
0.39
0.38
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14

GAMMA STAR
A. Assumed Evolution of Foreigners' Net Demand
for Mexico's Liabilities
0.036

0.032

0.028

0.024

0.020

0.016
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14

CA

B. Simulated Equilibrium Path of Mexico's
Current Account Deficit

53

Figure 5: Response Of Log(RER) To
One S.D. Capital Flows Innovation In Chile
1981:1 1996:4
0.000

-0.002

-0.004

-0.006

-0.008

-0.010
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

8

9

10

1981:1 1991:2
0.002

0.000

-0.002

-0.004

-0.006

-0.008
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1991:3 1996:4
0.004
0.002
0.000
-0.002
-0.004
-0.006
-0.008
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

54

Figure 6: Response Of Log(RER) To
Controls +/- 2 S.E.

1988:1 1996:4
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
-0.002
-0.004
-0.006
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

55

Figure 7: Response Of Interest Rate Differential To
One S.D. Innovation in Interest Rate Differential In Chile
1981:1 1996:4
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

8

9

10

1981:1 1991:2
0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1991:3 1996:4
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
-0.005

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

56

0.0630
0.0629
0.0628
0.0627
0.0626
0.0625
0.0624
86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

93

94

95

96

alpha

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
86

87

88

89

90

91

92
beta

Figure 8: Time Varying Estimates of Interest
Rate Differential Equation

57

References

Ades, Alberto and Federico Kaune. 1997. “A New Measure of Current Account Sustainability for
Developing Countries.” Goldman-Sachs Emerging Markets Economic Research.
Aspe, Pedro. 1993. Economic Transformation, the Mexican Way. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. 1998 “Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Liberalization,
Overshooting, and Volatility.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6530,
April.
Bartley, L. Robert. 1997. “Peso Folklorico: Dancing Away from Monetary Stability.” In S. Edwards and
M. Naim eds. Mexico 1994. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment.
Banco de Mexico. The Mexican Economy. several issues, Mexico City.
Birdsall, Nancy, Michael Gavin and Ricardo Hausman. 1997. “Getting the Lessons Right: A View from the
Inter-American Development Bank.” In S. Edwards and M. Naim eds. Mexico 1994. Washington,
DC: Carnegie Endowment.
Bruno, Michael. 1995. “Currency Crises and Collapses: Comment.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, No 2.
Burki, Shahid J. 1997. “A Fate Foretold: The World Bank and the Mexican Crisis.” In S. Edwards and M.
Naim eds. Mexico 1994. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Varieties of Capital Market Crisis.” In G. E. Calvo and
M. King eds. The Debt Burden and its Consequences for Monetary Policy, London: Macmillan,
forthcoming.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. 1993. “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors.” IMF Staff Papers, 40,
March.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. 1995. “Capital Inflows to Latin America
with Reference to Asian Experience.” In S. Edwards ed. Capital
Controls, Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in the World Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Enrique Mendoza. 1996. “Petty Crime and Cruel Punishment: Lessons from the
Mexican Debacle.” American Economic Review, May.
Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza. 1998. “Empirical Puzzles of Chilean Stabilization Policy.” Mimeo,
Duke University.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Vegh. 1998. “Inflation Stabilization and Balance of Payment Crises and
Developing Countries.” forthcoming J. Taylor and M Woodford eds. Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

58

Cardoso, Eliana, and Ilan Goldfajn. 1997. “Capital Flows to Brazil-The Endogeneity of Capital Controls.”
IMF Working Paper WP/97/115.
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco. 1998. “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: A Canoical Model.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6606, June.
Chase Manhattan Bank, 1997. “Emerging markets After Thailand: Guilt by Association or Flattered by
Comparison?” October 1.
Chinn, Menzie. 1998. “Before the Fall: Were East Asian Currencies Overvalued?” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 6491, March.
Chote, Robert. 1998. Financial Crises and Asia, CEPR Conference Report, No.6. London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research; Washington, D.C. 1998.
Cline, William R. and Kevin J.S. Barnes. 1997. “Spreads and Risk in Emerging Markets Lending.” Institute
of International Finance Research Papers No 97-1
Cole, Harold and Timothy Kehoe. 1996. “A Self-fulfiling Model of Mexico’s 1994-1995 Debt Crisis.”
Journal of International Economics, 41, 309-330.
Corden, W. Max. 1994. Economic Policy, Exchange Rates, and the International System. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, and Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini. 1998. “Paper Tigers? A
Model of the Asian
Crisis.” paper presented at the NBER-Bank of Portugal
International Seminar on
Macroeconomics, Lisbon, 14-15 June.
Cowan, Kevin and Jose de Gregorio. 1998. “Exchange Rate Policies and Capital Account Mangement.” In
R. Glick ed. Managing Capital Flows and Exchange Rate Rates, Cambrige: Cambridge University
Press.
D’Amato, Alfonse. 1995. “Report on the Mexican Economic Crisis.” United States Senate, June 29. 1995.
Dooley, Michael P. 1995. “A Survey of Academic Literature on Controls over International Capital
Transactions.” IMF Working Paper 95/127.
Dooley, Michael P. 1997. “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 6300.
Dornbusch, Ridiger. 1997. “The Folly, the Crash, and Beyond: Economic Policies and
in S. Edwards and N. Naim, Mexico 1994. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment.

the Crisis.”

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1998a. “Asian Crisis Themes.” Mimeo, MIT, February
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1998b. “Capital Controls: an Idea whose Time is Past.” in S
Fischer et al,
“Should the IMF pursue Capital-Account Liberalization?.” Essays in International Finance No.207,
International Finance Section, Princeton University, May.

59

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo O.Valdes. 1995. “Currency Crises
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1. 219-270.

and Collapses.”

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Alejandro Werner. 1994. “Mexico: Stabilization, Reform, and No Growth.”
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity. 1. 253-297.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1984. “The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in Developing Countries.”
Princeton Essays in International Finance 156. Princeton University.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1989. “Structural Adjustment Policies in Highly Indebted Countries.” in J.Sachs ed.,
Developing Countries Debt and Economic Performance Vol 2, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1993. “Exchange Rates as Nominal Anchors.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 129.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1997. “The Mexican Peso Crisis? How Much Did We Know? When Did We Know
It?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. No. 6334.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998a. “Capital Inflows into Latin America: A Stop-Go Story?” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper. No. 6441.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998b. “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: Some Latin
American Experiences.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. No. 6800.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Alejandra Edwards. 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean
Experience. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
Edwards, Sebastian and Moshin Khan. 1985. “Interest Rate Determination in Developing Countries: A
Conceptual Framework.” IMF Staff Papers. 32. September.
Edwards, Sebastian and Moises Naim. 1997. Mexico 1994. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment.
Edwards, Sebastian and Julio Santaella. 1993. “Devaluation Controversies in the Developing Countries:
Lessons from the Bretton Woods Era,” In M. Bordo and B Eichengreen eds. A Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Edwards, Sebastian and Miguel Savastano. 1997. “The Morning After: The Mexican Peso in the Aftermath
of the 1994 Currency Crisis.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6516.
Eichengreen, Barry and Paul Masson. 1998. “Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries Seeking Greater
Exchange Rate Flexibility.” International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper No. 168.
Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Mussa. 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical and Practical
Aspects.” International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper No. 172.
Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew K. Rose. 1998a. “Staying Afloat when the Wind Shifts: External Factors
and Emerging-Market Banking Crises.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
6370. January

60

Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew K. Rose. 1998b. “The Empirics of Currency and Banking Crises.” Mimeo,
University of California, Berkeley.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5681
Feldstein, Martin. 1998. “Refocusing the IMF.” Foreign Affairs 77 March-April.
Fischer, Stanley. 1994. “Comments on Dornbusch and Werner,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
No. 1, 304-309.
Fischer, Stanley. 1998. “The Asian Crisis: a View from the IMF.” Address at the Midwater Conference
of the Bankers’ Association for Foreign Trade, Washington DC, January 22.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew Rose. 1996. “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
Treatment.” Journal of International Economics, 41, November 1996.
Garber, Peter M. 1998. “Should the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?” Princeton Essays in
International Finance 207. Princeton University.
Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann and Leonardo Leiderman. 1996. “The Macroeconomics of Capital
Flows to Latin America: Experience and Policy Issues.” In R Hausmann and L. Rojas-Suarez eds.
Volatile Capital Flows. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
Gil Diaz , Franciscon and Agustin Carstens. 1996. “One Year of Solitude: Some Pilgrim Tales about the
Mexican 1994-95 Crisis.” American Economic Review, May.
Gil Diaz and Carstens. 1997. “Pride and Prejudice: The Economics Profession and Mexico’s Financial
Crisis.” In S. Edwards and M. Naim eds. Mexico 1994. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment.
Goldfajn, Ilan and Rodrigo O. Valdes. 1997. “Capital Flows and the Twin Crises:
the Role of Liquidity.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 97/87. July
Goldfajn, Ilan and Rodrigo O. Valdes. 1998. “Are Currency Crises Predictable?” European Economic
Review, 42. 874-885.
Goldman Sachs. Emerging Markets Economic Research, Various Issues.
Goldman Sachs. 1997. The Foreign Exchange Market, September.
Goldstein, Morris. 1998. “The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Curses and Systematic Implications.” Policy
Analyses in International Economics No. 55, Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Group of Thirty. 1995. “Mexico: Why Didn’t Wall Street Sound the Alarm?” Group of Thirty, New York
1995.
Hale, David. 1997. “Rubin’s Folly?”, The International Economy, September/October. 1997, 14-19.
Hamilton, James. D. 1994. Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press. Princeton: New Jersey.

61

International Monetary Fund. 1997. World Economic Outlook, Interim Assessment. Washington DC.
December.
International Monetary Fund. 1998. World Economic Outlook . Washington D.C. May.
Ito, Takatoshi. 1999. “Capital Flows in Asia.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
7134.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1997. The Twin Crises: the Causes of Banking and Balanceof-Payment Problems.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Krugman, Paul. 1994. “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle.” Foreign Affairs, November/December.
Krugman, Paul. 1998a. “What Happened to Asia?” mimeo, MIT.
Krugman, Paul 1998b. “Saving Asia: It’s Time to get Radical.” Fortune, September 7.
Leiderman, Leonardo and Alfredo Thorne. 1995. “Mexico’s 1994 Crisis and its Aftermath”, mimeo,
August.
Litan, Robert E. 1998. A Three-Step Remedy for Asia’s Financial Flu.” Brooking Policy Brief. No 30,
February.
Loser, Claudio M. and Ewart S. Wiliams. 1997. “The Mexican Crisis and Its Aftermath: An IMF
Perspective,” In S. Edwards and M. Naim eds. Mexico 1994. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
Endowment.
Massad, Carlos. 1998. “The Liberalization of the Capital Account: Chile in the 1990’s.” in S Fischer et al,
“Should the IMF pursue Capital-Account Liberalization?” Essays in International Finance No.207,
International Finance Section, Princeton University, May.
McKinnon, Ronald and Huw Pil. 1996. “Credible Liberalization and International Capital Flows: the
Overborrowing Syndrome.” In T. Ito and A.O. Krueger eds. Financial Deregulation and Integration
in East Asia, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. 1996. “Sustainability of Persistent Current Account Deficits.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5467.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin. 1998. “Sharp Reduction in Current Account Deficits: an
Empirical Analysis.” European Economic Review, 42. 897-908.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1998. “International Capital Movements, Financial Volatility and Financial Instability.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6390.
Obstfeld, M. 1997. “Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Developments in Theory and Policy.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6319.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1995. OECD Economic Surveys: Mexico.

62

Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs. 1998. “The Onset of the East Asian Financial Crisis.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6880.
Rebelo, Sergio. 1997. “What Happens when Countries Peg their Exchange Rates?: The Real Side of
Monetary Reforms.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6168.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Who needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in S Fischer et al, “Should the IMF
pursue Capital-Account Liberalization?” Essays in International Finance No.207, International
Finance Section, Princeton University, May.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell and Andres Velasco. 1995. “Lessons from Mexico.” Mimeo, Harvard
University, March.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell and Andres Velasco. 1996. “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: The
Lessons of 1995.” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity No. 1, 147-217.
Valdes-Prieto, Salvador and Marcelo Soto. 1996. “New Selective Capital Controls in Chile: Are They
Effective?” Mimeo, Catholic University of Chile, Santiago.
Wang, Yan and John D. Shilling. 1995. “Managing Capital Flows in East Asia.” World Bank Discussion
Paper.

63

ENDNOTES
1

On the Mexican crisis see, for example, Leiderman and Thorne (1995), Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1995),
Calvo and Mendoza (1996), the papers in Edwards and Naim (1997), Edwards (1997), and those in the
special issue of the Journal of International Economics (1996). The Mexican authorities’ views can be found
in Gil Diaz and Carstens (1996, 1997). The financial community perspective is in Group of Thirty (1995).
For the World Bank perspective see Burki (1997); the IMF views are in Loser and Williams (1997). See also
OECD (1995) and Birdsall et al (1997). On the East Asian crises see Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998),
Radelet and Sachs (1998) and Ito (1999).
2
See the studies cited in footnote 1.
3
See Edwards (1993) for a discussion on the role of fixed exchange rates as nominal anchors.
4
See Aspe (1993).
5
See D’Amato (1995).
6
In Edwards (1989) and Edwards and Santaella (1993) I had documented the connection between real
exchange rate overvaluation and currency crises for more than 70 developing countries during the 1950-1982
period.
7
Edwards and Savastano (1998) discuss Mexico’s post-1995 experience with a floating exchange rate.
8
Ades and Kaune(1997).
9
For an account of the crisis from the Bank of Mexico’s perspective see Gil Diaz and Carstens (1997).
10
See Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998) and Sachs and Radelet (1998).
11
Finance Minister Aspe (1993) devoted almost a full chapter of his book (Chapter 4) on the Mexican
reforms to discussing the importance of bank supervision.
12
This expression will hold for every period t; I have omitted the subscript t in order to economize on
notation.
13
The assumptions of constant λ and θ are, of course, highly simplifying.
14
As a result of this assumption, equation (3) overstates (slightly) the “sustainable” current account ratio.
15
Under the restrictive assumption that international inflation is equal to zero, this expression corresponds
exactly to G-S equation (5). See Ades and Kaune (1997, p6)
16
This assumes that growth is not affected. If, as it is likely, it declines the required compression would be
even larger.
17
This discussion draws partially on Edwards (1998b).
18
The tax equivalences estimated by Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996) were updated to the
end of 1997.
19
Cardoso and Goldfajn (1997) analyze a series of impulse response functions to a capital
controls
innovation in the Brazil.
20
As Cardoso and Goldfajn (1997) have argued, capital controls in Latin America are likely to be endogenous.
Thus, care should be taken in establishing the vectors ordering in the
VAR estimation.

