NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPECTATIONS, CREDIBILITY,
AND TIME-CONSISTENT
MONETARY POLICY
Peter N. Ireland
Working Paper 7234
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7234

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

I would like to thank Jon Faust and two referees, along with seminar participants at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, New York University, the University of Iowa, the University of
Quebec at Montreal, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and Yale
University, for helpful comments and suggestions. Some of this research was completed while
I was visiting the Research Department at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; I would like
to thank the Bank and its staff for their hospitality and support. All opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research , the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, or the Federal Reserve System.

© 1999 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Expectations, Credibility, and Time-Consistent Monetary Policy
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 7234
July 1999
JEL No. E31, E52, E61
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses the problem of multiple equilibria in a model of time-consistent monetary
policy. It suggests that this problem originates in the assumption that agents have rational expectations and
proposes several alternative restrictions on expectations that allow the monetary authority to build credibility
for a disinflationary policy by demonstrating that it will stick to the policy even if it imposes short-run costs
on the economy. Starting with these restrictions, the paper derives conditions that guarantee the uniqueness
of the model’s steady state; monetary policy in this unique steady state involves the constant deflation
advocated by Milton Friedman.

Peter N. Ireland
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu

</ref_section>

