NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING THE POOR PERFORMANCE
OF CONSUMPTION-BASED
ASSET PRICING MODELS
John Y. Campbell
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 7237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7237

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

Campbell’s research is supported by the National Science Foundation via a grant administered to the NBER.;
Cochrane’s research is supported by the National Science Foundation via a grant administered to the NBER
and by the Graduate School of Business. We thank Andrea Eisfeldt, Andrew Abel, George Constantinides,
Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Robert Lucas, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. All opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by John Y. Campbell and John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to

exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Explaining the Poor Performance of
Consumption-Based Asset Pricing Models
John Y. Campbell and John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 7237
July 1999
JEL No. G00
ABSTRACT
The poor performance of consumption-based asset pricing models relative to traditional portfoliobased asset pricing models is one of the great disappointments of the empirical asset pricing literature. We
show that the external habit-formation model economy of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) can explain this
puzzle. Though artificial data from that economy conform to a consumption-based model by construction,
the CAPM and its extensions are much better approximate models than is the standard power utility
specification of the consumption-based model. Conditioning information is the central reason for this result.
The model economy has one shock, so when returns are measured at sufficiently high frequency the
consumption-based model and the CAPM are equivalent and perfect conditional asset pricing models.
However, the model economy also produces time-varying expected returns, tracked by the dividend-price
ratio. Portfolio-based models capture some of this variation in state variables, which a state-independent
function of consumption cannot capture, and so portfolio-based models are better approximate
unconditional asset pricing models.

John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

John H. Cochrane
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th. St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu

</ref_section>

