NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MODEL OF MULTIPLE DISTRICTS
AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS:
THE ROLE OF MOBILITY, TARGETING,
AND PRIVATE SCHOOL VOUCHERS
Thomas J. Nechyba
Working Paper 7239
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7239

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

I am grateful to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) and the National Science
Foundation (SBR-9809269) for research support, and to seminar participants at Stanford, Duke, the
University of Virginia, Vanderbilt, the University of Florida, Fundacao Getulio Vargas, Johns Hopkins, Texas
A&M, the University of Washington, the New Zealand Ministry of Education, the First International Public
Economic Theory conference and the 1999 Winter meetings of the American Economic Association for
helpful comments. Part of this research was undertaken while I was visiting the Fundacao Getulio Vargas
in Rio de Janeiro and part while I was on leave at the Hoover Institution at Stanford. The hospitality and
financial support of both are greatly appreciated. All remaining errors remain mine. All opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Thomas J. Nechyba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,

may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Model of Multiple Districts and Private Schools:
The Role of Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers
Thomas J. Nechyba
NBER Working Paper No. 7239
July 1999
JEL No. I22, H73
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a multi-district model that can be calibrated to data reflecting housing market
conditions, public school finance mechanisms and private school markets. Simulations are undertaken to
investigate the impact of private school vouchers. Households that differ in both their income and in the
ability level of their children choose between school districts, between neighborhoods within their school
district, and between the local public school or a menu of private school alternatives. Local public school
quality within a district is endogenously determined by a combination of the average peer quality of public
school attending children as well as local property and state income tax supported spending. Financial
support (above a required state minimum) is set by local majority rule. Finally, there exists the potential for
a private school market composed of competitive schools that face production technologies similar to those
of public schools but that set tuition and admissions policies to maximize profits. In this model, it is
demonstrated that school district targeted vouchers are similar in their impact to non-targeted vouchers but
vastly different from vouchers targeted to low income households. Furthermore, strong migration effects
are shown to significantly improve the likely equity consequences of voucher programs.

Thomas Nechyba
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
tnechyba@leland.stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Persistent frustration with the perceived low quality of public education, exacerbated by
concerns over the inherently unequal levels of public school quality across school districts, has caused

policy makers, courts and researchers to investigate modifications and alternatives to the current
public school system. One idea that has received increasing academic and public attention is that of
private school vouchers, with proponents arguing that the competitive pressures of voucher programs

would cause improvements in the efficiency of the public school system while at the same time
addressing equity concerns if vouchers can be targeted to low income households or low income
school districts.2 But aside from a few limited experiments in some US cities, our experience with
vouchers in the US remains virtually nonexistent.3 This limits the amount of information researchers

can derive from standard empirical analysis in that it forces them to rely on only current (nonvoucher induced) differences in competition (Hoxby (1994)). Despite important suggestive results,
such work may not anticipate all the impacts from a large scale policy such as the voucher policies

currently under discussion. At the same time, theoretical models of school finance are also limited
in that they often either focus on only one particular aspect of the general equilibrium school finance

problem, or they are too rich and complex to yield crisp predictions.

It is for this reason that there is great potential for simulation approaches which combine

empirical evidence from household choices between school districts with rich but complicated

2 The most prominent of these experiments is taking place in Milwaukee where a limited number of
vouchers are targeted to low income households (see Rouse (1998) for early evidence on they impact). For other
instructive discussions and references, see Levin (1992).
Other countries, such as Chile, have more experience with vouchers, but it is unclear how much we can
learn from these experience for US policy given the very different cultural factors (Carnoy and McEwan (1997)).
3

theoretical models. This combination allows for a narrowing of the relevant parameter space in
general equilibrium models that would otherwise be of little predictive value. Careful calibration

combined with thorough sensitivity analysis can then lead to simulations that offer a first order
approximation of likely impacts of private school vouchers under different assumptions about factors

we currently have little evidence on. Such an approach can serve to clarify the nature and magnitude

of the general equilibrium forces that are likely to emerge under vouchers and to guide empirical
research in searching for more information on important factors that we know too little about.
It is this research strategy that I employ here. Specifically, I attempt to explore the impact of

voucher policies on the distribution of educational opportunities across school children by tracing

each policy's likely impact on household choices within a general equilibrium multi-community
economy. The theoretical model that is employed has several unique features: (i) each school district

can be composed of multiple types of neighborhoods that may differ in house quality and local
neighborhood amenities and externalities; (ii) households, who differ in income and child ability,
jointly choose between school districts, neighborhoods within districts and public and private schools;

(iii) school quality is determined by a combination of peer quality within the school and per pupil
spending, and peer quality is determined by both parental and child characteristics; (iv) both local
property and state income taxes are used to fund public schools, with local property taxes resulting
from a public choice process; and (v) private schools seek to maximize profits by setting tuition and
admissions policies in a competitive environment. The first of these features is particularly useful in

that it allows for imperfect Tiebout sorting of the type we observe in the data for most school
districts, while the remaining features lend themselves to calibration in other dimensions.

The overall approach of this paper differs most dramatically from many previous studies on

4

vouchers in that it considers the private/public school choice faced by parents as part of a larger
choice problem and therefore draws particular attention to the importance of considering mobility and

migration when designing school finance policies in general and private school voucher policies in

particular. In retrospect, it seems surprising that, despite the widespread acknowledgment that

variances in public school quality play a large role in shaping the current location choices of
households (and vice versa),4 little attention has in fact been given to the possibility that state wide

voucher programs might cause significant changes in residential location patterns by severing the

strong link between place of residence and school quality. In previous work (Nechyba (1999)),
however, I employed a simpler and more theoretical version of the model utilized in this paper to
suggest that general equilibrium Tiebout effects can be important when vouchers are introduced into
stylized state school systems. The clear forces emerging in the model are quite basic: As vouchers are

introduced into the multi-community economy, private schools form in low income communities to
serve middle to high income immigrants who move to take advantage of lower house prices. Only if
housing of sufficiently high quality is not available or if large negative neighborhood externalities exist

in the low income communities will private schools emerge elsewhere first.5
Given this basic insight, I focus here more sharply on the potential of residential mobility to
change the way we think about voucher policies by employing a richer and more realistic model than

See Nechyba and Strauss (1998) and references therein for empirical evidence of the impact of public
schools of residential location choices. Lankford and Wyckoff (1997) provide further compelling evidence on the
importance of parental choices in changing segregation patterns.
While the empirical evidence on private school formation is quite sparse, the basic observation that
private schools are likely to appear in low quality districts conforms strongly with the available empirical evidence
from California which experienced a dramatic rise in the number of private schools after the Serranocourt
decision and the passage of Proposition 13 in the late 1970's (Downes and Greenstein (1997)).
5

that used previously and by embedding a state finance system that mirrors one that is actually in

practice. I then focus on three different types of state financed voucher programs: (1) a general
voucher that can be used by anyone choosing to send their child to private school; (ii) a voucher

program targeted only to low income households; and (iii) a voucher program targeted to low
income/low public school quality districts. These vouchers programs are demonstrated to have quite

different impacts depending on the degree of mobility of households.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews some of the
relevant literature and presents the motivating intuition for this paper, and Section 3 lays out the
model and calibration formally. Section 4 defines the three different voucher programs and reports
simulation results under different assumptions of mobility, and Section 5 concludes.

2. A Brief Look at the Prior Literature6
As mentioned in the introduction, most prior models of vouchers have focused mainly on the

public/private schooling dimension of choice, but not on the jurisdictional and neighborhood
dimensions. Early approaches in this tradition have yielded the following powerfifi insight: Assuming

that private schools discriminate on ability and "skim the cream" off the public system, a classic
tradeoff may arise: on the one hand, vouchers may cause peer quality in public schools to decline,

while on the other hand public school quality may improve due to competitive pressures on an
inefficient public system. An emphasis of the latter effect essentially encompassed Friedman's (1962)

6

No attempt is made here to review the entire literature on school finance or school competition. Instead,
due to space considerations, a few recent highlights are provided. For more extensive reviews, see many of the
cited articles, as well as a recent comprehensive survey by

6

original argument, and the tradeoff between these effects was formalized by Manski (1992),.
Unfortunately, however, we still have little empirical evidence regarding the relative magnitude of
these forces under large scale vouchers.

For this reason, more recent theoretic and simulation approaches have taken the
FriedmanfManski insight as given while attempting to focus on other aspects of the problem.9 Epple

and Romano (1998), for instance, forgo attempting to model or quantif,' the degree of productive
inefficiency in public schools and instead focus on inefficiencies that arise from peer externalities.
Their interesting results suggest that, if private schools can observe peer externalities and are able to

discriminate in their tuition policies, profit maximizing behavior on their part leads to an
internalization of these externalities and results in an improvement of efficiency in the school sector. 10
Furthermore, low income/high ability children might benefit in a voucher system as private schools

seek to purchase their peer quality with sizable scholarships, while low income/low ability children

' Manski (1992) himself suggests that, from a policy perspective, the cream skimming effect is likely to
outweigh the competition effect and is thus critical of vouchers. For a recent critique of some of the normative
analysis, see Moe and Shotts (1996). Some other recent approaches have also been critical of the notion that
vouchers might improve school quality when public schools are efficient (see, for example, Rangazas (1997)).
See Hoxby (1994) for evidence relating existing private school concentrations to public school
performance and Hoxby (1998) for a discussion of how existing evidence can be interpreted as generally positive in
regard to competitive effect on public schools, and see Witte (1992) for a recent suggestion that little can be
inferred from previous evidence. Also, see Evans and Schwab (1995), Neal (1997) and Figlio and Stone (1997) for
somewhat differing evidence regarding Catholic school performance.

One notable exception is the political and institutional analysis offered by Chubb and Moe (1990).
10

More precisely, the distribution of students across private schools in the absence of free public schools
is shown to be efficient fthe number of private schools is efficient. Since this number is exogenous in ER, only
constrained efficiency is guaranteed. Caucutt (1997) presents a different model in which she allows for the number
of private schools to emerge endogenously and is able to prove a first welfare theorem in the absence of public
schools. Schwab and Oates (1991) demonstrates that, just as private schools may internalize peer group
externalities through pricing, more activist public schools could accomplish the same by charging low peer quality
students higher taxes.

7

would be worse off due to the exit of high ability children from public schools. In an extensions of

their approach (Epple, Newlon and Romano (1997)), it can further be demonstrated that public
schools may be able to use "tracking" within public schools as one tool to compete with private
schools by raising school quality internally for high ability children. However, the model assumes a

single public school district and thus abstracts away from issues related to school district choice.
Several recent efforts have begun to analyze multi-community models.11 De Bartolome (1990)

uses a two community model with peer effects to point out inefficiencies from voting when voters
ignore the impact of migration. More recently, Fernandez and Rogerson (1996) also use a simple two

community model (without peer effects) to investigate redistributive state policies in the presence of
migration and find that policies which raise the fraction of wealthy residents in poor communitiestend

to be welfare enhancing. This conclusion is mirrored in some of the results presented in Nechyba
(1999). Finally, Epple and Romano (1995) introduce multiple communities into their frameworkbut

do not focus on vouchers.

The nature of the additional effect of voucher induced migration is, of course, neither
mysterious nor difficult to model. Suppose, for example, that a continuum of households with
identical preferences but different incomes separate into two public school districts in the absence of

vouchers (and that none of the households chooses private schooling). Further suppose that the two

communities are identical in every way, and that the housing in each community is identical and
exogenously given. Under certain conditions, an equilibrium in such a model will entail a separation
of households into these communities by income, with the higher income community imposing higher

Other notable paper investigating different aspects of vouchers in a single community setting include
Glomm and Ravikumar (1995) and Hoyt and Lee (1996).

8

property taxes and funding better schools.'2 Furthermore, the tax inclusive price of housing in the
wealthy community must be higher than that in the low income community (to prevent low income

households from moving into the community with the better public schools). Now suppose a state
funded voucher program was instituted in this two community world. In the absence of mobility, it

is then ambiguous whether private schools will arise first in the poor or the wealthy community: If

public schools are sufficiently good in the wealthy community and sufficiently bad in the poor
community, then the highest income household in the poor community would be the first to utilize
the voucher. Otherwise, the highest income household in the wealthy community would be the first
to choose private schools and thus give rise to private schools in the wealthy community. Under full

mobility of households, however, high income households in the wealthy community would never
simultaneously choose private schools andstay in the wealthy community in which the tax inclusive
price of housing is higher. Thus, private schools would unambiguously arise in the poor community,

either because of local demand or because of demand from immigrating households.

While a simple model of the kind outlined above can therefore illustrate basic migration
forces, it helps us little in determining whether such forces are likely to be of empirical relevance
given the much richer environment into which vouchers would be introduced. In particular, available

housing is not identical across communities, neighborhood amenities other than public schools are
important in location choices, and neighborhood externalities may inhibit mobility. We therefore now
turn to the exposition of a richer model, calibrate it, and investigate the likely magnitude of migration

and general equilibrium effects from the introduction of private school voucher programs.

12

that this is just a simplification of the familiar Epple, Filimon and Romer (1993) model in which
housing is not exogenous.

9

3. The Model
As mentioned above, the theoretical model on which this paper's simulations are based is an

extension of Nechyba (1999) which builds a private school market into a well defined local public

goods economy first explored in Nechyba (1997a). It takes as given the boundaries that divide a
fixed set of houses into school districts and places no a priori restrictions on the mix of house and
neighborhood qualities within and across these boundaries. This allows the model to accommodate

the empirically important possibility of the coexistence of rich and poor "neighborhoods" within a
single school district.'3 Each household is endowed with a house (which can be sold at the market

price), a parental income level and an ability level for its one child. The parental income level
combined with the child's ability determine the child's peer externality within a school, and a school's

quality is determined by the interaction of the average peer quality of children within that school and

per pupil spending. A child is therefore assumed to impact his peers in two ways: first, through his
parents' income level and second through his own ability, The former of these captures the fact that

parental involvement and monitoring of schools increases in household income (see, for example,
McMillan (1998)), while the latter captures spillovers within the classroom. Parents take endowments

as given and choose (i) where to live, (ii) whether to send their child to the local public or a private
school, and (iii) how to vote in local elections determining the level of public school spending. A more

formal exposition of these elements of the model follows.

At the same time, however, the assumed exogeneity of the housing stock and neighborhood effects and
the fixed nature of the political boundaries make the model ill suited for explaining either the evolution of observed
intradistrict neighborhood structures or the formation of political jurisdictions. Instead, the model seems most
appropriate for analyzing policy issues for a relatively stable and developed urban/suburban economy.

10

3.1.

Community Structure

The set of houses is represented by the unit interval N=[O,1].14 A fixed school district and

neighborhood structure

c = {c, I

V (d,h),(d',h')EDxH s.t. (d,h)(d',h') and UdEDhEHC, = N}

is imposed on this set and partitions it into a set of house/neighborhood types 11= {1,... ,h,. ,H) spread

over a set of school districtsD={1,. ..,d,. ..,D}. C, is then the set of houses of type hlocated in district

d, or the set of houses in "neighborhood h" of community d. The calibrated computable general
equilibrium (CGE) version used in this paper sets 11=5 and D=3. This implies the existence of 15
different neighborhoods spread over 3 school districts, where the measure of houses in district d is
denoted p(Cd), and the measure of houses in neighborhood h of district d is p(CJ.

The school districts in the CGE model are assumed to be of equal size (i.e. { p(C1), p(C2),
p(C3)} = { 1/3,1/3,1/3 }) and are intended to be representative of low income, middle income and high

income school districts in the suburbs of New York City. Using 1990 School District Data Book
(National Center for Education Statistics (1995)) and Census (Bureau of the Census (1992)) data
from all districts in southeastern New York, school districts were divided into three categories by

median household income such that each category ended up with roughly equal numbers of
households. Table 1 gives summary statistics for each class of districts. Furthermore, each district in

the CGE model is divided into five equally sized neighborhoods. From price data on houses in the
various district types I am able to infer neighborhood quality parameters that enter directly into utility

functions by a process described in detail in Section 3.6. For now I simply note that this calibration

14

More precisely, the set of houses is defined as part of a measure space (N,N,p) where 1u is taken to be
the Lebesgue measure. All subsets referred to are henceforth assumed to be measurable.
11

translates a near-continuum of house qualities observed for each district type into 5 discrete quality

intervals (neighborhoods) of equal sizes. More precisely, one fifth of all houses in district d are
assigned the house/neighborhood quality of the median house observed in the data for that district

and are labeled houses of neighborhood type h=3. Similarly, neighborhoods 2 and 4 represent
"somewhat below average" and "somewhat above average" house qualities respectively, and one fifth

of all houses within district d are assigned quality levels corresponding to those observed at the 30th
and 70th quality percentile for that district type. Finally, neighborhoods 1 and 5 represent the worst

and best houses in a particular district, and one fifth of all houses in district d are assigned the quality
level observed for the houses in the 1 0th and 90thpercentile (respectively). Note that because I employ

price data to calibrate house qualities within districts, I capture both characteristics of the houses and

characteristics of the neighborhoods in one measure. Thus, the model allows for both neighborhood

externalities and amenities as well as house qualities to determine the character of neighborhoods
within school districts, In the simulations below it will then be assumed that these quality levels are
fixed once the benchmark (no voucher) equilibrium has been fully calibrated, and that migrations of

households do not change neighborhood qualities. However, I will argue in the conclusion that, if
anything, this biases the model against the results I report in Section 4.

3.2.

Endowments and Preferences
Households in the model are endowed with income, a house, a child with some exogenous

ability level, and preferences over the consumption set. Both the income and the house endowment,

however, can be viewed as private good endowment, except that the value of the house endowment
is endogenous.
12

More precisely, it is assumed that there is one and only one house for each household in the
model, and neither multiple residences nor homelessness are allowed. Thus, the unit interval N=[0, 1]

which represents the set of houses also represents the set of households, and each household is
assumed to have one child. Initially, an endowment function z:N-L divides this set of households
into a finite set of "income types."5 The income endowment function chosen for the CGE model

creates 10 income types and replicates a discretized version of the actual household income
distribution observed for the New York districts used in the calibration, Incomes in the model
therefore range from 1 (corresponding to $10,000) to 10 (corresponding to $100,000), and the
measure of agents with different levels, of income is given by the observed household income
distribution in the data. It should be kept in mind that this eliminates from the model extremely poor
and extremely wealthy households by truncating the income distribution at 1 and 10. Given that it is

likely that such extreme households are often motivated by factors quite different from the middle
class (broadly defined), however, this appears to be a minor limitation of the model.

In addition to income, each household is endowed with one house (the value of which is
determined endogenously in equilibrium), and each income type is initially spread uniformly across
all neighborhoods (in all school districts). Given that this is a static model calibrated to annual data,
the "value" of a house is defined as the annualized flow of housing/neighborhood services from that

house. Furthermore, it is important to note that, while some low income households are endowed
with high quality houses, this does not imply that these low income households actually live in high

priced houses. Rather, on the way to determining the benchmark equilibrium from which the

'

The assumption of finiteness of the number of income types is made for technical reasons related to the
existence of an equilibrium. These issues are discussed in detail in Nechyba (1 997a).

13

simulations start, households buy and sell houses on the market at market prices. Thus, those low

income types that are endowed with a high quality house will not remain in that house in the
benchmark equilibrium. The house endowments therefore are just like income endowments except

that their value is determined endogenously. In practice, the value of these endowments (i.e. the
value of the annual flow of services from these endowments) falls between 0.3 and 2.5 and thus
simply serves to smooth out the discretized income distribution. This causes the initial set of 10
income types to become 150 endowment types, where the distribution of the value of the combined

income and house endowments now more smoothly replicates the income distribution observed in

the New York districts.
Each household nEN is also assumed to have one child, and ability levels are assigned via a
function a:N-']R. In the CGE model, ability levels take on 5 different possible discrete values which

are set to correspond in magnitude to parental income levels (which range from 1 to 10).16 Solon
(1992) and Zimmerman (1992) provide a point estimate for the empirical correlation of parental and

child income of 0.4 which I use as a proxy for the correlation of parental income and child ability;'7

i.e. I assign the five ability levels in equal measure but distribute them in such a way as to make the
correlation between parental income and child ability equal to 0.4. Given the 150 endowment types
specified above, this addition of ability levels generates a total of 750 types.

Finally, each household nEN is assumed to act as one utility maximizing agent with utility

16

These values are admittedly arbitraiy, but sensitivity analysis has shown that changing either the mean
or variance of these numbers has little qualitative or quantitative impact on the results presented in this paper.
17

One can also interpret the correlation between parental and child income of 0.4 as an upper bound on
the correlation between parental income and child ability because of the correlation of school quality and parental
income. Sensitivity analysis with versions of the model that drive the correlation to 0, however, suggest this makes
little difference for the results I report.

14

function u":DxHxR2 -R that takes as its arguments the district and neighborhood the agent lives
in, his private good consumption CER, and the perceived school quality level 5ER÷ enjoyed by the
household's child.'8 In principle, few restrictions on utility functions are necessary for the existence

of an equilibrium (Nechyba (1997a)), and preferences may vary across household types. Under the
assumption of heterogeneous preferences, however, the potential of a large multiplicity of equilibria

arises, which is why the CGE model restricts all types to have the same Cobb-Douglas utility
function:
u(d,h,s,c) =kth sacp

nEN.

The determination of s is explored next, and the calibration of {kj dED, hEH}, a and is described
in Section 3.6.

3.3.

Production of School Quality

Both public and private schools combine per pupil spending with average peer quality to
produce the output s that enters the utility functions of the households. A child's peer quality q(n)
is jointly determined by his parents' income level and his own ability through a process captured by

the function q(n) = (z(n)° a(n)'°)/7.5.'9 Thus, as 0 increases, the importance of parental income

18 The household production literature (Becker (1991)) suggests school quality is only one of the inputs in
the production of student achievement, and that others include such factors as parental conunitment of time and
resources. In light of this, the utility function specified in this model should be viewed as somewhat "reduced
form." A more complete model might specif' a technology by which child ability combined with school quality and
parental inputs produces future consumption, and households care about this future consumption rather than school
quality per Se. The current reduced form utility function, however, can be derived from the more complete model
under certain specific assumptions (see Nechyba (1999)), and none of the main conclusions of this paper change
under a more complicated model of preferences and technologies.

19 The function is divided by 7.5 in order to make peer quality similar in magnitude to per pupil spending.
This is of no consequence other than that is eases the interpretation of the parameter p in the next equation.
15

increases while that of child ability declines. One possible interpretation of this is that 0 represents
the degree to which peer effects work through the channel of parental monitoring (which increases
in parental income) as opposed to the child's inherent ability. Letting x be equal to per pupil spending

and q be equal to average peer quality, household choices are then assumed to be made as if the
school production function were accurately described by the constant returns to scale process:

s =j(x,q) =

x"q where Op 1.

Note that so long as p<l, this implies that additional material resources (x) are viewed by parents as

translating directly into gains in school quality. Although the accuracy ofthis view is challenged in
much ofthe empirical education literature (Hanusheck (1 986)),20 there is overwhelming evidencethat

per pupil spending does affect parental location and voting choices. This evidence dictates that, in any

model that seeks to predict policy-induced changes in parental behavior, per pupil spending mustbe
perceived by parents to have a marginal product greater than zero. The specification off is therefore

intended merely to reflect the fact that both peer quality and per pupil spending affect parental
choices. Normative implications of the results, however, depend on how one resolvesthe puzzle that

a large part of academic research suggests a marginal product of per pupil spending close to zero
while parents act as if it was quite large.2' Since different explanations of this puzzlehave different

Betts
Debate over this continues, as demonstrated by the recent work of Card and Krueger (1992),
and
Hanushek
Krueger
(1998).
and
Lee
(1997),
Barro
(1998)
(1996), Heckman, Layne-Farrar and Todd (1996),
20

21 There several ways of resolving this puzzle. First, while economists typically quanti1 school quality

with test scores or future wages, parents may define "quality" more broadly to include other aspectsof schools
(such as music classes, athletic activities, the attractiveness of school buildings, etc.).If so, p<l is not inconsistent
with the "money does not matter for test scores" result of the Hanushek literature. Second, spending may appear
not to matter for test scores because, whenever spending falls, parents compensate by engaging moreunobservable
effort at home (Houtenville (1996)). In that case, parents would care about spending despite the empirical
observation that spending is uncorrelated with test scores. Third, Lazear (1999) argues persuasively that, if class
size is determined endogenously and peer quality matters in the sense that disruptive students are particularly
damaging, then it will appear that class size does not matter when in fact it does.

16

normative implications, the reader is left to make his own judgements regarding the actual importance

of x in relation to q, and simulation results will report x and q alongside •22 (This is also one of the
reasons I forego a detailed welfare analysis using utility functions in the simulations that follow.) The

calibration of the parameter p is left to Section 3.6.

3.4.

Public School Equilibrium
Before defining an equilibrium formally, the public choice process that determines average

public school spending in district d (xd) must be specified. Let TcN be the subset of households that

choose to send their children to public school. Then per pupil spending in district d is
Xd =

(tdP(Cd)+AIDd)/,u(llnJd),

where td is the local property tax rate in district d,23 AJDd is the total state aid received by district d,

and P(Cd) = h€H p(C.)p(C.) is the local property tax base. This base varies with the endogenously

determined house price function p:DxH-.1R that gives rise to an equilibrium house price vector
pER÷rm and thus assigns a unique price to each house type in each district. The formula underlying

22 While many studies focus on the impact of spending on both educational quality and on parental
choices, few papers investigate the impact of peer effects on either of these variables. Again, for purposes of the
present analysis, the precise nature of peer effects is secondary as parental beliefs are more important. It seems
quite plausible, therefore, that parents view schools with higher income parents and higher ability children as
better schools. The specification of peer effects in the functionf is, however, consistent with the general empirical
findings of Henderson, Mieszkowski and Sauvageau (1978) who suggest that peer effects are equally important for
high income and low income students. Summers and Wolfe (1979), on the other hand, find (in a different setting)
that less able students benefit from more able peers but high ability students are not affected by the presence of low
ability student, while Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992) cast doubt on much of this literature by demonstrating that,
in the case of teenage pregnancy and school dropouts, evidence of peer effects vanishes as endogeneity problems
are taken into account. But, more recent cross country evidence is again generally supportive of the importance of
peer effects (Toma (1996), Zimmer and Toma (1997)), although the literature is far from settled on appropriate
functional forms. For an excellent demonstration of the empirical difliculties involved in measuring peer effects,
see Manski (1993), and for a recent survey supportive of using peer averages, see Moreland and Levine (1992).
La.zear (1999) recently presented a different view of peer effects in which extremes rather than averages matter.

Nechyba (199Th) shows that the use of property taxes is the dominant local tax strategy in this model.

17

AIDd may in principle contain a variety of matching and block grant features which are taken into

account by voters as they vote on local tax rates.24 The CGE model contains state aid levels
corresponding to those found in the representative districts in New York in 1990. Throughout the

simulations, these aid levels (reported in Table 1) are taken as exogenous (on a per pupil basis).
Furthermore, it is assumed that there exists a constitutionally set minimum spending level of 0.6
(which lies below the lowest spending level in the initial benchmark equilibria.) This is to add some

realism to the public choice process in that it does not permit majorities who attend private schools

to vote for zero spending on public education, and it prevents simulations from finding trivial
equilibria in which no public schools exist.

While voters do take into account state aid, they are otherwise assumed to be quite myopic i.e. they take community composition and property values as given when going to the polls. Such

voter myopia is technically convenient and thus relatively standard in the literature (see Epple, Filimon

and Romer (1993), Dunz (1986), Rose-Ackerman (1979)). In the absence ofprivate schools, a voting

equilibrium for a given partition of the population is then obtained relatively easily as myopic
preferences over local tax rates are single peaked (Nechyba (1997a)). For expositional purposes I

therefore define a full equilibrium in two steps: First I specify a public school equilibrium under

which private schools are prohibited, and then I proceed to expand the definition to an actual
equilibrium that includes endogenously generated private schools. While the actual equilibrium must

specify a list {J,t,s,p,} that includes a partition of households into districts and neighborhoods J,

local property tax rates tER÷D, local public school qualities sElR÷', house prices pETR± and a

24 Nechyba (1996, 1999) demonstrates that the specific form of state aid formulae may indeed have large
impacts on the nature of equilibria in the context of this model.

18

specification of the sub-set of the population that attends public rather than private schools cN, the

public school equilibrium artificially forces r=N.

Definition: A public school equilibrium is a list (J,t,s,p,r} such that

(1) p(Jj=p(C) V (d,h)eDxH (every house is occupied);
(2) Property tax rates t are consistent with majority voting by myopic residents;

(3) s=j(x,q) for all d ED, where xd= (tdP(Cd)+AIDd)/iu(lflJd) (budgets balance) and
q= ((Z( llnJd))° (A(qnJ))(lO))/7. 5 ;25
(4) At prices p, households cannot gain utility by moving (market clearing); and

(5) r = N; i.e. everyone attends public school.
The theoretical properties of this type of equilibrium are explored in detail inNechyba (1997a)
where it is demonstrated that, under relatively weak assumptions, such an equilibrium is guaranteed
to exist. Furthermore, with sufficient variation in mean house quality across districts, the equilibrium

assignment of agents across neighborhoods and communities is unique (Nechyba (1997a, 1999)).26

3.5. Actual Equilibrium (including private schools)

Here, however, the focus is explicitly on the policy consequences of state voucher programs
in the presence ofprivate alternatives to public schools. Therefore, the definition of a public school

25 Z(Jd) = fjdz(n) dn and A(Jd) = f,d a(n) dn are the average income and the average ability level

(respectively) of the population assigned to district d.
26 Without variation in housing quality, such uniqueness does not happen. Consider, for example, the case
in which house qualities are identical across all communities and all neighborhoods. Then there is nothing in the
structure of the model that tells us which district will contain the high income households. With sufficient
variation in housing quality, high income households will always end up in high quality communities and
uniqueness is obtained. Due to the discreteness of housing, however, house prices can vary within small intervals.
The size of these intervals is decreasing in the number of housing types, and experiments with the current CGE
model suggest that, with 15 house qualities across five districts, these intervals are quite small.

19

equilibrium must be expanded to allow for the emergence of private schools. As noted in Nechyba
(1999), this raises two theoretical problems: First, Stiglitz (1974) points out that single peakedness
of preferences over tax rates is lost in the presence of private alternatives, which implies that, in the

absence of additional assumptions on voter behavior, a voting equilibrium does not exist.27 For
present purposes, however, this problem is solved by simply extending the definition of voter myopia

to include the choice of private or public schooling (in addition to community composition and
property values) as a factor voters take as given when voting. Thus, preferences over taxes for those

voters who choose public schools remain single peaked as before, and preferences for voters who
chose private schools are single peaked with peak at t=O (in the absence of state aid) or t<O (under
state aid).28 However, the assumption of a constitutionally set minimum level of spending prevents

majorities to impose negative property tax rates.

The second problem is that a model for private school markets must be introduced into the
already complicated Tiebout framework. I make two simplifying assumption: (1) there is free entry

into the private school market, and (2) private schools are prohibited from differentiating between

students in their tuition policies but are not prohibited from differentiating between them in their

ad,nissions policies. Each private school that opens therefore announces two characteristics: the
tuition rate that is charged per child, and the minimum peer quality accepted into the school. 29

27 Recent contributions

to the public choice literature on voting in the presence of private alternatives
include Epple and Romano (1996) and Glomm and Ravikumar (1998). The problem is generally studied in single
conununity settings, and proposed solutions are difficult to import into the current multi-community framework.
28

As pointed out in Nechyba (1999), this leads to the existence of trivial equilibria in which there are no
public schools (and, given eveiyone attends private schools, no public schools arise). In the simulations, however,
these trivial equilibria are reported only if there does not exist an equilibrium with public schools.
29

Note that, for technical reasons in part exposited in Nechyba (1999), this differs from the model of
Epple and Romano (1998) in which schools discriminate in their tuition but not their admissions policies.

20

Given that there are no set-up costs or increasing returns in the production technologyf faced

by private schools, it is then immediate that all parents whose children attend a particular private
school must be of the same endowment and peer type in equilibrium and that they pay tuition that is

exactly equal to their most preferred level of per pupil spending. Suppose, for a moment, that this
were not the case. In particular, suppose that a private school provided education to children of two
different income types. Then a new school that offered admission only to the higher income type (at
the same tuition) would improve the utility of the higher income parents (because of the higher overall

peer quality achieved through selective admissions). Under free entry, such a school would in fact
arise. Similarly, free entry eliminates all tuition levels other than those most preferred by parents.3°

This definition of a private school market then allows for an expansion of the definition of a
public school equilibrium in which 11 is artificially set to N to one in which is arises endogenously.

Definition: An actual equilibrium {J,t,s,p,q) is the same as a public school equilibrium except that
conditions (4) and (5) are replaced by (4') and (5'):

(4') At prices p, households cannot gain utility by moving and/or changing schools;
(5') The private school market is perfectly competitive, and private schools are able to
discriminate in their admission policy but not in their tuition policy.
The existence of such an equilibrium is guaranteed. (See Nechyba (1999) for a more extensive

discussion on both existence and uniqueness issues).

° For a formal proof of this, see Nechyba (1 999).This is similar to the familiar logic that underlies the
Hamilton (1975) local public finance result that zoning results in homogeneous communities. In that model,
communities (rather than private schools) fix a local taxlspending package (analogous to tuition levels) and set a
minimum zoning (rather than peer quality) level. Nechyba (1999) also pointed out that the assumptions made here
are formally equivalent to treating private schools as excludable clubs under an equal cost sharing rule.

21

3.6. Calibration of Remaining Parameters
Having specified the calibration of incomes and endowments, I now turn to the remaining

kj

preference and production function parameters. On the preference side, house quality parameters {

deD, h€H} as well as the Cobb-Douglas exponents a and 1 remain to be specified, while on the
production side values for p (the parameter specifying the relative weight of spending over peer

quality in school output production) and 0 (the parameter indicating the relative importance of
parental income versus child ability in determining peer quality) are still uncalibrated.

The general strategy for a large part of this calibration is similar to that laid out in Nechyba
(1997b). I assume an underlying utility function u(h,s,c) = höscP where hjointly captures housing and

neighborhood quality and is interpreted as the annualized flow of housing/neighborhood services.

Given that s is determined in a Cobb Douglas production process that places weight (l-p) on per
pupil spending x, we can re-write this utility function as u(h,x,c;q) =hô(x(lqc = yhx1"c where

q is equal to peer quality and y=q. When treating h, x and c as choice variables in an ordinary
maximization problem, the exponents ô, (1-p)a, and 3 can then, without loss of generality, be
normalized to sum to 1 and interpreted as budget shares. Thus, I calculate the budget shares for h,
x and c for a hypothetical "median household" that consumes the imputed median annualized flow

of housing/neighborhood services (in the data), earns the median income and "chooses" the mean
school spending level observed in New York, and I interpret these as ô, (1-p)a, and (equal to 0.22,

0.13 and 0,65 respectively). Given data on house prices rather than flows of housing services, the
median annualized flow of housing/neighborhood services is calculated for the median house value

in the data assuming a 5% interest rate.
Of course, housing in the model is not a continuous variable h but rather consists of a discrete

22

number of house! neighborhood quality levels {kj dED, hEH}. I therefore combine the housing value

distribution data from the School District Data Book with my estimate for 8 to calibrate the fifteen

values for k across the three representative school districts. In particular, I take the housing
distribution for all houses in districts of a particular type (i.e. low, middle or high income as defined

above), find house values at the 10th, 30th 50th, 70th and 90th percentile (corresponding to
neighborhoods 1 through 5 in district 1) and convert these to annualized housing flows (using a 5%

interest rate). I then combine these annualized flow values with the exponent 8 to arrive at the five
housing (or neighborhood) quality parameters for this representative district. More precisely, suppose

that for houses in districts falling into district category 3 (i.e. "high income districts"), the annualized
flow of housing services for a house at the 50th percentile of the distribution is 1.5 (corresponding to
$15,000). The housing quality parameter for neighborhood 3 (the "median neighborhood") in district

3 is then just equal to (l.5)ö, i.e. k23= (1.5) = (1.5)0.22 = 1.093. This procedure is then similarly
applied to other district types to arrive at housing quality parameters for all neighborhoods in all
representative districts. These parameters are reported in Table 2.

While housing quality parameters as well as the exponent 3 have thus been determined, the

values for a, p and 0 remain ambiguous. With respect to 0, I know of no consistent and reliable
estimates from past work that can be helpful in determining the impact of parental socioeconomic
status relative to child ability in determining peer externalities. I therefore make no attempt to arrive

at a single value for 0 and rather report simulations for different values ranging from 0 to 1. This
leaves only a and p, and the calibration procedure above has placed a restriction on these values given

that (1-p)a is interpreted as the budget share of school spending for the median in the data. Again,
there is little in the data or in prior empirical work that can be used to assign precise values to p and

23

a. However, if p is set close to 0 (i.e. if school quality is determined primarily by spending levels

rather than peer quality), private schools do not emerge in the model unless voucher levels are
unreasonably high. Similarly, if p is set too close to 1 (i.e. if school quality is determined primarily

by peer quality and not by spending), public schools cannot exist in equilibrium even without
vouchers. Therefore, if the benchmark equilibrium without vouchers is meant to reflect an equilibrium
in which public schools dominate but in which some households are on the margin of choosing private

schools, the value of p is limited to a range significantly narrower than the interval [0,11. More

precisely, Table 3a gives the fraction of households choosing public schools in the absence of
vouchers under different assumptions regarding p and 0 (assuming the previously derived joint
restriction on a and p holds). These numbers indicate that reasonable values for p must lie below 0.5.

Similarly, Table 3b gives the fraction of households choosing public schools in the presence of
vouchers of 0.5 (equivalent to $5,000). If the model is to reflect that at least some households are on

the margin of choosing private schools, these numbers indicate that p must lie above 0.3. For the
remainder of the simulations reported in this paper, I therefore set p within the interval [0.3,0.5]. To

arrive at a precise value for p, I choose that value which (given 0) yields a distribution of mean
incomes across school districts that most closely reflects that of Table 1. While p therefore differs

depending on 0, it always falls close to the midpoint of the interval [0.3,0.5]; i.e. pO.4. Sensitivity

analysis using values in the neighborhood of 0.4 indicates that the main results of the paper are
unaffected by the precise choice of p from this plausible interval.
It should be noted at this point that I have not attempted to use pto replicate the private school
attendance rates for New York, and that the benchmark equilibria all have 100 percent public school

attendance. While the alternative of using p in this fashion is tempting, I believe that this would be

24

misleading. In the absence of vouchers, households choose private schools for a variety of reasons,
many of which have little to do with the factors modeled in this paper. In particular, religion, race and

differences in pedagogical philosophies are likely to be quite important, as is the presence of high
income households that are currently not modeled. I therefore make to attempt here to mimic private
school attendance rates in the benchmark equilibrium. I note in passing, however, that such rates have

been replicated in this model by adding either an additional preference parameter for private schools
or by including higher income agents and additional house types. Results from such a model are not

markedly different from those reported here, but they quite unnecessarily complicate an already
involved model.31 For the remainder of the paper, I will therefore interpret the agents in the model

as limited to those who are in the public school system prior to the introduction of vouchers, and,

unless otherwise stated, assure the reader that an introduction of private school attendees into the
model (as described above) leaves the results emphasized in this paper virtually unchanged.

3.7. Benchmark Equilibrium

Table 4 gives a representative benchmark equilibrium for the case of 0=0.5. (Benchmark
equilibria for values other than 0=0.5 are not sufficiently different to warrant separate tables.) Note
that per pupil spending levels as well as mean incomes closely mimic those found in the representative

districts reported in Table 1. Similarly, interjurisdictional differences and overlaps in housing prices
are similar to those found in the data, both for representative districts and for actual sample districts

in New York. Finally, one might be concerned that the aggregation of the data into representative

districts might lead to too much intra-jurisdictional variance in incomes (and house prices) in the

31 These results are available from the author upon request.

25

districts used in the model. However, a comparison of the model's interjurisdictional variance in

incomes to the intrajursidictional variances (see Table 6) actually understate the within district
heterogeneity commonly found in school district data (see, for example, Bogart (1990)). Thus, given

that many of the results below are dependent on the presence of within school district variation in
housing and income, these results will tend to be under rather than overstated.

4. Simulation Results
In this section, I report simulation results of three types of private school voucher plans, and
I focus on reporting levels and variances ofvariables in the model without conducting detailed welfare
analysis using changes in household utility levels. While utility measures can easily be calculated, these

tend to be relatively uninformative as they contain changes in utility from a variety of sources and thus

do not focus on the important goals of education policy that emphasize the levels and distribution of
educational opportunities. A detailed welfare analysis therefore adds little beyond what the numbers

in the tables below suggest, and I therefore restrict such analysis to a final footnote to this section.
In each of the simulations below, a voucher of level y is simply a piece of paper that gives any
eligible household the option of redeeming y dollars from the state government if the household sends

its child to a private school that charges tuition of at least y. If the private school charges tuition less
than y, the voucher entitles the eligible household only to the full amount of the tuition.32 The state

government then sets a proportional state income tax sufficient to finance the voucher program.
32

Note that this implies that, in equilibrium, everyone who uses a voucher will send his child to a private
school that charges tuition greater than or equal to the level of the voucher. Note further that I focus here on
private school vouchers, not vouchers that would also extend to public schools in other districts. This is done
primarily because of evidence that public school district choice often is limited by legal provisions that allow good
school districts to claim capacity constraints as an exclusionary device for interested outside students. (See
Nechyba and Heise (1998) for a discussion of this.)

26

Voucher plans differ only in the definition of eligibility. In particular, a full voucher plan is defined

as any voucher plan under which every household regardless of place of residence and incomeis
eligible for the voucher. A community targeted voucher plan, on the other hand, limits eligibility to

the subset of households that resides in the targeted school district(s), while an income targeted
voucher plan is one that limits eligibility to households whose income falls below a targeted income

level regardless of place of residence.

4.1. Tiebout Equilibrium Changes under Full Vouchers

Table 5 begins with a fill voucher program and reports the fraction of households attending
private schools as well as mean income and mean property values by school district for different levels

of the voucher and for different assumptions for the value of 0. (Note again that dollar values are
expressed in tens of thousands, and property values are expressed as annualized house rents.) As
expected, regardless of the level of 0, private school attendance in all communities is monotonic in
the level of the voucher, but private school attendance arises first in district 1, the low income district.

The income and property value columns provide the explanation: as private schools begin to form,
community income rises due to the immigration of relatively high income households who bid up the

price of some of the houses in the better neighborhoods within the community. These immigrants
come from the middle and high income communities where house values capitalize the value of the
good public schools. Once the decision is made to send a child to private school, householdschoose

to migrate to comparable houses/neighborhoods (or at least to houses/neighborhoods of sufficient
quality) in communities that are cheaper due to their poor public school system.
Table 5 also demonstrates that the qualitative nature of the changes in the Tiebout equilibrium

27

is quite independent of assumptions regarding the value of 0. As 0 increases, peer quality is
determined more by parental income rather than child ability. This implies that those who have most

to gain from separating from the public school system are the very households that can most afford

to do so. It seems that for this reason the speed of privatization rises as 0 increases.
The major implication of Table 5 is that, in the presence of full mobility, modest levels of private

school attendance cause a substantial decrease in residential stratification of both community income

and property values. This becomes even more evident in Table 6 which reports the variance of both
incomes and property values within and across school districts. The variances across districts decline

substantially and monotonicaly (with the exception of the extreme voucher level that causes a
complete collapse of the public school system) as voucher levels rise. Homeowners in wealthy
communities with good school districts clearly suffer as their house values decline while homeowners

in the poor community benefit from capital gains due to increases in their house values. However,

these benefits are not uniformly shared as the intra-community variance in property values rises
somewhat in the poor community and falls in the wealthy community.

4.2. Targeting and Mo bility
Tables 5 and 6 focused on the case of full vouchers under complete mobility; i.e. vouchers that

are accessible to all households where each household is assumed to be costlessly mobile. I now

investigate precisely how much of the results are due to the mobility assumption and what
implications this has for different kinds of targeting. Table 7 begins by comparing the percentage of

students attending private schools from Table 5 to cases where households are immobile and cases

where vouchers are targeted either to communities or to individuals.
28

First, the columns labeled A replicate the percentages previously reported in Table 5 for full
voucher programs under full mobility. Columns labeled B differ from those labeled A in that mobility

is made prohibitively expensive. Note that in general, if mobility is assumed away, private school
attendance increases more slowly as voucher levels rise, and private schools now never arise in the

wealthy district. Thus, when forced to remain in their original communities, residents of the high

income community are sufficiently satisfied with their local public schools so as not to utilize
vouchers, as are residents of the middle income community when 0=1. Residents of the low income

community, on the other hand, take up vouchers when their level becomes sufficiently high.

Next, columns C and D report private school attendance rates under voucher plans that are

targeted to community 1, with columns C allowing costless mobility while columns D assume
mobility to be prohibitively expensive. First, note that private schools now arise exclusively in
community 1 where the voucher is usable. Second, note that columns C and A are identical for
voucher levels less than or equal to 0.2 (and for 0.3 when 0=0). This is because private schools do
not arise for these voucher levels in communities other than community 1 even when the program is

not targeted. For low levels of vouchers, targeting to the low income community is thus equivalent
to not targeting at all when households are assumed to be mobile. For higher levels of vouchers, take
up rates in community 1 are at least as high under targeting (and higher in some cases). Furthermore,

eliminating the possibility of migrating causes reductions in take up rates similar to those previously

found for full voucher programs.
Finally, columns E and F consider cases (for costless mobility and no mobility respectively) of

voucher plans targeted at households whose income is less than 2 (i.e. less than $20,000). For both

0=1 and 00.5, E and F are omitted from the table because no private schools arise, and for 0=0,
29

private schools arise only for vouchers of 0.6 or higher. Personally targeted vouchers are therefore

relatively ineffective in the model unless most of the peer effect is through the channel of child
ability (i.e. 0 close to 0). In that case, low income parents of high ability children choose to use
vouchers, but only in communities where public schools are quite poor. Income targeting of vouchers

therefore isolates public schools in wealthy and middle income districts from competitive pressures

they would face under community targeting or no targeting. Again, as for the two previously
considered voucher programs, mobility increases the take up rate substantially.

4.3. Impacts on Educational Opportunities

Tables 8 through 10 present the public school related variables for scenarios A through D

assuming 00.5. (Results for voucher plans targeted at individuals under the two mobility
assumptions are left out given that no private schools arise under such plans when 0=0.5 and when
results for other values of 0 are sufficiently similar.) In Nechyba (1999) I had demonstrated that the

direction of the change in per pupil spending on public schools in low income communities is
ambiguous under many local financing schemes because, while political pressures against public
school spending increase with private school use, the increased presence of middle to high income
residents who pay taxes (on a larger property tax base) without using the public schools provides a
counteracting force that acts like a local matching grant. However, I also demonstrated that the larger

a portion of the local budget in the poor district is made up by exogenous state finds, the smallerwill
be the latter effect. In New York, over half of public school funding in poor districts comes from the
state, which is enough to cause the simulations to yield decreases in per pupil spending with increased

use of private schools. (Spending levels off at 0.6 because of the assumed constitutionally required
30

floor on spending.) Under our full mobility assumptions, however, vouchers also cause an
unambiguous decline in per pupil spending in wealthy districts as the political constituency for high

spending in those districts decreases (due to high income families leaving to set up private schools

elsewhere) and as the tax base shrinks (i.e. as property values fall). Furthermore, ability levels in
public schools in middle and wealthy districts decline as parents of high ability children are the first

to be drawn into the private sector. Only in the poor community do ability levels in public schools
initially rise as high income/low ability households are pushed out of the community by middle and
upper income immigrant households who are choosing the low incomedistrict in order to send their

children to public schools. On balance, however, peer quality declines in all public schools. This,
combined with declining per pupil spending, causes declines in parental perceptions of public school

quality, declines which are generally more pronounced for wealthy communities than for poor
communities whenever households are assumed to be mobile. Without mobility, of course, ability and

peer levels change only when private schools form in the community, which happens primarily in the
poor community. Thus, wealthy districts are largely unaffected byvoucher policies, whether targeted

or not, whenever it is assumed that households are not mobile.

Most interesting and perhaps most surprising, however, are the impacts on the variances in
these school variables across students. Table 12 presents these for the case of no targeting (with the
case of community targeting yielding similar though somewhat more muted outcomes). The first set
of columns in the table provide variances across public school students (who are declining in number),

while the latter columns provide variances across all students, public and private. First, note that, as
voucher levels increase, variances of per pupil spending, ability, peer quality and parentally perceived

quality all decline among public school students under full mobility while they increase under
31

prohibitively expensive mobility. Under full mobility, wealthy communities suffer from out-migrations

of high ability, high income households who are not willing to pay for high house prices due to good

public schools when they have chosen to send their children to private schools. This causes quality

variables to decline in wealthy communities, and to decline proportionately more than in poor
communities, Under no mobility, on the other hand, quality variables remain constant for communities

that do not experience private school enrollments - i.e. wealthy communities. Thus, the lack of outmigrations resulting from the mobility restrictions causes quality to remain constant in communities
with good public schools while public school quality falls in communities with initially poor schools.

What we care about most, however, might not be the variance of quality across students who
remain in the public system but rather the variance in quality across all students who were initially in
the public system. Surprisingly, when households are fully mobile, the variance in per pupil spending
across these students actually falls for moderate levels of vouchers, and this decline is sufficiently high

to outweigh the increase in variances across abilities and peer quality to cause variances in parental

perceptions of school quality to remain roughly stable. This is true because, under mobility, the
greatest segment of initial private school attendees are composed of high ability households from

relatively modest neighborhoods in wealthy communities, households that can most easily find
substitute housing in lower wealth communities . With the implicit subsidy from wealthy homeowners

gone, however, they now choose private school spending levels below those they enjoyed in their
previous public school even if they previously voted for high spending given the price subsidy from

the wealthy. Thus, in addition to the decrease in the variance in spending across public school
students, the variance drops further when private school students are also considered. At the same
time, the exit of students into the private system unambiguously increases the variance in abilities and

32

peer quality even as the variance in peer quality across public school studentsfalls. Under no mobility,
however, the variance in all quality variables unambiguously rises because the migration effects giving

rise to the narrowing in the variance under full mobility is now absent. Private school attendees thus
exit the public system primarily in the low spending district, thus raising the variance in spending.
From an equity perspective, then, the mobility assumption yields outcomes that can be viewed

as roughly equivalent to outcomes without vouchers, far from most a priori predictions of vast
increases in inequities in education. This is true despite the assumption of rather extreme cream
skimming behavior on the part of private schools, despite the assumption that competition per se will
yield no increases in efficiency and despite a model of peer effects that does not allow for gains from

specialization of schools. A relaxation of any of these assumptions would, of course, make vouchers

more attractive on both efficiency and equity grounds, but simulations reported elsewhere indicate
that migration effects of magnitudes similar to those described above would persist.33 Regardless of

which other assumptions are incorporated into policy analysis, it therefore seems essential to
incorporate public school district choice into policy analysis of private school vouchers.34

See Nechyba and Heise (1998) for examples of such simulations.

As suggested at the beginning of this section, a detailed welfare analysis using utility measures from the
simulations is possible. While I have argued that such analysis may not be as meaningful as one might wish, I have
calculated utility levels for all 750 types as voucher levels change. The results of this analysis are intuitive given
the discussion above: Residents of the low income community who leave the district as a result of the inunigration
of private school attendees are made better off due to capital gains from selling their property, as are some
residents of the middle and high income community whose rental payments fall. Furthermore, for low levels of
vouchers, those that take up the voucher are made better off while those remaining in the public school system
(especially those in the middle and high income communities) are made worse off. As voucher levels increase,
however, high income households (even those choosing to take up the voucher) may be made worse off due to high
state income tax payments to finance vouchers, while low income households are made better off from the implicit
state subsidy of the voucher. This is true for both low income households who take up the voucher (and pay
relatively little for it) and those that remain in the public system (who now receive matching aid from local
residents who are paying local taxes but attending private schools).

33

5. Conclusions and Open Questions
This paper builds on previous research indicating that mobility of households may play an
important part in school finance debates. In the results presented here, mobility is demonstrated to

be important for both the positive analysis attempting to predict the impact of vouchers on the
distribution of educational opportunities and the normative analysis evaluating its equity properties.

On the positive side, it is shown that, in a model roughly calibrated to reflect the state of school

finance in New York, the general equilibrium impact of assuming mobility of households may
outweigh most other effects in the analysis. This has deep implications for policy makers considering

various options of targeting 'ouchers to those in most need. In particular, the impacts of targeted
voucher policies are vastly more pronounced under targeting schemes aimed at low public school
quality districts rather than poor individual households, especially if households are relativelymobile.

On the normative side, even with assumptions that are quite stacked against vouchers, variances in
overall quality may not be adversely affected by the introduction of either full vouchers or community

targeted vouchers, and variances in per pupil spending may actually decline.

While the use of house prices to calibrate neighborhood quality levels is intended to capture
both neighborhood and house characteristics within and across communities, it has been emphasized

throughout that the benchmark quality levels are assumed to remain constantin the face of rather
large voucher induced migrations. There are at least three reasons to be suspiciousof this assumption:

First, households that relocate are likely to change housing qualities at least marginally; second, they

are likely to effect changes in neighborhood amenities; and third, neighborhood externalities may
change by the mere fact that different individuals now reside in these neighborhoods. However, it is
important to note that all three of these restrictions are likely to understate the main results presented

34

in this paper. Since migrations lead to less stratification of income across jurisdictions,immigrants
to lower income communities are likely to expand housing quality, increase neighborhood amenities

and contribute to positive neighborhood externalities (if these are correlated with income), while
immigrants to higher income communities are likely to cause the opposite. This implies that the

attractiveness of neighborhoods in lower income jurisdictions is understated while that of
neighborhoods in higher income jurisdictions is overstatedin the current framework which causes the

model to underestimate rather than overestimate migration effects.
A few cautionary notes are, of course, appropriate. As is emphasized throughoutthis paper, the
mobility assumption changes crucially the impact ofvoucher initiatives. Given that mobility is costly
in the short run, it is unlikely that the types of effects implied bythe model under full mobility would

arise immediately in any real voucher experiment, and a more careful multi-period analysis might
therefore be more appropriate. Furthermore, the model as presented here is one of homeowners and

does not include renters. While other simulations (not reported here) in which residents are renters
rather than owners confirm the robustness of the migration trends, welfare analysis with the model
would differ as income effects from capital gains and losses would be absent. Finally, while we have
indicated that the private school formations predicted in this model are roughlyconsistent with private

school formations observed after the Serrano school reforms in California, it remains unclear precisely

what types of private schools might emerge under large scalevoucher initiatives. Additional effects,
such as returns from specialization, reductions in bureaucraticand political inefficiencies and the role
of parental involvement in public schools are all left out of the current analysis. While other work with

this model indicates that the migration effects I point to in this paper remain equally strong when
these other factors are added, the contribution of this paper is primarily to point to the importance
35

voucher policies. Clearly, more research is called for
of mobility and its implications for targeting of

to come to a clearer overall evaluation of vouchers in comparison to other school reform proposals,

and no simulation model can ultimately take the place of empirical work with real world voucher
experiments.

36

6. References
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1997): "Schooling Quality in a Cross Section of Countries," NBER working paper
6198.

Becker, Gary (1991): A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Betis, Julian (1996): "Is there a Link between School Inputs and Earnings? Fresh Scrutiny of an Old Literature," in
DoesMoneyMatter? The Effect ofSchoolResources on StudentAchievement andAdultSuccess (Gary Burtless,
ed.), Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 141-91.

Bogart, William T. (1990): Essays on Intergovernmental Grants, Property Taxation and Housing Markets,
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University.
Bureau of the Census (1992): 1990 Census of Population and Housing, Washington, DC: The Bureau of the Census.

Card, David and Alan Krueger (1992): "Does School Quality Matter? Returns toEducation and the Characteristics
of Public Schools in the United States," Journal of Political Economy 100,1-40.
Carnoy, Martin and Patrick McEwan (1997): "The Effects of Competitionfrom Private Schools on Achievement: A
Longitudinal Analysis of Chilean Schools,"working paper, Stanford University.

Caucutt, Elizabeth (1997): "Peer Group Effects in Applied General Equilibrium," working paper,University of
Rochester.
Chubb, John and Terry Moe (1990): Politics, Markets andAmerica 's Schools, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

De Bartolome, Charles (1990): "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Modelwith Peer Group Effects,"
Journal of Political Economy 98, 110-33.
Dewey, James, Thomas Husted, and Lawrence Kenny (1995): "Are Educational Inputs Irrelevant? A Reexamination
of the Evidence,"working paper, University of Florida.

Downes, Thomas and Shane Greenstein (1997): "Entry into the SchoolingMarket: How is the Behavior of Private
Suppliers Influenced by Public Sector Decisions?", working paper, Tufts University.
Dunz, Karl (1985): "Existence of Equilibrium with Local Public Goods and Houses," SUNY-Albany Department of
Economics Discussion Paper #201.
Epple, Dennis, Radii Filimon and Thomas Romer (1993): "Existenceof Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System
of Communities with Property Taxes," Regional Science and Urban Economics 23, 585-610.

Epple, Dennis, Elizabeth Newlon and Richard Romano (1997): "Ability Tracking, School Competition and the
Distribution of Educational Benefits," working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1998): "Competition BetweenPrivate and Public Schools, Vouchers, and PeerGroup Effects" American Economic Review 88, 33-62.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1996): "Ends Against the Middle: DeterminingPublic Service Provision when
there are Private Alternatives," Journal of Public Economics 62, 297-325.

37

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1995): "Public School Choice and Finance Policies,Neighborhood Formation,
and the Distribution of Educational Benefits," working paper, University of Florida.

Evans, William, Wallace Oates and Robert Schwab (1992): "Measuring Peer GroupEffects: A Study of Teenage
Behavior," Journal of Political Economy 100, 968-9 1.
Evans, William and Robert Schwab (1995): "Finishing High School and Starting College: Do Catholic Schools Make
a Difference?", Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 94 1-74.

Figlio, David and Joe Stone (1997): "School Choice and Student Performance: ArePrivate Schools Really Better?",
working paper, University of Oregon.
Friedman, Milton (1962): Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Glomm, Gerhard and B. Ravikumar (1998): "Opting out of Publically Provided Services: A Majority Voting Result,"

Social Choice and Welfare, forthcoming.
Glomm, Gerhard and B. Ravikumar (1995): "Vouchers, Public and Private Education, and Income Distribution,"
Econometrics and Economic Theoiy Paper No. 9508, Michigan State University.
Hamilton, Bruce (1975): "Zoning and Property Taxes in a System of Local Governments," Urban Studies 12, 205-11.
Hanushek, Eric (1998): "Conclusions and Controversies about the Effectiveness of School Resources,"FederaiReserve
Board of New York Economic Policy Review 4, 11-25.

Hanushek, Eric (1986): "The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools," Journal of
Economic Literature 24, 1147-217.
Heckman, James, Anne Layne-Farrar and Petra Todd (1996): "Does Measured School Quality Really Matter? An
Examination of the Earnings-Quality Relationship," in Does Money Matter? The Effect ofSchool Resources
on StudentAchievement andAdult Success (Gary Burtless, ed), Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 192289.

Henderson, Vernon, Peter Mieszkowski and Yvon Sauvageau (1978): "Peer Group Effects in Educational Production
Functions," Journal of Public Economics 10, 97-106.

Houtenville, Andrew (1996): "Parental Effort, Student Achievement and the Qualityof Schooling, working paper,
University of New Hampshire.

Hoyt, William and Kangoh Lee (1996): "Educational Vouchers, Welfare Effects and Voting," working paper,
University of Kentucky.
Hoxby, Caroline M. (1998): "What do America's "Traditional" Forms of SchoolChoice Teach us About School Choice
Reform?" Federal Reserve Board of New York Economic Policy Review 4, 47-59.

Hoxby, Caroline M. (1994): "Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?", NBER working paper
4978.
Krueger, Alan (1998): "Reassessing the View that American Schools are Broken,"FederalReserve Board ofNew York
Economic Policy Review 4, 29-41.

38

Lankford, Hamilton and James Wyckoff (1997): "The Effect of School Choice and ResidentialLocation on the Racial
Segregation of K-12 Students," working paper, SUNY-Albany.

Lazear, E. (1999): "Education Production," Hoover Institution working paper.

Levin, Henry (1992): "Market Approaches to Education: Vouchers and School Choice," Economics ofEducation
Review 11, 279-85.
Mauski, Charles (1992): "Educational Choice (Vouchers) and Social Mobility," Economics ofEducation Review 11,
351-69.

Moe, Terry and Kenneth Shotts (1996): "Computer Models of Educational Institutions: The Case of Vouchers and
Social Equity," Journal of Education Policy.
Moreland, Richard and John Levine (1992): "The Composition of Small Groups," in Advances in GroupProcesses
(E. Lawler, B. Markovsky and C. Ridgeway, eds.), Greenwhich, CT: JAI Press, 237-80.
McMillan, Robert (1998): "Competition, Parental Monitoring and Public School Quality," working paper, Stanford
University.
National Center for Education Statistics (1995): School District Data Book v. 1.0, Washington, DC: US Department
of Education.

Neal, Derek (1997): "The Effect of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Achievement," Journal of Labor
Economics 15, 98-123.
Nechyba, Thomas (1999): "School Finance Induced Migration Patters: The Case ofPrivate School Vouchers," Journal
of Public Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Nechyba, Thomas (1997a): "Existence of Equilibrium and Stratification in Local and Hierarchical Public Good
Economies with Property Taxes and Voting," Economic Theory 10, 277-304.
Nechyba, Thomas (199Th): "Local Property and State Income Taxes: The Role of Interjurisdictional Competition and
Collusion," Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 35 1-84.

Nechyba, Thomas (1996): "A Computable General Equilibrium Model of IntergovernmentalAid," Journal of Public
Economics 62, 363-97.
Nechyba, Thomas and Michael Heise (1998): "School Finance Refonn: Introducing the Choice Factor," working paper,
Stanford University.

Nechyba, Thomas and Robert Strauss (1998): "Community Choice and Local Public Services: A Discrete Choice
Approach," Regional Science and Urban Economics 28(1), 51-74.
Rangazas, P. (1997): "Competition and Private School Vouchers," Education Economics 5, 245-63.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1979): "Market Models of Local Government: Exit, Voting and the Land Market," Journal
of Urban Economics 6, 3 19-37.
Rouse, Cecilia (1998): "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: AnEvaluation of the Milwaukee Parental
Choice Program," Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 553-602.

39

Schwab, Robert and Wallace Oates (1991): "Community Competition and the Provision of Local Public Goods,"
Journal of Public Economics 44, 2 17-37.
Solon, Gary (1992): "Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States," American EconomicReview 82, 393409.

Stiglitz, Joseph (1974): "The Demand for Education in Public and Private School Systems,"Journal of Public
Economics 3, 349-85.
Summers, A. and B. Wolfe (1977): "Do Schools Make a Difference?" American Economic Review,639-52.

Toma, Eugenia (1996): "Public Funding and Private Schooling Across Countries," Journal ofLaw and Economics,

Witte, J. (1992): "Private School versus Public School Achievement: Are There Findings That Should Affect the
Educational Choice Debate?", Economics of Education Review 11, 37 1-94.
Zimmerman, David (1992): "Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature," AmericanEconomic Review 82,
409-29.

Zimmer, Ron and Eugenia Toma (1997): "Peer Effects in Private and Public Schools: Across Country Empirical
Analysis," working paper, University of Kentucky.

40

</ref_section>

TABLE 1

Representative School Districts
Low Income

Middle Income High Income

(d=l

(d=2)

(d=3)

Median House Value

$65,927

$83,078

169,113

Median Household Income

$32,183

$43,824

$69,125

Per Pupil Spending

$6,352

$7,515

$10,479

41%

54%

72%

$3,720

$3,480

$2,930

Fraction Raised Locally

Per Pupil State Aid

41

TABLE 2

Selected Parameters

Utility and Production Function Exponents

Population

District Size

N

p(c)

a

[0,1]

0.0667

0.217

0.650

0.372

0.600

0.333

0.348

0.600

0.333

0.293

0.600

0.333

42

p

0

O.40O

varies

4

5

0.955

1.005

1.000

1.075

1.105

1.250

TABLE 3

Public School Attendance

b. Voucher = 0.5
31%

0%

31%

0%

46%

0%

43

TABLE 4

Benchmark Equilibrium
0=0.5

3 .2973

0.5859

0.6674

5. 1643

0.6076

4.5527

0.9032

0.7856

6.0388

0.7336

7. 1500

1.6950

1.0499

7.3 125

1.0057

1

2

3

4

5

0.32 13

0.4225

0.5501

0.6953

0.9403

0.473 1

0.6482

0.88 12

1.08 15

1.432 1

1.0111

1.34 11

1,6962

1.9673

2.4593

44

TABLE 5
Migration and Private School Attendance
Community I

Vouch

0.0
0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

0=1
0.0000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
1.0000

0=0.5

0.0000
0.1000
0.2333
0.5667
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000

Mean Property Values

Mean income

Fraction Private
0=0
0.0000
0.0000
0.1333
0.3333
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000

0=1

0=0.5

3.3719
3.9000
4.5000
5.0000
4.9000
4.6000
3.7083

3.2973
3.5000
3.9000
4.7000
4.6000
4.5333
3.5301

0=0
3.3100
3.3100
3.7000
4.1500
3.9889
4.5250
3.6500

0=1
0.5613
0.5746
0.6213
0.6763
0.6413
0.6692
0.6530

0=0.5

0.5859
0.6042
0.6042
0.7292
0.7659
0.6309
0.6459

0=0
0.6592
0.6592
0.6617
0.6726
0.6859
0.6901
0.5017

Community 2

Vouch

0=1

0.0

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2000
0.5333
0.8667
1.0000

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

0=0.5
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1333
0.2667
0.7667
1.0000

Mean Property Values

Mean Income

Fraction Private
0=0

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.7333
0.7667
1.0000

0=1
4.5281

4.4500
4.3457
4.1000
5.3000
5.7000
5.0917

0=0.5

0=0

0=1

0=0.5

0=0

4.5527
4.5071
4.4500
4.0000
4.2000
5.2167
5.1199

4.4900
4.4900
4.4000
4.3000
5.3000
5.1750
5.2000

0.8966
0.8882

0.9032
0.9157

0.8841
0.8241
0.8716

0.91 49

0.9232
0.9232
0.9249
0.9216
0.8882
0.9241
0.7541

0.9316
0.8495

0.8532
0.8778
0.8174
0.8557

Community 3
Mean income

Fraction Private
0=1
Vouch
0.0000
0.0
0.0000
0.1
0.0000
0.2
0.0000
0.3
0.0667
0.4
0.0667
0.5
1.0000
0.6

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0=0
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.0667
1.0000

0.0667
1.0000

0=0.5

0.0000 0.0000
0.0000 0.6037

0=1

0=0.5

7.1000
6.6500
6.1543
5.9000
4.8000
4.7000
6.2000

7.1500
6.9929
6.6500
6.3000
6.2000
5.2500
6.3500

45

0=0
7.2000
7.2000
6.9000
6.5500
5.7111
5.3000
6.1500

Mean Property Values
0=1
1.6950
1.6783
1.5533
1.4850
1.3217
1.2688
1.3233

0=0.5

1.6950
1.6733
1.6558
1.4538
1.3725
1.1525
1.3717

0=0
1.6058
1.6058
1.6008
1.5892
1.4050
1.2633
1.3133

Table 6
Variances within and across Communities
Theta = 0.5
Variance in Income Values
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Comm. 1
1.7048
3.4500
5.0900
5.4600
4.3400
4.6822
2.3539

Comm 2
3.0709
2.2214
2.1725
3.3500
4.7600
5.3281
3.6461

Comm 3 Across Comm.
1.0025
1.3639
2.0025
1.9100
2.1600
3.1625
3.5025

2.5739
2.1549
1.4117
0.9267
0.7467
0.1091
1.3325

Variance in Property Values
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Comm. 1
0.0652
0.0600
0.0612
0.1556
0.1690
0.2223
0.1787

Comm 2
0.1469
0.1309
0.1270
0.1262
0.1210
0.3148
0.2809

46

Comm 3 Across Comm.
0.2331

0.2195
0.2081

0.1824
0.1768
0.1393
0.3739

0.2175
0.2016
0.1946
0.1001

0.0695
0.0466
0.0930

Table 7
Private School Attendance
Community I

Voucti
0,00

A

0=0

0=0.5

0=1
B

C

D

A

B

C

D

0%
10%

0%
0%

0.10

0% 0%
0%
0%
20% 0% 20% 0%

0%
10%

0%
0%

0.20

40% 3%

23%

0% 23% 0%
20% 63% 20%

0.30
OAO

0.50
0.60

40%

3%

67% 7% 67% 7%
67% 7% 67% 7%

67% 27% 77% 27%
100% 100% 100% 100%

57%
67%
100%

A
0%

B

0%

0% 0%

13% 0%

0%

A

B

C

0% 0% 0%

0%

0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%

100% 100% 100% 100%

E

0%

F
0%
0%
0%
0%

E
0%
0%
0%

F
0%
0%
0%

0% 0% 0%
0% 0% 0%

13%
33%

37% 67% 37%
80% 100% 80%

D

C

0% 33% 0%

0%

100% 67% 100% 67% 0% 0%
100% 80% 100% 80% 0% 0%
100% 100% 100% 100% 63% 20%

Community 2
Vouch

0.00
0.10
.0.20,

03O
0.40

A
0%

B

C

0%

0%

D
0%

0% 0% 0% 0%

0% 0% 0% 0%

20% 0% 0% 0%
53% 0% 0% 0%

0% 0%
0% 0%

0%

0.50:.L

87%

0.60

100% 0%

A
0%

C

B

0% 0%
0% 0%
13%

0%

27% 17%

0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40.:
0..50

0.60

B

C

0% 0% 0%
0% 0% 0%
0%
0%
7%

0%
0%

0%

0%

0%
0%
0%

D

0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%

0%
0%

0%

7% 0% 0% 0%

100% 0% 0%

A

0%

0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0% 0%
0% 0%
0% 0%

0% 0% 0%

100% 100% 0%

Community 3

B
0%
0%
0%
0%

C
0%
0%
0%

0%

0% .0% 0%
7%

D
0%

73% 37% 0%
77% 77% 0%

0=0

0=0.5

0=1
A

0%
0%
0%
0%

D

77% 70% 0% 0%
100% 87% 0% 0%
•

Vouch
0.00

0=0

0=0.5

0=1

0%

0%

0
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

100% 0% 0% 0%

A
0%
0%
0%
0%

0

E

F

0%

0%

0%

0% 0%
0% 0%

0%

0%

0%
0%

B

0%

0%

C

0% 0%

0%
0%

0%

0%

100% 0%

0%

7%

0%
0%
0%
0%

0% 0%
0% 0%

0% 0%

0% 0%
0% 0% 0%

A = full mobility and no targeting
B = no mobility and no targeting
C = full mobility and targeting to community 1

D = no mobility and targeting to community 1
E = full mobility and targeting to low incomes
F = no mobility and targeting to low incomes
* Note: E and F are not reported for 0=1 and 0=0.5 because no private schools arise.
47

Table 8
Public School Variables
0=0.5, full mobility, no targeting
Community I
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40

050
0.60

Attend.
100%
90%
77%

43%
33%
0%
0%

Spending
0.6674
0.6688
0.6688
0.6000
0.6000

Ability
5.1643
5.4861

5.4484
5.1442
4.2969

Peers
0.5199
0.5147
0.4934
0.4274
0.3609

Quality
0.6076
0.6047
0.6047
0.5239
0.4896

Peers
0.6699
0.6319
0.6135

Quality
0.7336
0.7376
0.7376
0.6500
0.6570
0.3949

Community 2
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%

87%
73%
23%
0%

Spending
0.7856
0.7864
0.7864
0.7585
0.7973
0.6000

Ability
6.0388
5.4575
5.2187
4.9279
4.8935
1.2500

0.51 56

0.4770
0.2108

Community 3
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
93%
0%

Spending
1.0499

Ability
7.3125

1.0531
1.0531

7.0112
6.5937
4.7500
4.0781
3.3761

0.9723
0.9278
0.8819

48

Peers
0.9427
0.9119
0.8592
0.7142
0.6652
0.5452

Quality
1.0057
1.0075
1.0075
0.8594
0.8070
0.7276

Table 9
Public School Variables
0=0.5, no mobility, no targeting

Community I
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%
80%
63%
20%
0%

Spending
0.6674
0.6674
0.6674
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000

Peers
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
0.4217
0.3805
0.2108

Quality
0.6076
0.6076
0.6076
0.5269
0.5069
0.4113

Peers
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.4789
0.3478
0.2950

Quality
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.5864
0.5110
0.4507

Ability

Peers

7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125

0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427

Quality
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057

Ability
5.1643
5.1643
5.1643
4.0820
3.61 84

1.2500

Community 2
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%
100%
73%
30%
13%

Spending
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000

Ability
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
4.4531
3.0208

2.6800

Community 3
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%

Spending
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499

100%
100%

1.0499
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499

100%
100%

49

Table 10
Public School Variables
full
mobility, targeting to community 1
0=0.5,

Community I
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40

050
0.60

Attend.
100%
90%
77%
37%
33%
0%
0%

Spending
0.6674
0.6688
0.6688
0.6000
0.6000

Ability
5.1643
5.4861
5.4484
4.1051
4.2969

Peers
0.5199
0.5147
0.4934
0.3616
0.3609

Quality
0.6076
0.6047
0.6047
0.4900
0.4896

-.-.-.-.

Community 2
Vouch

Attend.

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

100%

Spending
0.7856
0.7864
0.7864
0.6985
0.6970
0.6671
0.6596

Ability
6.0388
5.4575
5.2187
5.3281
4.9479
3.7656
3.7266

Peers

0.6699
0.6319
0.6135
0.5556
0.5446
0.4754
0.4796

Quality
0.7336
0.7376
0.7376
0.6381
0.6315
0.5825
0.5807

Community 3
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%

Spending
1.0499

100%
100%

1.0531
1.0531

100%
100%
100%
100%

0.9420
0.9246
0.8782
0.8649

Ability
7.3125
7.0112
6.5937
5.1562
5.3021
5.2500
5.2891

50

Peers

0.9427
0.9119
0.8592
0.7417
0.7348
0.7085
0.7043

Quality
1.0057
1.0075
1.0075
0.8553
0.8434
0.8059
0.7967

Table 11
Public School Variables
0=0.5, no mobility, targeting to community 1

Community I
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%
80%
63%
20%

Spending
0.6674
0.6674
0.6674
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000

Ability
5.1643
5.1643
5.1643
4.0820
3.6184
1.2500

Peers
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
0.4217
0.3805
0.2108

Quality
0.6076
0.6076
0.6076
0.5269
0.5069
0.4113

Peers

0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699
0.6699

Quality
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336
0.7336

Peers
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427
0.9427

Quality
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057
1.0057

0%

Community 2
Vouch

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

100%
100%

Spending
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856
0.7856

Ability
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388
6.0388

Community 3
Vouch
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

Attend.
100%

100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

Spending
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499
1.0499

Ability
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125
7.3125

51

Table 12

Full Mobility, No Targeting
Variance Across Public School Students

Vouch Spending
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

0.0256
0.0257
0.0255
0.0206
0.0135
0.0127

Ability
0.7780
0.5360
0.3837
0.0212
0.1382
0.7233

Peers
0.0306
0.0277
0.0227
0.0138
0.0141
0.0179

Quality
0.0276
0.0279
0.0275
0.0175
0.0133
0.0177

Variance Across All Students
Peers
Spending Ability
0.7780 0.0306
0.0256
1.3535 0.0370
0.0250
2.1945 0.0422
0.0236
5.5197 0.0664
0.0185
7.2392 0.0750
0.0136

0.0314 10.4334 0.0835
0.0344

11.0413 0.0933

Quality
0.0276
0.0288
0.0280
0.0236
0.0210
0.0345
0.0476

No Mobility, No Targeting
Variance Across Public School Student

Vouch Spending
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60

0.0256
0.0259
0.0259
0.0339
0.0501

0.0417
0.0208

Ability
0.7780
0.8120
0.8120
1.6673
2.7694
5.8064
2.2043

Peers
0.0306
0.0308
0.0308
0.0434
0.0668
0.0953
0.2076

Quality
0.0276
0.0281
0.0281
0.0375
0.0532
0.0620
0.0316

52

Variance Across All Students

Spending Ability

Peers

0.7780
0.8120

0.0306
0.0308

0.0256
0.0259
0.0259
0.0324
0.0419
0.0495
0.0497

0.8120 0.0308
2.2388 0.0439
4.7148 0.0651
7.1608 0.0731
8.3204 0.0620

Quality
0.0276
0.0281
0.0281
0.0352
0.0429

0.0512
0.0480

