                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 CHARACTERISTICS OF TQM:
                             EVIDENCE FROM THE RIT/USA TODAY
                                 QUALITY CUP COMPETITION

                                            Joshua G. Rosett
                                            Richard N. Rosett

                                           Working Paper 7241
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7241


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         July 1999




We are grateful to the 15 companies we visited for permitting us to interview their employees. We thank
participants at the NBER pre-conference (Cambridge, MA, July 1998) and NBER Organizational Change
and Performance Improvement Conference (Santa Rosa, CA, April 1999) for valuable comments. We
especially thank David I. Levine (the discussant) for useful input, and Donald Siegel and David Waldman for
additional suggestions and background material. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Joshua G. Rosett and Richard N. Rosett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Characteristics of TQM: Evidence from the RIT/
USA Today Quality Cup Competition
Joshua G. Rosett and Richard N. Rosett
NBER Working Paper No. 7241
July 1999

                                                ABSTRACT

        This paper reports the results of a field study examining the use of TQM at 15 firms. The sample
is drawn from winners and finalists of the RIT/USA Today Quality Cup. The authors interviewed 75
employees (5 per firm) including 14 executives, 44 middle managers, and 17 front line workers. The
interviews elicited information on the motives for adopting TQM, the role of leadership, the use of
monitoring, the use of rhetoric, the extent and type of training, the basis for employee evaluation,
compensation, and promotion, the use of teams, reallocation of authority, and the results of the TQM
program. We use the data to provide a description of how TQM works in practice, including factors that
determine patterns of use across firms. A major result is that team-based problem solving is used about
twice as frequently as devolution of authority in our sample. We attribute this result to the higher costs of
monitoring and corporate change associated with devolution relative to problem solving.



Joshua G. Rosett                                            Richard N. Rosett
A.B. Freeman School of Business                             College of Business
Tulane University                                           Rochester Institute of Technology
New Orleans, LA 70118                                       Rochester, NY 14623
jrosett@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu                             rnrbbu@rit.edu
 1. Introduction.

        The purpose of this paper is to construct a portrait of a firm committed to Total Quality
Management (TQM) and to describe and explain the variations observable among such firm.
The firms selected for this study were among fifty-six firms that nominated teams that were
winners or finalists in the RIT/LJSA Today Quality Cup Competition in the years of 1992 through
1998. These represent what were judged to be the best out of over 2,200 nomination received by
the Quality Cup over the first seven years of its existence. Richard Rosett's position as founder,
director and judge of the Quality Cup put us in a position to use this unique database and gain
entry to participant firms. Joshua Rosett has familiarity with the competition and twice has served
as a judge.

        Our interest in the topic was stimulated by the broad set of examples of TQM team-based
performance improvements represented in the nomination archives of the RIT/TJSA Today
Quality Cup. Between the two authors, we have read well over half of the Quality Cup
nominations. The topics we chose to pursue in this paper reflect this wealth of knowledge, but
our findings are based on field studies of some of the best performers from the Quality Cup
archives. We conducted interviews with employees of fifteen Quality Cup winners (6) or finalists
(9). We spoke to five employees at each firm, ranging from senior executives to front line
employees. This approach allowed us to obtain details, from several perspectives, about the
history of the TQM initiative at each firm.

        Our goal in this paper is to provide evidence on how and why TQM works. Significant
research suggests that TQM improves quality and efficiency (e.g. Easton & Jarrell [1998]; Powell
[1995]; Hendricks & Singhal [1996]; Hendricks & Singhal [1997]), but few papers provide an
internal view of what drives these improvements. In contrast, ourpaper follows Wruck & Jensen
[1994], which develops a theory of TQM and then illustrates the theory with detail drawn from
observation of a single firm. In this paper, we trade off some richness of detail in order to obtain a
larger sample that allows us to see patterns unavailable from examination of a single firm.

        A major objective of this paper is to distinguish between two potential sources of
improvement associated with TQM; namely, delegation of authority vs. team-based problem
solving. We find that different factors drive the costs and benefits from each method, and that
though some firms engage in both behaviors, problem solving is more prevalent. We attribute this
to the fact that problem solving and related activities (providing an atmosphere conducive to
employee input) provides significant improvements without some of the costs associated with
delegation of authority. Though this is one of our principal findings, we also examine several
other aspects of TQM.

         Section 2 provides a background for this paper including links to other research and more
detail regarding why we examine the questions raised here. Section 3 describes the Quality Cup
competition. Section 4 explains how the fifty-six firms in the original panel of winners and
finalists were reduced to fifteen. Section 5 describes the interview procedure and explains how


Page 3
we processed the data. Section 6 discusses motives for adopting TQM, the role of leadership,
the extent of empowerment, monitoring, the use of rhetoric, training, and evaluation, recognition,
and compensation. Finally, section 7 provides a composite portrait of the TQM firpi and discusses
variations in the portrait. This section also focuses on an important distinction between the t,wo
manifestations of TQM: operational empowerment and problem-solving by teams that include
members with specific knowledge. It argues that problem-solving is inexpensive, does not require
significant organizational change, and can provide relatively swift returns. Because the advantage
of exploiting specific knowledge through operational empowerment may be outweighed by
training and monitoring costs, problem-solving alone may be far more widely practiced that full-
blown TQM because it entails few such costs.


2. Background.
        The introduction notes that researchers have shown linkages between TQM and
performance improvements in several dimensions. For example, Easton and Jarrell [1998]
provide empirical evidence that successful adoption of TQM does, in fact, improve both
accounting measures of a firm's performance and its market valuation. The improvement is
greater for firms with mature, well-established quality programs than for the less mature, Easton
and Jarrell use Malcolm Baldrige assessment criteria and develop measures of the extent of use of
TQM as driving variables in their analysis. Similarly, Black and Lynch [1997] show that adoption
of practices such as TQM, by allowing increased employee input, improves productivity. Helper
[1997] shows that both customer and employee inputs lead to reduced costs, and that higher
wages increases the effect. Other research provides evidence on the efficacy of practices such as
quality circles and ESOPs. Levine and Tyson [1990] provide an extensive review of this
literature.

        Though these papers provide evidence on the efficacy of TQM, they generally provide
analysis based on establishment- or firm-level data, so they are not able to provide much insight
into how the adoption of TQM practices translates into improvements. Wruck and Jensen [1994]
provide both an economic rationale for TQM-based efficient use of information, and a specific
example of how this translates into value. Their central thesis is that employment of TQM
organizational principles can increase the firm's efficiency and productivity by exploiting available
but previously untapped human capital. At every level in the firm, employees gain experience and
knowledge that could be used to improve performance by reducing errors, increasing quality, or
enhancing efficiency. Employees must be trained in methods of scientific reasoning so that they
can make rational use of their specific knowledge on behalf of their employers.Trained
employees must be given authority to make performance-improving decisions based on results of
their reasoning. This entails empowerment: transferring decision-making authority to employees
lower in the hierarchy than is customary. Empowerment increases agency costs because an
empowered employee may use enhanced decision rights for personal gain at the expense of the
employer. In balancing the monitoring costs against the advantages of exploiting the firm's
untapped pooi of specific knowledge, some firms will find that by reallocating decision-making


Page 4
authority they can improve performance.

        This reallocation of decision-making authority often imposes substantial csts. Both those
whose authority is reduced and those whose authority is increased may resist the change.
Because employees'interests and the firm are not identical, devolution of authority increases the
cost of monitoring. The cost of overcoming resistance to change and the increased monitoring
costs may outweigh the advantage of accessing valuable specific knowledge through devolution.
The Wruck and Jensen model encompasses problem-solving as another manifestation of
empowerment. The costs of problem-solving comprise mainly training and the opportunity cost
of time spent in the problem-solving process. The use of problem-solving teams need not involve
significant organizational change or increased monitoring costs. This raises the question of
whether firms'successful use of problem-solving is necessarily associated with more general
reallocation of decision-making authority. In extending empowerment to the point where the
marginal cost equals the marginal benefit, a firm might find that it pays to emphasize problem-
solving. Are the efficiency gains attributed to TQM achieved through widespread devolution of
authority or are they largely due to problem-solving?

        The Quality Cup archives contain more than two thousand of examples of value gains
achieved through team-based problem solving. The rules of the Quality Cup Competition
practically insure that successful teams will be problem-solving teams, not individuals or teams
necessarily empowered in ongoing operations. While the teams nominated for the Quality Cup
have been enabled and encouraged to apply their specific knowledge to problem-solving, they are
seldom given authority to implement solutions without permission from higher authority. The
delegation of authority is limited to a well-defined set of decisions and it is temporary. The gains
from this sort of empowerment can be substantial and the cost can be low because it does not
require large scale organizational change. If this were its only manifestation, TQM would still be
a significant contribution to efficiency improvement. Some of the larger firms in the Quality Cup
archives annually submit multiple nominations, suggesting broad use of problem-solving teams,
to good effect.

      Three examples, drawn from the Quality Cup competition, illustrate the nature of
problem-solving and its power to improve efficiency.

         1.    A team of five hard-hats employed at U.S. Steel's Gary Works eliminated defects
               that threatened the plant's survival. They were trained in simple problem-solving
               techniques and charged with determining why 2.6 percent of the steel shipped to
               Detroit automobile manufacturers was rejected as defective. The big three had
               announced their intention to switch to Japanese competitors and the largest U.S.
               manufacturer of sanitary cans had already switched. The team found that much of
               the damage occurred in shipping and that it could be reduced through the use of
               inexpensive plastic devices that protected the coils of steel from damage done in
               securing them to the flatbed trucks on which they were shipped. They also found
               that good steel was being rejected because the customer wrongly believed that a

Page 5
              powdery white residue was a defect. Elimination of these sources of customer
              dissatisfaction reduced the defect rate to .6 percent, won quality awards from the
              customers, recaptured the can manufacturer, and saved the plant, w)bich is still
              operating.

         2.   The United States Navy, an early practitioner of TQM, was driven by its leadership
              to minimize the effects of force reductions. A Navy depot responsible for
              production of travel orders reduced its turnaround time from about six weeks to
              about three days. A team of clerical employees found that the chief cause of delay
              was incorrect data entry. It also found that more than 80 percent of the data being
              entered were already available in their own data base. They simplified the request
              form. As they reduced the turnaround time, they found that the number of
              requests fell dramatically. Because the turnaround time was so long, Navy
              personnel submitted requests even when the likelihood of travel was low. They
              had been reserving places in the queue.

         3.   Federal Express formed a team to improve the sorting of parcels that needed to go
              out of Memphis on commercial passenger flights because they had missed the
              regular Federal Express flights. The sorting is done largely by casual part-time
              labor. The winning team comprised workers who sorted the packages: a full-time
              employee, who led the team, and several casual part-timers. They developed a
              system in which numbered squares on the floor corresponded to numbered
              instruction posters on the wall. The rule was, when you are standing in square
              one, follow the instructions on poster one, etc. This reduced the need to instruct
              workers unfamiliar with the process and also reduced the number of errors. The
              first year savings, of refunds for late delivery, amounted to $600,000. Assuming
              this gain is perpetual and the discount rate is 10%, the value of solving this
              problem was six million dollars. It is unlikely that the opportunity cost of time for
              those on the problem-solving team amounted to even a small fraction of this value.

        In all three of these examples, the results were achieved by applying specific knowledge
available to front-line employees. Team members were trained in simple problem-solving
techniques, assigned a specific problem to solve, and produced solutions subject to ratification my
management. Federal Express won a Malcolm Baidrige National Quality Award, suggesting that
empowerment went far beyond problem-solving, but none of these examples contains evidence of
a general reallocation of decision-making authority. The resistance to general reallocation and the
cost of overcoming it tends to discourage the implementation of TQM, but this need not deprive a
firm of significant TQM benefits. It is possible that many of the TQM gains can be obtained
simply through problem-solving. To gain some insight into whether this is so, we conducted a
series of interviews with a sample of Quality Cup winners and finalists. Our results shed some
light on the extent to which problem-solving alone, reallocating authority, or both practices
provide the benefits observed be associated with TQM initiatives\


Page 6
3. The Quality Cup
                                                                                     p
         The Quality Cup Competition was created in 1991 as a partnership between USA Toçlay
and the Rochester Institute of Technology College of Business. It honors teams making
exceptional contributions to the quality of their employers'products or services, or to the
efficiency of their processes and it publicizes exemplary applications of Total Quality
Management. Nominees are asked to submit three brief, essays dealing with: the process which
led to the accomplishment (400 words), how the accomplishment was measured (200 words), and
a description of the accomplishment (400 words). They are scored on ten attributes, six having to
do with process, two having to do with measurement, and two having to do with accomplishment:

         •      Process (six attributes, each weighted .067 for a total of .40): level of
                empowerment, the use of quality tools, customer-driven goals, quality leadership,
                reproducibility of the process, and continuous improvement

         •      Measurement (two attributes, each weighted .10 for a total of .20): appropriate
                data and appropriate statistical methods

         •      Accomplishment (two attributes, each weighted .20 for a total of .40): impact on
                the organization and exemplary valuej.

       Awards are made in six categories: Education, Government, Health Care, Manufacturing,
Service, and Small Business. Judging is as follows:

         •      In each of the five categories, groups of about twenty-five nominations are
                assigned to two judges each. In each pair, the two judges score independently.
                Their scores are standardized and combined into a composite score. The top
                scorers in each category are designated semifinalists. Depending on the number of
                nominations in each category, and the quality of the nominations, these number
                from six to fourteen

         •      In the second round of judging, each of the categories is assigned to a panel of
                three judges. These judges score the semifinalists without knowledge of the
                original scores and, in each category, select up to three nominees for site visits.

         •      In the third round of judging, each nominee is visited by two of the second round
                judges. On the basis of the site visits, one nominee in each category may be named
                a winner, and the other two may be named finalists. A winner has been named in
                each category every year, but occasionally a nominee, after a site visit, has failed to


         'Appendix A contains the RIT/USA Today Quality Cup 1999 nomination form.

Page 7
              be named a finalist.

       More than four hundred nominations were received in the first year of the ompetition.
The number decreased annually and has stabilized at about 180. The merit of the semifinaliss has
not deteriorated. Altogether, the Quality Cup archives contain more than 2,200 nominations,
representing more than 1,800 separate organizations. About 500 nominees have been named
semifinalists by first round judges, indicating sufficient merit to warrant consideration by second
round judges. This does not imply that none of the others possessed similar merit. We regularly
receive correspondence, after each annual competition, providing additional data which would
have raised the nominee's score significantly, had it been included in the original nomination.

       Several characteristics of the nominees suggest that they have been caught up in the
quality-oriented organizational change that has swept through much of U.S. industry over the past
two decades

         •     Some nominations come from organizations that have won other quality awards:
               the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, state quality awards, or quality
               awards presented by industrial customers to exceptional vendors.
         •     Some of the nominees have won internal competitions sponsored by their
               employers.
         •     Many of the nominations are submitted by managers with responsibility for their
               employers'quality programs. While quality control managers preceded TQM, the
               nature of the nominations they submit suggests that these managers are committed
               toTQM.
         a     In describing the processes that led to the nominees'accomplishments, a majority
               of the nominations use terms typical of the quality revolution (i.e., Pareto charts,
               brainstorming, benchmarking, fishbone diagrams, six sigma, seven-step problem-
               solving) and in particular those favored by famous TQM consultants (i.e., Crosby,
               Deming, Juran).



4. The Sample

        From 1992 through 1998, there were sixty-three Quality Cup winners and finalists in the
three for-profit categories: Manufacturing, Service, and Small Business. Because several firms
had submitted multiple nominations, these represented fifty-six individual firms. All of the firms
were invited to participate in the Quality Cup Research Project. The responses to these
invitations were as follows:




Page 8
         Category          Invited to participate     Accepted invitation       Interviewed

     Manufacturing                             21                        10                   6
     Service                                   18                           6                 3'
     Small Business                            17                        10                   6
     Total                                     56                        26                15

        Firms declined to participate for a variety of reasons: change of control, contact person no
longer employed, too burdened with similar requests, no reason given, and no response to the
invitation, even after several attempts by letter and telephone. Time constraints made it
impossible for us to schedule interviews with all twenty-six of the firms that volunteered to
participate. Of the twenty-six firms, interviews were conducted with fifteen. The table above
shows how these were distributed.

        Since factors unrelated to the nature of the firms determined the sites we were unable to
visit among the twenty-six willing to participate, we believe the patterns we observed are likely to
be representative of all twenty-six. It is also likely that firms declining on grounds of too many
such requests, have persisted in their TQM programs. Thus we believe our findings apply to at
least half of the winners and finalists. For those that opted out for other reasons, our conclusions
may be inappropriate.


5. The Interviews

        At each of the fifteen firms, interviews were conducted, usually with five employees,
including high level executives (14, including 9 executives who were either CEOs or the highest
ranking manager at the site visitecf), middle management (44), and front line workers (17). The
distribution across ranks within each establishment allowed us to derive a reasonably complete
picture of the effects of TQM policies from both the perspective of the policy maker and the
employees affected.

        The interviews were conducted as conversations dealing with respondents'own
responsibilities, the nature and extent of change in the organization, and the impact of change on
the respondent. The interviews generally lasted between 45 minutes and one hour. We did not
use an extensive questionnaire, but rather asked a fairly limited set of open-ended questions. We
obtained the questions by starting with an extensive set of questions designed to get at the details
of adoption and implementation, costs and benefits of TQM, the impact on individuals in terms of


        2One additional firm scheduled an interview with the top manager at the site, but he was
called away for an emergency the day of the site visit.

Page 9
 compensation and changes in work patterns, and a number of other factors. We then categorized
 these and narrowed them down to find a smaller set that would provide openings for respondents
 to talk about the main issues we were interested in. In brief, these questions asked,respondents to
 discuss the motives for adopting TQM, the role of leadership, the use of monitoring, the use, of
 rhetoric, the extent and type of training, the basis for employee evaluation, compensation and
 promotion, the use of teams (examples and description of the process), reallocation of authority
 (extent and examples), and to provide characterization of the results of these measures and
 specific examples of how they work and what they produced.

        All interviews were recorded and transcribed. We then processed the interviews in three
stages. We first read each interview and created a hyper-linked index (using the CoreP
WordPerfect® index tool) with index terms including both the main subject areas we wished to
examine, and any themes which appeared in the texts themselves (which varied from site to site).
This both created systematic data for use in subsequent processing steps, and allowed us to verify
the internal consistency of the interviews from each site. In general, we found that almost all
respondents had something to say about the main subjects of interest, and, within firms, their
responses were consistent. For example, all respondents would name the same person as
responsible for the adoption of TQM at the site, or similarly describe the process for choosing
teams at the site.

         We next examined the indexes across firms to find patterns in the data to help flesh out the
use and value of TQM. Finally, we used the indexes to go back through the texts of the
interviews and cull quotes which we believe are both representative of major patterns of behavior
and provide value in understanding what we found. Based on this methodology and our reading
of the interviews, we believe the data we elicited provide a solid basis for generalizations, within
the fifteen firms in our sample, about the sources of value from TQM, especially team-based
problem solving and reallocation of authority, and a number of supporting factors including the
motives for adoption, the role of leadership, the use of rhetoric, training, and compensation and
promotion policies among firms in our sample. Though our data are not adequate for the purpose
of rigorous statistical analysis, they do provide valuable insights, pointing the way toward future
research.

6. Characteristics of the sample

6.a. Adoption of TQM

        Full implementation of TQM entails transferring decision rights from one group to
another, generally to lower positions in the organizational hierarchy. A firm implementing TQM
must be prepared to transfer of decision rights from middle managers to front-line employees.
Reducing the authority of middle managers is likely to meet opposition from those managers, who
may feel that their jobs are diminished or possibly threatened. Consequently, they may oppose or
obstruct the adoption of TQM as they perceive that it is not in their interest, though it may be in
the interest of owners who want to tap into the specific knowledge available to employees at

Page 10
lower levels in the organization. Front line employees also have incentives to resist adoption, as
TQM often requires additional effort on their part while exposing them to new risks. Making the
judgment calls associated with increased authority requires effort, and may lead to,situations in
which they are criticized or punished for their judgments. Simply doing what you are told is,both
easier and less risky. Consequently, resistance is also encountered from front line employees.

        Despite these obstacles, a decade ago several major U.S. firms adopted serious TQM
programs because they were threatened by Japanese competition. The best-known examples were
Motorola, U.S. Steel, and Xerox. In each case top leadership committed itself to implementing
TQM. The CEO, himself, received TQM training which then cascaded down through the ranks.
To counteract the problems outlined above, opposition from managers at any level was severely
discouraged. One top executive asserted that in addition to the usual training, empowerment, and
rhetoric (vision, mission, values) an essential ingredient for successful implementation of TQM is
"weeding out" executives resistant to change Among firms less threatened, half-hearted efforts
were made to implement TQM. These included Eastman Kodak, General Motors, and IBM. In
these cases, the CEO'S commitment was limited. TQM was viewed as one alternative for
management of individual business units, not an imperative for the firm. Resistance was tolerated.
In each of these cases, individual units were successful in implementing TQM, but the larger
organization failed to reap the potential benefits. IBM's Rochester, Minnesota site, for example,
won a Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award while its parent was struggling. G.M. and its
Cadillac division had a similar experience.

        In our sample, we observed a few cases where resistance to the adoption of TQM clearly
existed and had to be overcome by strong leadership from the top. It should be noted that
nominees for the Quality Cup come largely from firms that have succeeded in implementing TQM,
at least to some degree. An example of opposition is a sales manager whose authority was
diminished by this change. Though he ultimately supported the change, he admitted initial
reluctance:

               Going back to before we had all these sales people and before we had the way we
               are doing things now, shall I say, the efficient way we are doing things now. It
               got to the point where I wasn't getting back to customers... From that point of
               view, somebody had to do something, or the customers weren't simply going to get
               satisfied. They weren't going to get the service. So then, what happens from
               there is an idea is, you know, badgered around. J., myself some of the other
               sales people maybe, maybe even some of the input came from G., for all I know.
               The meetings I had with J. was that there had to have been a way to do things.
               One of the things that came out of it through the necessity of just simply
               empowering the sales people to make some of these decisions. Why should... I
               mean I am going cra. I am very busy. J. was certainly very busy. So
               something had to be relinquished. In the beginning it is not an easy thing to do
               because you are always afraid that someone is going to make a real drastic
               mistake. Then, you know, that's how people learn. I had to just... A real blunt

Page 11
               way of putting it, but I had to basically just throw up my hands and say, 'Let them
               make mistakes. That's how they're going to learn. Let them do their thing.
               Eventually, over time, they will learn what the correct way is of dozpg it or what
               we would like to see as a company, and so forth. Again, it's not going to hapJen
               overnight.

Not surprisingly, his objection is cast in terms, not of injury to himself, but of injury to the firm.
In fact, before the outside salesmen were empowered to provide prices and delivery dates without
consulting the sales manager, they were trained in how to do it.

        We have documented some of the primary reasons for adoption of TQM. The categories
we selected reflect both general knowledge and our experience with the Quality Cup archives. In
particular, we looked at threats to survival, competitive advantage, customer requirements, and
ISO certification. Our classifications summarize our reading of the transcripts.

        Of the fifteen, only two claimed that survival was the issue. Both were firms that had
adopted TQM early, one in response to ruinous foreign competition and the other, a U.S.
government contractor, in response to a catastrophic reduction in demand. Of the rest, seven
cited competitive advantage as the motive for change. These were either successful start-ups
whose founders implemented TQM at the beginning as a way of breaking into an existing market,
or firms trying to pull ahead of the rest of the pack in highly competitive markets. Two of the
seven no longer have active TQM programs. Six firms in the sample adopted TQM at the urging,
and in one case, with the help, of their customers. Eight of the fifteen mentioned ISO 9000
certification among the reasons for implementing TQM. These observations suggest that TQM
has graduated from an emergency treatment to a standard management technique, supported by
market forces.


6.b. The Role of Leadership

        Of the seven Malcolm Baldrige criteria, Leadership is number one. The introduction to
the criterion says:

               An organization's senior leaders need to set directions and create a
               customer orientation, clear and visible values, and high
               expectations. The directions, values, and expectations need to
               address all stakeholders. The leaders need to ensure the creation of
               strategies, systems, and methods for achieving excellence,
               stimulating innovation, and building knowledge and capabilities.
               The strategies and values should help guide all activities and
               decisions of the organization. The senior leaders need to commit to
               the development of the entire work force and should encourage
               participation, learning, innovation, and creativity by all employees.

Page 12
             Through their ethical behavior and personal roles in planning,
             communications, review of organizational performance, and
             employee recognition, the senior leaders serve as role models,
             reinforcing values and expectations and building leadership and
             initiative throughout the organization..

         Acknowledgment of the importance of leadership was pervasive in the interviews we
conducted. Asked to name the individual responsible for initiating the firm's quality program,
almost every respondent immediately provided a name. The answers were consistent within firms.
Even in the case of the two firms that seem to have given up on TQM, the individual responsible
for its implementation was named, and his departure from the firm appears to be associated with
the lapse. The following quotes, chosen from many similar examples, provide elaboration:

       •      Having senior leadership and middle leadership deal, actually be leaders and
              promote this stuff is... You can/just hang it on the wall, because that becomes a
              slogan and not a culture.

       •      The key was D. S.. [senior site manager]. A couple of them [senior management]
              were invited to a major semiannual qualify symposium or something. They got to
              hear some CEOs and some other folks, who were using SQC/SPC. They got
              turned on, what that would be like and it makes sense. It fit with the philosophy
              on how we wanted to manage this mill and that. sort of how it started.

       •      All I can say is that working here for me has been an experience that has been, as
              I say, innovative and exciting. I am very enthusiastic every day that I come in. I
              think that a lot of people that I work with, the associates here down to the people
              in the warehouse get enthused because they see that I am enthused, and then I
              explain to them that I am enthused because people like G. D., the CEO, is
              enthused and J., the President, is enthused. So we get it from higher corporate
              management all the way down. So it sort of cascades down. If you talk to
              anybody here, you will understand that there is an enthusiasm, a vigor that you
              won't find in a lot of companies today. I think that's important. If [leadership is]
              not there, forget about it.

       •      At this plant had there not been a commitment by the General Manager, and I am
              sure his commitment was reinforced by his superior, it would of taken longer and
              would not have been done.

       •      The way 1 feel is... I attributed to one man, J., he wasni the original General
              Manager here. B. was and I am sure he was afine individual. He left shortly
              after I started. J. is the General Manager that I attributed all to. He came with
              that attitude. I think he trained all of us. This is something that he insisted upon

Page 13
             and he built the structure that we now maintain. We may have deviated a little
             from J. approach, but the basic culture, the concepts that he taught us, we carry
             with us and pass it down to, not only our employees, that... I didni tart out by
             being responsible for shipping or receiving, I started out in a totally different,
             setting... that through my years Iie taken his teachings with me and pass them
             through. Now I have supervisors that lam responsible for. I try to give them the
             benefit that I got from him. So I attribute it to J. I really do, as the beginning.
             And then I credit all of us for helping to maintain that.

       •      Basically, what sums up our mission here is the vision that C. has. He is just an
              honest, caring individual, and I think that reflects down from everybody that
              reports to him right down the chain. I think everybody supports his ideas, thinks
              they are great ideas, and it's something that we talk about at every level. I really
              think leadership has a lot to do with where we are at now.

       •      I think it was largely because it was J view that in order to maintain the quality
              he wanted which was just infinite quality...

              Rosett: J. is your CEO?

              A: Right. He believed in it and because of that, he started on this program.
              Because he believed in it and at his level, it became fairly easy to implement. It is
              easy to get buy-in when is starts with J.

       The last few words provide a key to understanding the almost universal belief that strong
commitment by top management is essential to successful implementation of TQM. Any major
change in an organization requires commitment by leadership if it is to succeed. What
distinguishes TQM is the ongoing need to maintain the focus of all employees on issued that
transcend their own immediate responsibilities. To focus on continuous improvement, an
employee must not only do his job, he must be alert to ways in which efficiency might be
improved by changing the way he does it. To focus on customer satisfaction, an employee must
attempt to view the transaction from the customer's viewpoint. If satisfaction callsfor departure
from an ordinary practice, the employee must exercise judgment as to the appropriateness of such
departure and decide whether to risk it. Training, monitoring, and frequent reminders, backed up
by leadership's commitment, all help maintain direction and focus.

6.c. Extent of empowerment: reallocation of authority vs. problem solving



       3These results are consistent with findings elsewhere that leadership is a key to success in
using TQM. For example, see Waldman [1993] and Waidman, Lituchy, Gopalakrishnan,
Laframboise, Galperin, and Kaitsounakis [1998].

Page 14
        All of the seventy-five respondent were given an opportunity to describe their own
experiences with devolution of decision-making authority, both in terms of reallocation of
authority and participation in problem-solving teams, as well as through less form1 methods such
as suggestion programs. We reviewed the transcripts in order to classify each site on the bais of
its use of the each of the primary methods. Overall, we found that problem-solving was used at
roughly twice the rate of reallocation of authority. This is summarized in the table below:

           Devolution of Authority and Problem-solving

           Problem-solving alone
           Neither

In one of the two cases in which neither is employed, the initial effort to establish a TQM program
seems to have failed and in the other a change of control ended the TQM program.

        Devolution is the strongest form of empowerment and it is the most expensive and
difficult to implement. Resistance to the transfer of decision-making authority from higher levels
within the organization to lower needs to be overcome. Empowered employees need to be
trained, both in the scientific disciplines that enable them to use their specific knowledge
effectively, and in aspects of their new responsibilities, previously left to their supervisors.
Finally, empowered employees need to be monitored to insure that their authority is used in the
interest of the employer.

        The most obvious factors determining how far to carry empowerment to employ are costs
and benefits. Both of these may be difficult to measure. Consistent with this, we found a broad
range of approaches to estimating the cost/benefit tradeoff. With respect to empowerment of
front line employees, we found that several interviewees could cite estimates of dollar savings
associated with granting specific rights to front line employees. Examples of this are yearly
savings due to stopping production when the employee knew faulty product was being produced,
and cost reductions due to saved supervisory labor by allowing front line employees to deal with
dissatisfied customers without supervisory intervention. In these cases, management frequently
also could cite specific means of monitoring to minimize agency costs. For example, a service
 firm that authorizes front line employees to grant exemptions from normal service charges tracks
 the total dollar value of exemptions. A manufacturer that authorizes front line employees to stop
 a production line monitors lost output.

         In some cases the benefits from extending authority are difficult to measure, but it is
 extended anyway because management simply believes that the benefit outweighs the cost. For
 example, a service subsidiary of a larger service firm empowers its employees so as to provide
 high quality service to both its own and its parent's customers. They believe, but cannot explicitly
 demonstrate in dollar terms, that the quality of the subsidiary's service attracts business to the
 parent, and that the benefit to the parent helps justify the cost to the subsidiary. In another case,

 Page 15
employees are allowed to placate dissatisfied customers at cost to the firm. The lifetime loyalty
this policy is expected to inspire is difficult to document.
                                                                                       p
        With  respect  to team-based  problem    solving, at the hard-nosed end of the scale, at least
one firm, a manufacturing site, requires each problem-solving team to supply estimates of all costs
and benefits of implementing a new process, including the opportunity cost of time the team spent
examining the problem at hand. These estimates are required to be conservative on the benefit
side. The actual results are then tracked following implementation and present values of expected
future gains are calculated. This same firm has a fairly complex scheme for awards based on both
the efforts made by teams and the success of their suggestions. It has numerous teams solving
problems on a regular basis, and apparently. has significant data on the value of teamwork in their
plant. Other sites gave at least some examples of estimated dollar value of solved problems. Still
others either do not or cannot estimate such values, but act as though they justify the costs of
empowerment. All of the firms we interviewed stressed their focus on customer satisfaction.
Even in the absence of information about the effects of process changes on revenues and
expenses, most employees at all levels implicitly accept the idea that improving customer
 satisfaction benefits owners.

        Three of the six firms that employ both devolution and problem-solving have mature, well-
established TQM programs. In each case the interviews elicited consistent and detailed accounts
depicting TQM programs strongly supported by leadership, and including customer focus,
training, continuous improvement of processes, and devolution of decision-making authority.

                Integrated product teams are empowered to the level of cost structure and
                schedule structure for that team. If they're putting out product X, they have a
                budget for product X and they have a schedule for product X that's going to flow
                up to a master schedule and a master work break down structure for that cost.
                They are empowered within that scope of cost and schedule. Now, if they want to
                go outside those empowerment boundaries, they can do so as long as they don't
                affect someone else's grand scheme of things, costs and schedules. So you may
                have five integrated product teams, with five products, cost structures and
                schedules. You need to get approval from the leadership team, if you will, in
                order to affect someone else's cost and schedule, and that team has got to give
                approval to that. You need to be able to justify that for the greater good of the
                program this makes sense.

         •      Typically here, a lot of our integrated product teams have customer
                representation and supplier or partner representation. They key there is to have
                customer and supplier representation and have those people be strong decision
                makers.

         •      We have team launches. We have a regular process by which we form teams. We
                do it both during the proposal phase, and we have contract launches.... They are

 Page 16
          usually a one day session facilitated generally by two people. There is some prep
          work before it with proposed sub inte grated product teams on a program, and then
          we teach them the tools to be a team. We let them determine the team norms.
          One of the most effective modules we will take them through for both a propoal
          and a program is a risk module whereby the team members will identify the risk
          and categorize it and prioritize it. We will as a team work several... We will pick
          the high probability, high impact risk, which would be a very high risk and
          aggregate. As a team we will work some risk mitigation strategies justto teach
          them the tools for working as a team in areas like risk management, intergroup
          coordination, and our proposal launches will actually determine strategies,
          themes, and discriminators to produce a winning proposal. We will do something
          similar on contract as to what it would take to perform brilliantly on a contract.

          So this SEI (Soft ware Engineering Institute)is actually an institute within the
          bounds of the aegis of the Carnegie-Mellon University. There are very formal
          ways to determine where you are on their maturityscale. Our customers
          increasingly use this scale, this evaluation to determine to whom they will award
          contracts. So large contracts to the military that have measurable software
          content, the customer will send a team in to examine your software maturity
          against this set of criteria with the award going to the... Well there is no one
          single criteria that says if you do well on this, you get the award, but it's just a big
          swinger in picking who will do it. So in 1996 we were judged a level 3, which not
          a lot of people were at that time. The SEI has a lot of data that says the world at
          large is less than a 2. The next year we got ISO 14,001, which is the
          environmental health and safety, and we did that on the trial run. We used that
          as an example again of the strength of our processes. We called the registrar in
          to take a look at us so that he could tell us what we were going to have to fix to
          get ready for running for the roses. He looked at us on the trial run and
           registered us on the spot. Then the crown jewel was in December of1997 to get
           recognized at SEI level 5. At the time we did that there were only three or four
           other companies in the whole world that had achieved that level, so it's a pretty
           rare atmosphere to be an SEI level 5. It's just the latest in what we view as where
           you can go when you cast your lot with process management. Since I've talked so
           much about processes, the next chart shows the process view that we have of how
           this place runs. It starts with this leadership process which drives a strategic
           planning process which drives a business acquisition process, and then after you
           have acquired the business, you turn it over to the performance management
           process to now manage that which you have won.

           M: We came up with what we call RLO [regional lending officer] position and
            that was revolutionary at that time, because the business traditionally was very
           ji4nctional. You had simply on a front end to take applications, people then will
           process that application, then people who close the loans and there are other

Page 17
             people who did other functions and services. We said we had to changethis. You
             have five points of contact there and as you hand off the file to the next functional
             process, you could lose something that was told by somebody else that
             customer. So, we said leth just do something better and let. have 1 point of
             contact and leth have a regional landing officer, who has most of those
             responsibilities. And by doing that, we said to the customer, here your . . . brand

              J. So my goal was that everybody can tell you what's important to their business,
              you know, how well they answer phone calls, and cash flow, and so on and so
              forth. Everybody can tell you their quality indicators. Our goal is 100%,
              everything done within X amount of days. I want everybody to know their
              compliance rules, same way. Once I got to that point, I felt that I made it. So
              step one is identify what the compliance regulations were. Two, identify the
              owners. Three, is put a team together to look at the areas and identifywhat
               compliance processes had to be in place to meet those regulations. I used to joke.
              I used to say that unit level quality is one of my biggest competitors for good
               compliance. The reason is that everybody in the company has the power to sit
               there and look at the work flow process. They see this little loop in there, and
               they are like, 'What's this loop in this process? It doesn't make sense. Let's get
               rid of it.' Many times it is a compliance requirement that is in thai' little ioop, and
               they get it out of there, and all of sudden we are doing the right process, it's very
               systematic, it's high quality, but at some point regulations said you had to sign
               your name right here, and we got rid of it because we thought it was a waste of
               time

        The following three examples illustrate empowerment in relatively new smaller firms. In
each of these, the front line is directly visible to the CEO who founded the firm and was, himself,
the instigator and author of the TQM program. It seems likely that direct monitoring of
employees by top executives is less costly in these cases. Hence empowerment in terms of
reallocation of authority is a more feasible option in these cases. All three involve devolution of
authority.

               V. In other words, if I empowered the inside sales person to start making
               decisions on pricing and that person could then give the customer on the other
               end an answer within the matter ofafew seconds, all of the sudden it would feel
               pretty good to them. The better they felt, the more they did it, The more they did
               it, the more they got involved in doing everything, whether it be better efficiency
               in writing up paper work, paying more attention to what the needs were of the
               customer, and doing that whole thing... As you can imaging, when somebody
               makes a change f something happens, it's not like turning off a light switch where
               one day it's this and the next day it's, you know... It's a gradual change.

        Every employee of this automobile dealership has the authority to spend up to $100

Page 18
satisfying a customer's complaint.

              In any company, especially in a customer service industry, when a guest
              [customer] pulls in with their car and they have a problem, the service advisqrs
              are the closest link we have with our guest, because they are the person that sees
              the guest time and time again. They may have the same technician work on their
              car, but the advisor is the person that greets the guest and that calls the guest
              when they have to spend money. They have constant contact. That guest wants
              that advisor to be allowed to do whatever he needs to do to take care of them.
              They don't want to have a disagreement or misunderstanding, then have it have to
              come to me, then go to K., and then whomever it has to go to in order for it to be
              taken care of They want the person standing in front of them to take care of it.
              That is the person they trust the most.

              I mean, we lose one guest for $100, we're losing thousands and thousands of
              dollars over the next so many years in lost business.

              A: When Ifirst started, we had a supervisor and we took dire ctions from the
              supervisor. Whatever jobs were required to be done that morning, we did them.
              When we were done, we were to go on to our next job. Now we are working as
              teams where we have a team leader for each line along with all the employees
              that are working along with that team leader. That's basically where we are at
              now. We are not totally supervised. We have our project coordinators where we
              get our jobs from and then we work as team leaders. As a group in the morning
              we'll meet to find out what we are running for that day. We will all get together
              and assign the people we think will do the best job on that job. In the middle of
              the day it may change too. We may have to stop one job and start another one.

               Rosett: What's the difference between having a supervisor and having a team
               leader?

               A: The supervisor will give you directions on what to do and you'll do it.
               Working as teams, we direct ourselves.

       In contrast to these, five of the sample firms, instead of providing examples of devolution
when asked, described management's receptiveness to suggestions from below. These firms
encourage employees to suggest improvements and to help solve problems, but they are not
empowered in ongoing operations. These are typical responses:
       •       A good manager always listens to the guys that are running the machines, doing
               the jobs.

        •      The days are over with management saying, 'No, We are going to go with this.'

Page 19
              We have to do that sometimes because it is a matter of running the business.
              Some of the ideas that are out there are not really feasible, but they are never
              forgotten. Some of these things are actually written down because J do the
              minutes at the meetings, and I keep track of all these ideas whether they're go,od
              or bad.

               Well, we have a suggestion box. Besides that, the guys would came in and talk to
               the dispatcher and then he would go to his manager and let them know. They
               would sit down and talk about it with this guy. Also, they have meetings for the
               drivers on a regular basis. The executive board meets regularly, and then the
               advisory board. Usually, most of the departments... The sales department has a
               meeting every Friday and they all get together and exchange their ideas. I work
               in the accounting department. We try to get together every week, if not every
               other week and discuss what's going on and anything that we can do to help each
               other out.

               We have drivers' meetings. We have an open door policy where if someone has a
               situation, problem, concern, question, or a way to do something differently, they
               are welcome to come in and see anyone [in management]. We welcome... We
               don't confess to knowing everything. Sometimes we get people who come from
               other moving companies also. Different people do things different ways. We are
               not that egotistical where we think everything we do is the correct way. We hope
               it is, but we will take suggestions. Our drivers and helpers come to us all the time
               with that type of stuff

        These firms invite advice and suggestions from employees at all levels, train them in
scientific reasoning, and grant them the authority to develop solutions to problems and
improvement to processes, subject to ratification. The cost of this problem-solving practice is low
relative to the costs associated with devolution. It seems likely that these firms find that the costs
of devolution outweigh the benefits, but that the problem-solving from of TQM pays.

        The next two examples deal with empowerment that does not entail devolution of
authority. In one case, the employees are support technicians who handle customers'problems on
the telephone, in the other they are software programmers. The nature of these jobs demands that
the employees use their specific knowledge in ongoing operations. In each case, a time constraint
was relaxed to, increasing the quality of performance, but also increasing the labor cost. In
neither of theses cases was it necessary to overcome resistance from middle management, nor was
there an increase in monitoring cost.

               So there is the balance of quality and quantity. So, we ask that you [a support
               technician] average four calls an hour [industry standard is between seven and
               eight], but if you don't make four calls in any given hour, we are not going to
               come down on you. It's just at the end of the week when you total up your calls if

Page 20
             you've been here 40 hours, then hopefli.lly you've done around 160 calls.] Most
             people hit that metric. It's not a difficult goal to achieve. Some days you might
             walk out of here and may have only done 20 calls, but tomorrow yot might come
             in and do 40 calls. It all comes out in the wash. If somebody has a very highs
             quantity rating, I mean if they have an absurdly high quantity rating, I am going
             to check their quality scores and be certain that they are not just churning calls.
             So that's the check and balance that we have between the two.


              F: I think that what principally happened was that it became okay to withhold
              completing a task or delivery of a task if it didn't meet the quality standardsthat
              were required.

              Rosett: Became okay for whom to withhold?

              F.: For the N. people doing the work for... It became okay for those people to
              recognize that there were circumstances where quality demanded that more time
              be spent and so forth as opposed to being slavish to the schedule at the possible
              expense of quality. That was something that happened not only at N., but it was
              also recognized as being an acceptable thing by our customer at the site.

        In these seven cases, benefits of TQM are realized through problem-solving teams, but not
through devolution of authority. Our judgement, based on reading the transcript,is that cost
benefit considerations, however imprecise, led to this result, and that in each case factors
including the firm's industry, technology, age, and size explained the decision not todevolve
decision-making authority.

6.d. Monitoring
        Employees in all firms, whether or not they are practicing TQM, are monitored to insure
that they are doing their jobs properly and that they are not acting against the interest of their
employers. TQM, by broadening the allocation of decision-making authority,calls for intensified
monitoring on both grounds. Empowered employees can further the firm's interest by putting
their specific knowledge to good use, but they can also misuse or abuse their enhanced decision-
making authority. The examples and commentary below illustrate how monitoringis used with
TQM in our sample.

       One theme we found was that when failures are detected, they must be handled in a
fashion that does not degrade the environment of communication and trust required for TQM to
produce results:

               Rosett: Do you keep track of how many mistakes they make.


Page 21
              V: Yes.

              Rosett: What do you do if somebody makes a lot of mistakes?

              V: Go back and determine why, is number one. Rather than pointthe finger and
              say, 'rararararar' with this person. Sit down and talk to them, and it may even
              have involved going over the procedure and finding out that in me teachingthem
              the procedure, that they may not have understood it completely. A pricing issue
              as an example, maybe we gave them a guideline as to how to price, but maybe in
              my teaching them, I wasn't getting my point across. So I would sit down and ask
              them to explain to me what the procedure was. If I am hearing something that's
              totally over here when I know it should be over there, then I know something is...
              I have to then find out why they think that way. If they come back and say, 'Well,
              you told me that,'then I would have to stop, without arguing, and go over the
              procedure all over again, and this time obviously getting the point across. Then
              we'd go from there. Usually it works.

               In several cases, we observed that when authority is reallocated increasing lower-
level employees ability to use resources, that specific resource usage is monitored. For example,
with respect to the authority to spend up to $100 to satisfy a customer's complaint:

       •       L: We have individual accounts. So I can see whose account on a monthly basis
               is high or low, or whatever.

               Rosett: So if something was out of line, you would recognize that.

               L: Certainly.

               Rosett: $100. Is that hard and fast, or can they go beyond that?

               L: Oh, if its $119, it's not a problem. It's just kind of a guideline that Keith put
               out there for everybody to make sure that... Up to $100... You know, ifit's $120
               or $130 usually they come get me and run it past me. I'll get the details and go
               from there.

       This example is representative of many similar instances of such monitoring. This pattern
suggests that monitoring is specifically tied to enhancements in authority, and the ability to
monitor may determine the types of authority that can be allocated. In fact, we found evidence
that employees are encouraged to monitor themselves to see if their actions agree with both
specifics and the "culture" of TQM in place at their site.

        •       K: If you look at our mission, it talks about a trustworthy, flexible, and responsive
                organization who are highly qualified people at handling the customer's product.

 Page 22
          Cleanest and safest in the industry. Highest qualified employees who are
          knowledgeable and trustworthy. So how do you take this and make it real to
          people? So what we've done is... and I can show you the actual sc3re card.
          We've established a score card where they measure themselves every day on
          quality, on safety, on cleanliness, and with cleanliness it's an objective way of
          measuring cleanliness. They have an actual list saying did you empty thetrash
          bins? Did you do this? If you did all these things, then you get ten points. So it's
          an objective measure for cleanliness. With respect to knowledge as a partin their
          score card, they must read a procedure every single day. One person in each cell
          needs to read a procedure. With respect to knowledge as well, you get bonus
          points for certifying a person. Actually it will be easier if I show you a score
          card..

          Rosett: So if I teach you how to do something, then I get some points for having
          done that.

          K: Right. If you look at the score card, and if you look at the mission statement,
          there is a direct correlation between the two. They score themselves every day on
          that, and they get rewards and reinforcements for scoring high. So that's the way
          we've driving the mission statement.

           Rosett: They score themselves. What keeps them from cheating?

          K: Well, we've done different things. There was some cheating with the
          cleanliness. And when that happens, which is normal, because if you reward them
          for scoring high, you're going to see unless you're managing.... That's what I was
          saying with respect to... It takes more management a lot of times to have a team
          based environment, because if you're not paying attention to it, then it will slip.
          So with cleanliness what we did is people were putting 10 points when they didn't
          deserve it, so I sat everyone in a room and said 'What do we want to do about
           this?' They decided to come up with a clean team - where there is a different
           group of three people who would go around at the end of the day and measure
          people, and that group would change. But then over time, that doesn't become an
           issue, and maybe what happens or what's not working as well as our continuous
           improvement process, or maybe are filling out the forms but they're not putting a
           lot of thought into it. So then we'll put more of an emphasis and get everyone
           together and say 'What are we going to do about this?' So it takes reinforcement.
           If you just have a score card and 1) you don't reward people for scoring high, it's
           not going to mean anything, and 2) if you have a score card and if you don't go
           out and recognize that people are doing on a daily basis, not that I have to walk
           up to every team every single day and say 'Great job for doing the score card,'
           but if the management doesn't pay attention to it, it wouldn't work


Page 23
        Where empowerment consists of relaxing, but not eliminating, the time constraints, there
is no change in the need for monitoring. If a service technician is allowed an average of fifteen
minutes to solve a customer's problem, a system for monitoring the length and quity of the call,
is no more necessary than it is for a service technician who is expected to average eight minutes
per call

               Rosett: You have given the people who answer the phone more o do and more
               latitude in deciding how much they are going to do. How do you keep track of
               whether they are overdoing it or not doing enough?

               G: Well, there are couple systems in place. We do have tools that we can use,
               like realtime, to see if the technician is taking a call and how long of a call they
               are already on. It's part of the responsibility of a coach to keep an eye on this
               tool. Let's say a technician has reached a 15 minute mark or maybe a 20 minute
               mark, it's usually a good sign for the coach to walk over and say, 'Hey, how are
               things going? Do you need some help?' If not, okay. If they are working towards
               a solution, no problem. If they do need some help, the coach is there to help them
               out. So we can track up to the minute. What we can also do is we track weekly.
                We get reports basically on how many calls our techs can answer. The quality,
               we send out surveys to customers. We track the quality. We have a weekly
               average of these surveys, and we provide that feedback to our techs so they know
                where they need to be or ifthey're doing great, 'Hey, here's the results. You're
                doing great.' So there are a lot of tools in place. Even as far as like ourcall
                boards... We have call boards up here on the floor so each tech knows how many
                calls are in queue. They can gauge how to handle the call. Let's say we have a
                customer who's pretty computer savvy and is willing to receive an E-mail for
                support, we will send an E-mail out to them, if they are willing. Ifthere are no
                calls in queue, why don't we just go ahead and walk him through the process and
                give him that extra wow, you know. So it gives each of our techs a gauge too, by
                looking at the call boards.

        Finally, external organizations may monitor the efficacy of monitoring monitoring. This
 appears to be a natural outgrowth of TQM's incorporation of suppliers and customers into
 internal activities such as product and process design. In addition to improving the quality of
 product and reducing problems, this provides benefits in the form of additional monitoring from
 outside parties.

                In SEI level 4 you would be a part of a large organization that had a very, very
                well articulated process for the development of that software, and that those
                would be processes that were company wide, that were religiously followed and
                respected throughout the entire organization, and were monitored on a regular
                basis to ensure that those processes were being followed, and so forth, and
                rewards and punishments, if you will, were based on adherence to those processes

 Page 24
               and to that philosophy. In a level 1 organization you would be doing business as
               usual. Business as usual, whatever that is. It might even be very similar, but fI
               couldn't show you that we are doing it, and if you couldn't go from ,.coftware
               developer to software developer and get the same answer, and that person
               couldn't show you that he or she was using the same process, then you would rate
               me down because I hadn't instituted those processes on a broad basis.

               As far as exceeding customers' expectations, on all our moves we have
               questionnaires that go out to all our customers that get sent back to us so we can
               monitor the customers' opinions of our crews and our office staff and the whole
               move in general.

6.e. The Use of Rhetoric

         The use of rhetoric (vision, mission, values) and the belief in its importance is pervasive in
all thirteen of the firms that are still practicing TQM. To be effective, the rhetoric needs to reflect
leadership's commitment. Employees in our sample identify the rhetoric with leadership, and
frequently credit the ideas embodied in the rhetoric for the firm's success. A few of the quotes
illustrate the employees'understanding of the role of rhetoric:

       •       There are nine core values and beliefs that our founder and chairman of our
               board, C. B. sat down and penned out one day before he even knew what he was
               going do. [He] was working for a company. He achieved a certain amount of
               success and became somewhat disillusioned with the corporate environment that
               he was working in. He left and took a year off and had this idea that he wanted
               to start a company. Before he even had a business plan for the company, he sat
               down and said these are going to be the guiding principals for whatever company
               I form.

               Rosett: To what extent are your employees familiar with those guiding principals
               and how does it affect the way they work?

               C: They are familiar with them from day one. The fIrst day of training we go
               over the core values and beliefs and talk about the core values and beliefs. When
               I have the opportunity to sit on it an early training... It's getting harder to do now
               with four facilities and hiring at the pace that we do, but we have a training group
               right now that I will sit with tomorrow. I will get them to talk about the core
               values and beliefs. I want them to understand that... From the outside they can
               appear hokey, but in discussing them, I like to try to get people to understand that
               there's nothing hokey about them. We take them very seriously. They really are
               meant to be your guiding post as you're making your decisions.... We never had
               all the information we needed to make certain important decisions... in the lack
               of information, you just kind of look at the core values and beliefs and say, 'Does

Page 25
                this decision fit these guiding principals?' If it does, then it is likely a good
                decision for the company and let's just go ahead and make this decision even
                though we don't have all the information we'd like to have. We rec4(e the core
                values and beliefs at every company meeting.

                A: We all helped write our mission statement three years ago when we started.
                We set those values ourselves. We all had a part in it is some way. I guess
                everything we do is based on... We try to stay within whatever our mission... And
                that's in our quality, our trustworthiness, and I guess those are all our values.
                They're good. I don't think we would have said them if we didn't think they were
                important. They are just things we try to do on a daily basis.

        The rhetoric is far more than a mere collection of slogans. Each of the following ideas,
reflected in the above quotes, applies in some degree in each of the firms in our sample that
practice TQM:

       •        training includes emphasis on the rhetoric and leadership's commitment to it,

       •        rhetoric serves as a constant reminder of important aspects of training,

       •        adherence to the chief ideas embodied in the rhetoric is enforced by monitoring,
                and

       •        evaluation relies on and compensation is based, at least partly, on compliance with
                the rhetoric.

6.f. Training

        Implementation of TQM requires substantial training. Employees must be taught methods
of scientific reasoning so that they can make rational use of their specific knowledge on behalf of
their employers. Often, they must be cross-trained so as to facilitate contributions to process
improvement. In many of the firms we interviewed, training is continuous. This is necessary
partly because employees are expected to become familiar with processes in which they
themselves are not engaged, partly because continuous improvement often changes the processes
in which they are engaged. TQM firms that emphasize problem-solving, rather than devolution,
train their employees to apply the solutions that problem-solving teams develop. Finally, since
TQM involves an intense focus on customer satisfaction, they must learn, in addition to the
ordinary responsibilities of their jobs, what it takes to satisfy customers.

       The following quotes suggest the extent of training:

       •        M.: We started having classes, big formal classes where you'd go offfor two days
                with your team, and you would learn this intensely. You would stay overnight and

Page 26
          kind of have a fellowship and everything like that, and then you would go off with
          your team and solve a problem. Then it was publicized widely - what was solved,
          how was it solved, and how we would not have come up with this if,we didn't have
          this team, and that's pretty important, and again, backed by J continuously. Then
          it just kind of grew. People sponsor more teams and more teams, and so it's
          pretty much a household word now.

          J: We brought a professor from a local community college here to train our
          people.. I believe the name of the course was the Transformation of American
          Industry, it was from one of our Michigan universities, I am not sure
          which... heavily into the problem solving techniques and SPC. He started out by
          training executive staff and some of the higher level managers and then we,
          eventually over time, depending on the position of the company, determined who
          needed what and then accommodated that individual for what they needed.

          Rosett: Did you send them to the community college over here or you had
          someone coming in?

          J: We had a classroom on site. He was using it all the time. He was just like one
          of us except he worked for a college.

          Rosett: He really trained everybody here... how long did that take?

          J: It took about 2-3 years. He would still deal with new people. Vi say it was at
          least 2-3 years to get everybody.

          M. A seasoned quality manager from another plant came here to start quality
          systems. But I see a huge difference in our expectation an operator or a ... for that
          matter, materials manager or a plant manager than it was maybe back in 1980. I
          knew quality meant something, but I did not know it meant near what it means.
          I didni think it meant what it means today. Back then my training program
          pretty well consisted of.. there is a part coming down this line here, a lady put
          clips on it and theyll give it to you and you put a rod in it and you pass it on to
           the next person. That was about it, which is fine. I had worked there in summers
          before since I was 16. So I knew some of what they were doing when I went into
          full time. It was not that difficult, but now we instill a very aggressive training
          program here. If you are a new employee coming in, you spend about 4-5 days
          just understanding what we are about and the expectation you are going to be as
          an operator.

          Rosett: What do they talk about in those 4-5 days?

          M: It sounds simple, but it really isni. We explain to people what the difference

Page 27
               is between molding, press and assembly area. We go through the safeties of them:
               what does this mean, what does that mean... We go through the forms of them. If
               you have an accident, this is what will happen. If you have issues, iis is who
               you can see. Hereé your supervisor. They meet their supervisors. They meet Itze,
               they meet D [the plant managerl. They put a name to a face or a face to a name.
               Even down to where the bathrooms are.

       The training often involves cross-training. This is necessary because of TQM emphasizes
and uses cross-functional tasks. Problem solving teams are frequently cross-functional, and in
general employees are encouraged to take a bigger view of the firm and act accordingly.

       •       H: Well, it used to be as a packer, compared to now, you'd come in and have one
              job. That's it. Don't worry about what anybody else is doing, or so what that line
               wasn't going to make it. Where now, as a packer, you have just as much
               responsibility as say the team leader because you should know what's going on on
               other lines in case we need to shut down a line to go help another line. If you're
               taping here, you should know as a team member to go up and help somebody else
               if you're caught up. But before, who cared? You were put there, that's where you
               stayed.

       •       We are right now in the midst of training our crews that go out on the jobs. The
               training covers anything from... We go over our employee handbook and show
               guys how we want them to go. When they meet a customer, hüw to introduce
               themselves. What to do, that type of thing. We go through all the paperwork. We
               have hands on as far as packing, loading, and that type of situation. Basically go
               through everything that they can encounter on ajob and tell them how we want
               them to do it, the correct way to do it. Again, this is for people who are brand
               new employees through people who have been with us 25-30 years. They all go
               through it.

        Firms use both internal and external resources for training. A common pattern seems to
be to obtain external training early in the TQM initiative, and to then move it in house as internal
expertise is developed.
       •       K: My first real exposure to the quality movement was with Qualpro. At that
               point, I think weI'e trained all the superintendents. At some point, in my
               reflection of when we did what, is kind offoggy. I know we have trained all the
               superintendents and all the foremen. We have trained all the operators internally.

               Rosett: Qualpro trained the people who were higher up in the structure and then
               they internally trained the other people?

               K: Right. We formed a group, which we call PDQs (people devoted to quality),

Page 28
              which are typically our engineers from all the areas. But each department
              basically has represented in the PDQ group.

              Rosett: Are you a PDQ also, because of your... ?

               K: I was a PDQ as an engineer and that pretty much how I ended as a total
               quality manager, because I played a big role as a PDQ. I believejn a process and
               I let the charge a lot of times. That how I ended up where lam now. So, we
               used PDQs to do the internal training to train all the operators. So, we
               have.., but that really took place after the 3 big teams and one of which one is the
               Quality Cup.

        Finally, as in the case described above where TQM activities are linked to monitoring,
training is explicitly linked to TQM objectives, and may be tailored to suit the individual's role in
the organization.

               D: Your evaluation depends how many procedures you've been trained on, how
               many procedures you've trained other people on, and they just add those up. That
               actually goes on record. When you train somebody, it goes on your training
               record, and it is all tallied up.

               Rosett: You can only train people on things on which you are certified.

               D: On which you are certified, yes.


               This is our training plan. Each individual has their own plan. These are the
               training records for each individual. This is a list of all of our procedures that we
               have. Everyone has a plan. There is a date in there that they are going to plan
               on trying to get that procedure done, and these are the dates that they have been
               accomplished. Everyone also puts in a plan on what they want to learn, and it
               also is based on your review. The more procedures you know, the better your pay
               rate is. For each line there is a team leader. Each team leader is certified on all
               the procedures. This enables them to teach other team members, train them on it,
               and certify them on it.

6.g. Evaluation, compensation and promotion

        All well-managed firms, TQM or not, link evaluation, compensation and promotion with
well-defined firm objectives. We summarize the patterns we observed in our sample with respect
to these issues here. One interesting finding is that TQM may provide a superior method of
identifying employees eligible for promotion. This is because a distinguishing characteristic of the
TQM firm is that empowered employees have numerous opportunities to demonstrate initiative,

Page 29
judgment, and in problem-solving teams, qualities of leadership.
        Our findings with respect to explicit pay-for-performance incentives appear consistent
with the incentives literature. For example, Prendergasth [1999] review article suggests that, as
generalities, more complex tasks are more likely to receive subjective performance evaluatiqn,
rather than explicit bonus plans. Interviewees frequently said that there was no direct connection
between specific features of the TQM program and pay, but that evaluations and pay reflect
overall conformity with the TQM objectives:

               V. It may take them three, four, five or a half dozen instances of dealing with a
               customer of the phone and learning about what the customer is and what they're
               like, and so forth, but it may take another person only two or three. So, I can't
               hold that against them, because that's just how the person is.

               Rosett: Do those differences affect their compensation at all?

               V. No, not generally.

               Rosett. So they are all compensated the same?

               V: Yeah, actually pretty much. We have a bonus plan that the owner has kindly
               given people. It is very clear. It is based on your efforts and what you do, but the
               sales people do pretty similar, I mean within afew dollars.

               Rosett: I see.

               V. You know, there is a reason for that too. If I catch wind that something
               doesn't quite seem right to me. Maybe I heard something or overheard something
               that the sales people were talking about, and 1 say, 'Geez, what's going on here?'
               Then Ifind out that maybe that particular instance was not handled quite right.
               What I will do is I will take that sales person, we will sit down, and we will discuss
               it so that the next time, I feel at least, that it is handled in a more professional or
               a better way. I think that is probably why they are pretty similar. There isn't a
               day that goes by that that's not done. The girls, and there is one other gentleman
               in there... There's always things that come up. You know, 'How do I do this?
               How do I do that?' After a while it's everybody singing from the same page.

        •      Rosett: Do you think that the mission statement guides M in what to look for
               when he does your evaluation?

               C: 1 am sure it does. It's a company goal.

        •      Rosett (questioning P, afront line employee of the same firm): When your
               performance is evaluated, what kinds of things do they look at to see whether

 Page 30
              you'd get a raise, get a promotion, or get fired or whatever?

              P: I guess the biggest thing would just be how you treat the custorper. I mean, if
              you're rude, snappy, or you don't do your job right, you don't solve the proble,m...
              That's the biggest thing. They understand things like sick days and maybe being
              tired because traffic is crazy, and things like that, but if you're just not taking
              care of the customer, then it's just not going to work out.

              Rosett: How do they find out whether you are taking care of the customer?

              P: Well, in tech support they have surveys. After you take a technical support
              call, they'll send out a survey asking how that person did. They keep a rating of
              your surveys of the percentage on how well you did. If it's constantly low, I mean,
              they are going to confront you about it and talk to you about it and see if they can
              help you. Of course, they are not going to be like, 'You're fired.' They are going
              to see if they can help you to help improve that and work on maybe specific
              issues. I mean, if it's just constantly low and you're just not taking care of the
              customer, then that's pretty much how they would pretty much know is the surveys.
              Plus, some of the coaches, they can monitor the calls and things like that.


        Consistent with these views, few of the firms appeared to have any direct scheme linking
successful problem-solving team participation to individual pay. In only a couple of cases were
cash bonuses or prizes associated with successful process improvement suggestions. More
commonly, successful teams were given public recognition for their achievements. In many of
these cases, it was clear that the team members placed great value on the recognition. But most
of the examples of cash incentives actually were small bonuses for useful input contributed
through suggestion boxes.

        Despite the difficulties with linking pay to the TQM program, incentives appear to come in
at least three forms. First, several plants had bonus schemes tied to productivity at the team or
plant level. A second method of motivation is positive feedback, with rhetoric and continual
education reinforcing the importance of the firm's mission. This was commonly mentioned. A
third, and closely related motivation is to avoid discouraging employees. Several interviewees
indicated that positive reinforcement becomes useless if employees are reprimanded or punished
for decisions made in good faith, but which have negative consequences. Several managers said it
is more effective to take a problem-solving approach to such situations to see how the mistake
can be avoided in the future. The following quote touched on several of these issues and is
broadly representative of what we heard across the sample:

               T (Plant manager): That's right. It doesn't happen in all facilities, but in some
              facilities. Most people will know, ball park anyway, how they are doing. At the
              strip mill they can calculate it down to the penny if they want. The number is up

Page 31
              there. On that closed circuit TV communication system we have our stock price
              rolls every five minutes or so. Although it doesn't change as much as their
              incentive, they can still monitor the company's performance as welt Along with
              that productivity performance, there are different systems across the plant thqt all
              of our employees have some sort of productivity incentive program in place. We
               have a performance improvement program but mostly related to quality customer
              service in our manufacturing cost, which is another incentive that's paid out every
               month to our employees. So that's another form of compensation. So over and
               above productivity, they are rewarded for other performance. There is also a
              profit sharing program put in that is an annual payout if the company is
              profitable. Beyond that formal compensation, the recognition of dinners, jackets,
               world record performance sweatshirts, you know, pride things, the hats. That's
               important too.


        Another potentially important incentive is promotion. Several employees indicated that
successful participation on problem solving teams was an important means of gaining promotion.
Front line employees who otherwise have little opportunity to display managerial abilities are
placed in a setting where they can contribute. Their efforts are directly observable to managers
who attend team presentations. In cross-functional team settings, these employees have the
opportunity to make contacts and learn about the operations of the firm outside of their
immediate area. Several employees believed they had been identified for promotion through this
process. The following was typical:

       •      A lot of our senior management at the corporate level had said that to be
              promotable, you need to have spent some time in the total quality processes. You
              need to have a good understanding of it, you need to be able to lead teams and
              facilitate teams. It a good developmental experience to be involved in it, because
              it not easy. If you can facilitate teams and get people working on this stuff, it
              says a lot in a leadership abilities.

        Finally, as in the cases of training and monitoring, there may be opportunitiesfor direct
linkages between the TQM and evaluation. Though this was not common, in at least a couple of
instances, employees jointly agreed with their managers regarding the criteria that would be used
for their evaluations. In these cases, employees specifically figure out how to fit their individual
behavior with the overall corporate vision or mission and expect feedback to reflect whether they
have achieved their own objectives. This appears to be taking TQM methods to the highest level.

        •      E (senior manager): The company develops its plans, senior leaders develop the
               overall plan. Champions define what it really means show it to those departments
               throughout the organization, which is call the core and support processes. They
               develop their plan in support of the company. goals and objectives and once the
               plans and budgets are finalized at that point, individual partners [employees]will

Page 32
                develop their individual what we call "partner performance management plans"
                in support of accomplishing their departmenL objectives. Each person does
                that. But the neat thing about it is that PPMP is how we evaluate p,formance on
                the individual level and it ties the accomplishment of goals and objectives to
                compensation. So, everybody linked to and aligned to the goals and objectives
                of the company. The neat thing about it is when you create these plans in
                January, then no surprises in November, when your performance evaluation takes
                place.

        Management and front line employees generally recognize the link between important
elements of the TQM rhetoric on one hand and evaluation, recognition, and compensation on the
other. Even the manager who explains why all his reports are paid the same does so in terms his
ability to bring them all into compliance with the rhetoric.


7. A Portrait

     The thirteen firms still practicing TQM have the following four characteristics in
common:

       •        Strong, committed leadership: Leadership ranges from the founder, unfamiliar
                with the TQM, but determined to found a business that will succeed by delighting
                customers, to a senior executive of a large firm who comes away from a TQM
                conference, convinced that success lies in that direction.

       •        A well-articulated vision that includes a focus on customer satisfaction: The vision
                may be the product of a leader's unshakable commitment to a particular goal or it
                may be shaped by input from employees. It may consist of a single declarative
                sentence like, "We are the best because our customers say we are the best," or it
                may be an elaborate structure starting with an overarching statement pertaining to
                a large corporation, with subsidiary statements, each tailored to a single unit within
                the firm, sometimes with employee input, sometimes not.

       •        Training that includes indoctrination to the vision: Training practices range from
                relying heavily on its own trained employees to train others, to employment of
                professional TQM trainers.

       •        Communications reinforcing the vision: Statements reminding employees of the
                vision appear on posters and on the reverse of business cards. They are recited at
                meetings of employees and they are a component of monitoring and evaluations
                practices. Most significant, they create an environment in which employees tend to
                be guided, not only by their own immediate responsibilities, but to larger
                objectives of the firm as well.

Page 33
       The variation in these characteristics from firm to firm is inconsequential. A fifth
characteristic, central to TQM varies far more from firm to firm than these four: tli level of
employee involvement in decision-making. Seven of the firms in our sample have devolved,
decision-making authority in ongoing operations. Two patterns are discernible: employees who
deal with external customers, and who are empowered to make decisions previously requiring
supervisory approval (for example, giving regional lending officers authority to approve loans
which had previously required central office approval, allowing telephone sales representatives to
quote prices and delivery dates without consulting the sales manager), and those who deal with
such a wide variety of issues, that some level of empowerment is inescapable (in our sample,
software programmers and ISP technicians who provide technical support on the telephone), the
question being, how much.

       The software programming team that succeeded in the Quality Cup competition reduced
the number of programming errors from between seventy-five and a hundred per hundred
thousand lines of code to zero by relaxing time constraints and increasing redundancy in the
programming process. The resulting elimination of errors eliminated the need for ex-post patches.
The result was an improvement in quality at no increase in cost. The Internet service provider's
technical service representatives, were allowed to handle far fewer service calls per hour than the
industry standard, increasing their latitude in deciding whether more time spent on a customer's
problem would result in a solution. Empowerment in both these cases consisted of relaxing a time
constraint, enhancing existing empowerment.

       In all these cases, the variety of issues confronted by the employee is too great to be dealt
with by a rule book. Judgment is called for. The question is whether it will be a superior's
judgment or the subordinate's. In the case of these firms, it is the subordinate's.

         Interviews with the remaining six firms elicited no evidence of devolution of authority in
ongoing operations. These firms are especially interesting because they have successfully
adopted one manifestation of TQM, but without incurring the costs associated with the major
organizational change. They seem to have derived sufficient benefit from it to persist, To those
firms, TQM consists of training employees to solve problems, readily accepting employees'
suggestions as to problems needing to be solved, and, to solve them, forming teams that draw on
specific knowledge. Problem-solving may have called for an increase in monitoring in these firms,
but, if so, it was not evident in any of the interviews. These firms, like the other seven, exhibit
evidence of strong leadership and admiration for leadership's vision. These firms, too, employ
TQM-type rhetoric, but it is less prominent and less immediately recalled by the employees.

        While our sample of fifteen firms is not necessarily representative of the larger universe of
all firms, the fact that almost half of them have adopted, at low cost, an element of TQM that
seems to be both profitable and self-sustaining, raises a question worth examining in the larger
universe: how important has this phenomenon been in contributing to the recent dramatic
improvement in U. S. productivity growth? Full-blown TQM is not for everyone. In some cases

Page 34
the cost of training and monitoring is prohibitive because the prospective gains are too small. The
technology may not offer profitable opportunities for much exercise of judgment by low level
employees. For example, the operation of a steel mill may impose an iron discipline that almost
always favors strict adherence to rules over the exercise of judgment. TQM implementation can
be disruptive and expensive. Its payoff is unlikely to be immediate. Failure in the effort to
implement TQM is not uncommon.

        Compared with all this, problem-solving is easy, inexpensive, and likely to produce
reasonably prompt results. It would be surprising if this manifestation of TQM were not
increasingly popular. Research directed at determining the extent of TQM-type problem-solving,
because of its narrow focus, could be conducted using a survey technique rather than face-to-face
interviews. For example, a survey of a sample drawn from the membership of the American
Society for Quality, though it would represent only the universe of firms that employ members of
that society, would provide a far broader picture than has been possible with the sample used in
this paper.

        The interviews we conducted with the fifteen firms that participated in this research
revealed significant variations attributable to differences in functions and technologies, but they
also revealed strong similarities in the approach to TQM. In the words of one of the individuals
interviewed:

               I think I would like to recap it though. You asked me... One of your first
               questions was what makes it successful? If you were going to do this again, how
               would you drive this? In my opinion, it's creating... and again I don't want to use
               quotes in these words, but you have to create a means of telling people where you
               want to go. I will call it vision just because of that. People need to know. They
               need to know where the organization is going. Once you do that, you have to
               communicate it. The next three points are that you have to communicate it, you
               have to communicate it, and you have to communicate it. Then you have to
               measure it and show them. Once you do that, you have to recognize them and
               recognize their performance. In my opinion, you have to inject a little bit offun
               into that. You have to challenge them, you have to train them... but overall you
               create the vision, you communicate it, you measure it, and then you follow-up. If
               you continue to do that... It doesn't matter how formally you do that, as long as
               you are doing it. You talked about the continuous improvement process, it's
               identified. If you don't have it identified, but you're still doing it, that's much
               more important. It's not what you call it, it's how you're doing it.




Page 35
References

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch, "How to Compete: The Impact of Workp1ac Practices and
Information Technology on Productivity," National Bureau of Economic Research Working,
Paper 6120, August, 1997.

Easton, George S. and Sherry L. Jarrell, 'The Effects of Total Quality Managen)ent on Corporate
Performance: an Empirical Investigation,"Journal of Business, Vol.7 1, No.2 (1998), 253-307.

Helper, Susan, 'Complementarity and Cost Reduction: Evidence from the Auto Supply Industry,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6033, May 1997.

Hendricks, Kevin B. and Vinod R. Singhal, "Quality Awards and the Market Value of the Firm:
An Empirical Investigation,"Management Science, Vol. 42, No. 3 (March 1996), 415-436.

Hendricks, Kevin B. and Vinod R. Singhal, "Does Implementing an Effective TQM Program
Actually Improve Operating Performance? Empirical Evidence from Firms That Have Won
Quality Awards,"Management Science, Vol. 43, No. 9 (September 1997), 1258-1274.

Levine, David I. and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, 'Participation, Productivity, and the Firm's
Environment", in Alan S. Blinder, ed.,Paying For Productivity. Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, 1990.

Powell, Thomas C., 'Total Quality Management as Competitive Advantage: A Review and
Empirical Study,"Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 16 (1995), 15-37.

Prendergast, Canice, 'The Provision of Incentives in Firms ,"Journal of Economic Literature,
Vol. 37, No. 1 (1999), 7-63.

Waldman, David A., "A Theoretical Consideration of Leadership and Total Quality
Management," Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 4, No. 1 (1993), 65-79.

Waldman, David A., Tern Litychy, Mohan Gopalakrishnan, Kevin Laframboise, Bella Gelpenin
and Zefi Kaitsounakis, "A Qualitative Analysis of Leadership and Quality Improvement,"
Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1998), 177-201.

Wruck, Karen H. and Michael C. Jensen, 'Science, Specific Knowledge, and Total Quality
Management," Journal of Accounting & Economics 18 (1994), pp 247-287.




Page 36
</ref_section>
                                        Appendix A

1999 RIT/USA TODAY QUALITY CUP NOMINATION FORM


Before completing this nomination form, please read through the entire form. Note the
instructions and follow them carefully.

Nominations must be postmarked by Monday, December 7, 1998.

Thank you for requesting a Quality Cup nomination form. We wish you good luck in the
competition. Whatever the outcome, the fact that so many enter each year is good news for our
country.


1. Name of the team you are nominating:

2. Name of the organization submitting the nomination: ______________________________


1. Person who can respond to questions about this nomination:

     Name (typed or printed):
     Title: ____________________________________________
     Company:
     Address:
     City, State, Zip:
     Telephone number: _______________________________ FAX number: ____________________


4.   Nomination Category Check the category in which the nomination is submitted. The
     category is determined by the principal activity of the organization which employs the nominees.

     _____ a. Education Institutions All educational institutions, including K through 12, two
     and four year colleges, universities, and technical institutes. Not-for-profit, government
     operated, and proprietary institutions are all eligible.

     ______ b. Government: All units of federal, state and local government. It does not include
     for-profit firms devoted to providing services or manufactured goods to government units.

     _____ c. Health Care Organizations All providers of health care, including, but not limited
     to, hospitals, nursing homes, HMOs, and health care practices. Not-for-profit, government

Page 37
     operated, and proprietary organizations are all eligible.

     _____ d. Manufacturing Industry: All for-profit manufacturing firms with 3ver 500
     employees. Subsidiary service firms, wholly owned by manufacturing firms and offering
     services to external customers, should be submitted in the service category.

     ______ e. Service Industry: All for-profit services with over 500 employees. Subsidiary
     manufacturing firms, wholly owned by service firms and offering manufactured products to
     external customers, should be submitted in the manufacturing category.

     _______ f. Small Business: All for-profit manufacturing and service firms with 500 or fewer
     employees. In counting the number of employees, include those employed by any parent
     company and all divisions and subsidiaries.

     The sponsors reserve the right to reclassify the nomination if doing so will place it in
     competition with a significant group of similar nominations.
     *To help us verify the category you have chosen, please describe briefly the products/services
     offered by your organization.




     The sponsors reserve the right to reclassify the nomination if doing so will place it in
     competition with a significant group of similar nominations. Donna Slavin, at 716/475-2199,
     can help if you are uncertain about which category to check.


5.   List the names and job titles of the team members, with the team leader first. A team may
     include members who are not employed by the nominating organization, such as employees
     of a supplier or customer. There is no limit to the number of team members you may
     nominate. Use an additional sheet of paper, if necessary, to list them all.



 Name                                               Job Title




Page 38
                                                                                 p
                                                                                            ,




In answering questions 6, 7, 8 and 9, please:
     1.        OBSERVE THE WORD LIMITS
     2.        PROVIDE A WORDCOUNT FOLLOWING EACH RESPONSE
These are included in the criteria the judges consider. Additional exhibits, amounting to as
many as six 8 1/2 x 11 pages, may be used to supply supporting statistical evidence in
tabular or graphic form. It is expected that statements made in response to these questions
are verifiable and that nominees will be prepared to provide verification if it is requested.


6.   Brief description: In no more than one hundred words summarize the quality
     improvement for which this team is being nominated.


7. Process (400 Points): In no more than four hundred words describe the process that led to
     the quality improvement. In scoring this section, judges consider the appropriateness of team
     composition and its empowerment, the appropriate employment of quality tools,
     customer-driven goals, the role of leadership, reproducibility of the quality improvement
     process, and commitment to continuous improvement. (Four hundred points)


8. Measurement (200 Points): In no more than two hundred words describe the data and the
     method of analysis you used to measure the magnitude of improvement, and explain your
     choice of data and method. The judges will consider the relevance of the data and the
     appropriateness of the method of analysis. They will not expect more complexity than
     required for good measurement. (Two hundred points)


9. Result (400 Points): In no more than four hundred words describe the improvement, its
     impact on the organization, the customers who benefit, and the magnitude of the benefit.
     (Four hundred points)


10. Briefly, is there anything else we should know about this team?


Page 39
11. Release: Quality Cup nominations provide valuable illustrations of processes for achieving
    and measuring quality, continuous improvement, and customer satisfaction. 1ease indicate
    whether you are willing to allow such use of your nomination.

    _____ a. Information in the nomination may be used for the purpose of teaching and research.

    _____ b. Information in the nomination may be used for the purpose of teaching and
    research, but only after I have had an opportunity to review the use to which it will be put.

    _____ c. Information in the nomination may not be used for teaching or research.


12. Signature of an officer or executive whose span of authority includes the nominee.

    Signature: ____________________________________________Date: ________________

    Name (typed or printed):

    Title:

    Company:

    Address:

    Telephone number: (                                  )

    Fax number: (                                 )


    E-mail address: __________________________________




Page 40
