NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY TRAPS:
HOW TO AVOID THEM AND
HOW TO ESCAPE THEM
Willem H. Buiter
Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou
Working Paper 7245
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7245

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

We would like to thank, without implicating in any way, Olivier Blanchard, DeAnne Julius and Ron McKinnon
for helpful discussions on the subject. Special thanks are due to Anne Sibert for key technical assistance in
Section IV of the paper. We are also very much indebted to Ian Plenderleith, John Rippon and Rupert
Thorne, for educating us on the subject of bearer bonds, and to Jenny Salvage and Nick Hanchard for
assistance with the Figures and Tables. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and not those of the Bank of England, the other members of the Monetary Policy Committee,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Willem H. Buiter and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,

is given to the source.

Liquidity Traps: How to Avoid Them and How to Escape Them
Willem H. Buiter and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou
NBER Working Paper No. 7245
July 1999
JEL No.B22, E41, E31, E32, E51, E52, E58, N12, N13, N14
ABSTRACT
The paper considers ways of avoiding a liquidity trap and ways of getting out of one. Unless lower
short nominal interest rates are associated with significantly lower interest volatility, a lower average rate
of inflation, which will be associated with lower expected nominal interest rates, increases the odds that the
zero nominal interest rate floor will become a binding constraint. The empirical evidence on this issue is
mixed.
Once in a liquidity trap, there are two means of escape. The first is to use expansionary fiscal
policy. The second is to lower the zero nominal interest rate floor. This second option involves paying
negative interest on government 'bearer bonds' -- coin and currency, that is 'taxing money', as advocated
by Gesell. This would also reduce the likelihood of ending up in a liquidity trap. Taxing currency amounts
to having periodic 'currency reforms', that is, compulsory conversions of 'old' currency into 'new' currency,
say by stamping currency. The terms of the conversion can be set to achieve any positive or negative
interest rate on currency. There are likely to be significant shoe leather costs associated with such schemes.
The policy question then becomes how much shoe leather it takes to fill an output gap?
Finally the paper develops a simple analytical model showing how the economy can get into a
liquidity trap and how Gesell money is one way of avoiding it or escaping from it.
Willem H. Buiter
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London EC2R 8AH, UK
and NBER
willem.buiter@bankofengland.co.uk

Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London EC2R 8AH, UK
nikolaos.panigirtzoglou@bankofengland.co.uk

Non-technical summary
The credible targeting of a low rate of inflation should result, on average, in low

nominal interest rates. The administratively determined zero nominal interest rate on
currency sets a floor under the nominal interest rate on non-monetary financial claims. An
important policy issue then is the following: how likely is it that the economy ends up, as a

result of shocks or endogenous fluctuations, in a situation where the zero short nominal
interest floor becomes a binding constraint, that is, how likely is the economy to end up in a
liquidity trap?

If low average nominal interest rates also tend to be stable rates, the risk of ending up

in a liquidity trap need not be enhanced much by targeting a low rate of inflation. The
empirical evidence on the relationship between the level and volatility of short nominal rates

is, however, mixed. The cross-sectional evidence supports a strong positive correlation
between the average level of the short nominal interest rate and its (unconditional) variance.

The time-series evidence for the UK is ambiguous. At very high (daily) frequencies, the
correlation between the level of short sterling futures and a volatility index derived from short
sterling futures options is negative. At weekly frequencies, the correlation is positive for most

of the post-1975 period is positive, but the correlation is negative since 1993, the beginning
of inflation targeting in the UK.

Once an economy lands itself in a liquidity trap, there are just two policy options.
The first is to wait for some positive shock to the excess demand for goods and services,
brought about through expansionary fiscal measures or through exogenous shocks to private

domestic demand or to world demand. The second option is to lower the zero nominal
interest rate floor on currency by taxing currency. A negative interest rate on currency would
also reduce the likelihood of an economy landing itself in a liquidity trap.

The paper revisits a proposal by Gesell for implementing a negative nominal interest

rate on currency. Under this proposal, currency would cease to be current, and could be
subject to confiscation, unless a predetermined periodic payment is made by the bearer to the

issuer. Currency would have become 'stamp scrip'. Another perspective on Gesell money is
to view it as involving periodic monetary reform, in which the conversion terms between old
and new currency define the own interest rate on currency.

The transactions and administrative costs associated with such periodic currency

reforms would be non-negligible. Such currency conversion costs could be reduced by
lengthening the interval between conversions, but they would remain significant. These
'shoe-leather costs' would have to be set against the risk of ending up in a liquidity trap, if a
very low rate of inflation is targeted without taxing currency, or against the cost of targeting a

higher rate of inflation. It may take a lot of shoe leather to fill an output gap or to rub out the
distortions associated with the inflation tax.

We then develop analyse the behaviour of a small analytical macroeconomicmodel in

which negative interest on currency is a policy option. In the Keynesian, sticky price version

of the model, there are two kinds of equilibria, 'normal' equilibria and liquidity trap
equilibria. If the inflation rate falls to a sufficiently low level, the economy may end up in the

liquidity trap zone in which it will cycle permanently around the liquidity trap steady state.
Imposing a negative interest rate on currency lowers the critical rate of inflation at which the

economy enters the liquidity trap zone. Once caught in the liquidity trap zone, a reduction in
the nominal interest rate on currency provides a means of escape.

If there are indeed benighted countries threatened by, or even caught in, a liquidity
trap, the policy makers there have one more option they might wish to consider on its merits:
Gesell money.

(I) Introduction
Liquidity trap talk is with us again. Liquidity traps may be with us. An economy is
said to be in a liquidity trap when the ability to use monetary policy to stimulate demand has

vanished because the nominal interest rate has reached an unbreachable floor. The textbook
treatment of liquidity traps, based on Hickss [1936] interpretation of Keynes [1936], involves

the assumption that the demand for money becomes infinitely sensitive to the opportunity
cost of holding money, the spread between the pecuniary yield on some non-monetary asset,

i, and the pecuniary own yield on money, M, at some low level (typically zero) of that

opportunity cost. With portfolio holders indifferent a regards the composition of their
financial wealth between money and non-money assets, changes in the supply of money
cannot affect the spread. Specifically, increases in the supply of money cannot push the
spread below the level at which the demand for money becomes infinitely elastic.

The argument assumed that the pecuniary own rate of return on money was zero, an

appropriate assumption for coin and currency, although not for the liabilities of private
deposit-taking institutions that make up most of the broader monetary aggregates, which now

typically have positive nominal returns.

With the own rate of return on currency

administratively fixed at zero, a floor for the spread becomes a floor for the nominal yield on
some non-monetary financial instrument, i, the short nominal interest rate. l

nominal interest rate is taken to be
When, as is institutionally more relevant, the short
the monetary instrument, rather than some monetary aggregate, the argument is not changed

in any essential way. Since money is, by assumption, the asset with the highest non-

'With the nominal rate on currency fixed at zero, the nominal interest rate on other financial
claims can be negative if the cost of holding and storing currency exceeds that of holding and
storing these other claims (see Porter [1999]). This is unlikely to be important quantitatively
and for expositional simplicity it is ignored in what follows.

pecuniary rate of return, the equilibrium spread between the pecuniary return on nonmonetary assets and that on money, has to be non-negative. The authorities therefore cannot
drive the short nominal interest rate below the pecuniary own rate of return on money. This
is zero if (some component of) money is non-interest-bearing.

Non-interest-bearing coin and

currency therefore prevent the short nominal interest rate on non-monetary financial claims

from falling below zero. This produces liquidity trap at (or possibly above) a zero nominal
rate of interest.

This liquidity trap used to be treated, in the mainstream accounts of the monetary
transmission mechanism, as a theoretical curiosum without practical relevance.2 The revival

of interest in the liquidity trap is not surprising. First, Japan is in a protracted economic
slump. Short nominal interest rates there are near zero. Zero is the absolute nominal interest

rate floor in Japan because yen notes and coin bear a zero nominal interest rate. Monetary
policy in Japan currently appears to have a very limited effect on aggregate demand. The

conclusion that there is a liquidity trap at work is hard to resist (see e.g. Krugman
[1998a,b,c,d; 1999], Ito 111998] and McKiimon and Ohno [1999]); for a view that liquidity

traps are unlikely to pose a problem, see Meltzer [1999]).

Second, inflation in Euroland is below one percent per annum. The official short rate
now 3is 2.5 percent. Euroland economic activity is slowing down. This raises the question as

to whether a margin of two hundred and fifty basis points provides enough insurance against
a slump. Demand could weaken to such an extent that a cut in the short nominal rate of more
than two hundred and fifty points would be required to boost aggregate demand sufficiently

Romer [1996], which covers the topic as half of an exercise at the end of the
chapter 5, "Traditional Keynesian Theories of Fluctuations".
June 1999.
2

2See e.g.

The monetary instrument is, almost invariably, a short nominal interest

rate.4

Aggregate demand is influenced primarily by real interest rates, short and long, that is, by
nominal interest rates corrected for (expected) changes in the purchasing power of money.

The transmission of monetary policy through other real asset prices, including the real
exchange rate, depends on the ability of the monetary authorities to influence real interest

rates. For the monetary authority to affect real demand, changes in nominal interest rates
have to be translated, at least temporarily, into changes in real interest rates. In a moderate or

low-inflation environment, inflation and inflation expectations tend to move only gradually

and sluggishly. This Keynesian feature of the economy gives monetary policy a temporary
handle on the real economy.

If short nominal interest rates cannot fall any further, short real rates can only be
pushed down if there is a rise in the expected rate of inflation. If the price stability gospel has

been widely internalised by market participants, expected inflation is unlikely to rise to
produce the required cut in real rates.

Once an economy is in such a situation, it is not possible to get out of it using the
conventional monetary policy instruments - changes in the short nominal interest rates.

Inflation expectations are not a policy instrument. Why would inflation expectations rise

when monetary policy cannot stimulate demand? It is a trap - an inefficient equilibrium.
Conventional monetary policy advice then can only be preventive, not curative: do not get
4The argument could be recast in terms of the monetary authority using some monetary
aggregate as the instrument, with the short nominal interest rate on risk-free non-monetary
financial claims treated as endogenous. Taking the short nominal rate as the instrument has
two advantages. First, the exposition in simpler. Second, it is what central banks actually do.
Changes in reserve requirements, open market operations etc. arebest viewed as ways of
changing the interest rate. .In an open economy, the other institutionally relevant instrument
of monetary policy is the nominal exchange rate. When capital mobility is limited, the short
nominal interest rate and the nominal exchange rate both can be instruments of policy, at any
rate in the short run.

into this situation.5 Make sure inflation expectations (and actual inflation) are targeted at a

level high enough to ensure that nominal interest rates will not hit the floor, even during
periods during which aggressively expansionary monetary policy is in order.

Of course, in a liquidity trap, expansionary fiscal policy, or any other exogenous
shock to aggregate demand, is supposed to be at its most effective. There are, however,
conditions under which fiscal policy cannot be used to stimulate aggregate demand. Debt-

financed lump-sum tax cuts could fail to stimulate aggregate demand if there is Ricardian
equivalence or debt neutrality. Alternatively, the government's creditworthiness may be so

impaired that it cannot borrow. Finally, there could be external, Maastricht Treaty or
Stability and Growth Pact-like external constraints on a government's ability to use deficit
financing.

If Ricardian equivalence holds, a temporary increase in exhaustive public spending

will, even with a balanced budget, and in virtually any model of the economy, boosts
aggregate demand. For this fiscal policy channel also to be ineffective, exhaustive public
spending must be a direct perfect substitute for exhaustive private spending, say because
public consumption is a perfect substitute for private consumption in private utility functions,

and public investment is a perfect substitute for private investment in private production
functions. 6

If expansionary fiscal policy can be used to work the economy out of a liquidity trap,
the problem is clearly rather less pressing. In what follows, it is assumed that this option is
not available.

5This advice is a variant on the following familiar dialogue. Question: "How do I get there
from here?" Answer: "I would not start from here".
6See Buiter [19771.

(II) Can the zero nominal interest rate floor become binding in
the UK?
Most estimates of the current level of the long real interest rate in the UK put it

somewhere between 2.0 and 3.0 percent per annum. Figures 1 and 2 show the recent
behaviour of medium-term and long-term real rates of interest on index-linked government
securities.7

Figure 1 here

Figure 2 here

With an inflation target of 2.5 percent per annum (as in the UK), the long-run nominal

interest rate (ignoring term- and risk premia) would be between 4.5 and 5.5 percent per
annum. In steady state, the short-term nominal interest rate would also be between 4.5 and
5.5 percent per annum. We can regard this as the 'normal' level of the short nominal interest

rate. If one believed that there were contingencies (such as a dramatic, spontaneous collapse
of aggregate demand) under which a cut in short rates of more than 4.5 to 5.5 percent would
be in order, the monetary authority would be at risk of hitting the zero interest floor.

Historically, in the UK, there have been occasions when Bank Rate has swung by

more than 4.5 or 5.5

percentage

points. On 15 November 1979, the Bank's Minimum

Lending Rate hit 17.00 percent. On March 11, 1981, it stood at 12.00 percent. On October 6,

1989, the Bank's Minimum Band 1 Dealing Rate stood at 14.88 percent. On 8 February

1994, it was down to 5.13 percent. Clearly, very large swings in Bank Rate, in excess of the
4.5 or 5.5 percent 'safety margin' associated with a 2.5 percent inflation target and a 2.0 to 3.0

percent long real interest rate, have occurred inthe past.
The emphasis should, however, be on 'in the past'. These very large cuts in Bank Rate

invariably took place from a very high level of rates associated with prior macroeconomic
mismanagement, generally an inflationary surge that threatened to get out of control (or had
indeed done so) or the desperate defence of an overvalued exchange rate peg. Figure 3 shows

the behaviour of Bank Rate, the inflation rate and the sterling-US$ exchange rate for the UK
in the post-World War II period.

Figure 3 here

Neither situation applies today. Nor should it apply again if the political commitment

to low and stable inflation and its institutional expression in an operationally independent
central bank remain intact.

The longer-term historical record can also be viewed as encouraging. The UK got
through the period 1800-1914 without ever landing itself in a liquidity trap. As Figure 4
shows, the average rate of inflation over this 115-year period was slightly negative and the
variability of the inflation rate was high. Figure 5 shows that Bank Rate did not fall below 2
per cent throughout 115 years preceding World-War I.

Figure 4 here

7Jenny Salvage prepared Figures 1 through 5.
The temporary collapse in the external value of the U.S. dollar starting in 1861 is American
Civil War related.

Figure 5 here

There is a marked positive association, over time and across countries, between the
level of the inflation rate and its variability (see Okun [1971, 1975], Taylor [1981], Ball and

Cecchetti [19901). If such a relationship were to be found also between the level of short

nominal rates and their variability or volatility, it would further reduce the likelihood of
ending up in a liquidity trap in an environment with sustained low inflation and therefore, on
average, with low nominal interest rates.

As will become apparent, the available statistical evidence on the association between

the level and volatility of short-term nominal interest rates is mixed. It is indeed very
difficult to offer a convincing test of our prior belief, that it is hard to conceive of situations in

which the zero nominal interest rate floor would become a binding constraint on monetary
policy in the UK, with the current symmetric annual inflation target of 2.5 percent.

In principle, one could try to test this hypothesis by estimating a dynamic stochastic
process for the short nominal interest rate, using either time series or Markov chain

models.

If one were brave enough to make distributional assumptions about the disturbances in this
below
process, it would be possible to calculate the odds on the short nominal rate falling

in this
zero, given the starting values of the process. We do indeed make some attempts
direction, but our efforts must be accompanied by a clear health warning.

There is an obvious, and in our view virtually insurmountable, problem with any
assessment, based on historical data, of the odds that the non-negativity constraint on short
nominal rates will become binding. During the sample, markets undoubtedly were operating
under the assumption that short nominal rates could neverfall below zero. In the UK over the

past 200 years, the annual Bank Rate series indeed never fell below 2 percent. With the
support of the empirical distribution of nominal short rates truncated from below at zero, the

historical interest rate record is unlikely to be informative about the odds on the economy
getting into a liquidity trap in the future, since this would require a structural break in the

interest rate process, about which the sample is uninformative. If we were to assume
(counterfactually, as can be seen from Figures 7 and 8) that the distribution of Bank Rate or

of the error term in the Bank Rate equation is normal, there will always be a positive
probability that Bank rate will go negative. If we assume instead that the distributions in
question are, say, lognormal, the probability of breaching the zero floor (even asymptotically)

is a-priori constrained to be zero. We try to circumvent this by calculating the asymptotic
confidence bands for Bank Rate reported below from the empirical distribution of the sample

residuals. Since the empirical distribution of the residuals obviously has finite support, this

procedure will, if anything, underestimate the likelihood of the economy ending up in a
liquidity trap.

Even ignoring the unavoidable small-sample problems, this procedure is vulnerable to

the following criticism. What we are interested in estimating is the probability that the
interest rate would have had to be negative (or below the possibly positive liquidity trap
level) in order to avoid the economy getting into a liquidity trap equilibrium. If the economy

had been in a liquidity trap in the sample, the data would reflect the liquidity trap
configuration of the economy, including the response of real activity and inflation that
supported the liquidity trap floor as an equilibrium. Information on the 'deep' structural

parameters of the model (the invariant parameters governing money demand and its
determinants) is necessary to recover the 'first passage' probabilities into the liquidity trap
region of the economy.

What do the data tell us about the statistical association between the level and
volatility of the short nominal interest rate? The very high-frequency association between
short nominal sterling rates and a measure of volatility derived from short sterling futures
over the period 1987-1999 is shown in Figure 6. The association between the level of short
sterling and its volatility is, if anything, weakly negative.

Figure 6 here

The slightly lower frequency time-series evidence on the association between the
level of short nominal interest rate and a statistical measure of its variability using weekly
data is also mixed. Table 1 shows the time series record for the UK for the period 1997-1999.

Table 1 here

For the whole period 1975-1999, volatility and level of the three month interbank rate
are positively contemporaneously correlated, but for the post-inflation targeting period 1993-

1999, the correlation is slightly negative. The statistical model that generated the conditional

variance measure used in Table 1 can be found in Appendix 2. We also provide an estimate
of the steady state (long-run) value of the three month interbank rate implied by the statistical
model, together with 95% steady state confidence bands for three month interbank rate.

We also investigated the statistical properties of Bank Rate at significantly lower
frequencies, using a 200 year time series of annual observations. Our time series model
(described in Appendix 2) implies a strong positive correlation (0.81) between the level of
Base Rate and its contemporaneous conditional variance. Table 2 plots the level of Base Rate

and our estimates of its conditional variance. We also provide an estimate of the steady state
(long-run) value of Base rate implied by the statistical model, togetherwith 95% steady state
confidence bands for Base Rate.

Table 2 here

The confidence bands were calculated using the distribution of the estimated sample
residuals. Not surprisingly, the distribution of sample residuals is distinctly non-normal. The

same holds for Base rate itself. Figure 7 shows the frequency distribution of Base Rate and
Figures 8 and 9 those of the estimated interest rate residuals. The sample distribution of Bank

Rate is significantly skewed to the right. Its empirical distribution is truncated from below at

2.0 percent. The distribution of the sample residuals from the two main interest rate models
is rather more symmetric.

Figure 7 here

Figure 8 here

Figure 9 here

Krugman 1998d] has suggested that deflation (negative inflation) makes a liquidity

trap more likely. This is indeed an implication ofjust about any model of liquidity traps,
including the model we develop in Section IV of this paper. We therefore estimate a simple
time series process for annual RPI inflation over the 200 year period, and for its conditional

variance. The results are reported in Table 3, together with its estimated steady state value
and steady state 95% confidence intervals. The statistical inflation model is described in
Appendix 2. Surprisingly, the contemporaneous correlation between inflation and its
conditional variance turns out to be negative.

Table 3 here

The steady state confidence intervals for the annual rate of RPI inflation show that

there is quite a large probability of deflation. Before one gets too worried about this, three

points should be kept in mind. First, the relationship between interest rates and expected
inflation depends on the behaviour of the inflation risk premium. Second, the UK
experienced negative trend inflation and short bouts of sharp deflation in the 19th century,

without landing itself in a liquidity trap. Third, the monetary policy target in the UK is, since
June 1997, a symmetric inflation target. Deviations of inflation below the 2.5 percent target
are to be avoided as much as deviations above that target. The risk of sharp deflation is

therefore diminished. The new monetary regime has been in operation for too short a period,
however, for this to show up as a structural break in the inflation time series process.
McKinnon and Ohno [1999] have argued that, at any rate in the Japanese case, a large
expected appreciation of the currency could create a liquidity trap. We investigated the
likelihood of a sharp appreciation of sterling by using almost 200 years of £I$ exchange rate
data to estimate a simple stochastic process for the proportional rate of depreciation of the

exchange rate and its conditional variance. The results are reported in Table 4, together with
the expected long-run sterling depreciation rate and the 95% asymptotic confidence intervals.

The statistical model underlying these calculations is described in Appendix 2. The

contemporaneous correlation between exchange rate depreciation and its conditional variance

is low but negative.

Table 4 here

It suggests that, based on this particular statistical model, there is quite a significant
probability of a sizeable appreciation of sterling. Again, the caveat about the dangers of

ignoring risk premia applies. It is surprising that our simple statistical model appears to
handle such episodes as the American Civil War, two World Wars and the Great Depression

of the Thirties quite well.

Finally, Table 5 reports cross-sectional evidence on the relationship between the level

of short nominal rates and their volatility based on a sample of .59 countries between 1989
and 1998. The source of the data is IFS.9 The correlation between the two variables is very
high at 0.89, suggesting that across countries high short-term nominal rates are accompanied
by high unconditional variances.

Table 5 here

On balance, the data fail to offer convincing support either for or against the
contention that a regime of low short nominal interest rates is likely to be a regime of stable

short nominal interest rates.

This is therefore not unambiguously good news, nor

unambiguously bad news for a policy maker targeting low inflation, although the current UK

target would seem to provide quite handsome room for monetary manoeuvre. Two hundred
would like to thank Nick Hanchard for preparing this Table.

years of UK monetary history also favour the contention that liquidity traps are unlikely to
become a policy concern.

(III) Options for avoiding a liquidity trap
The lower the inflation target, and, if it is credible, the lower the underlying rate of
inflation, the narrower is the 'safe range' above the zero floor for the short nominal rate. A
credible target of zero inflation, would, with the long real rate at 2.0 to 3.0 percent, reduce the
safe range to 2.0 to 3.0 percent.

Does this mean that targeting zero inflation would be a high-risk strategy? There
would be risks if, despite a credible commitment to zero inflation, the economy is likelyto be

hit by shocks that would make interest rate cuts of more than 200 or 300 basis points
desirable. If fiscal policy cannot be used to escape from the liquidity trap and if the risk of
ending up in a trap is considered unacceptable, two options remain.

Raising the inflation target
The first option is to accept the nominal interest rate floor as immutable, and to target

a rate of inflation high enough to reduce to acceptable levels the risk of hitting the zero

interest floor. This would have to be done before the country gets into a liquidity trap.
Targeting a higher rate of inflation after you are caught in the trap would be like pushing
toothpaste back into the tube. All one can do is hope and wait for fiscal policy, or some other
shock to aggregate demand, to boost the economy out of the trap.

Lowering the nominal interest rate floor: stamping money a Ia Gesell

The only other option is to stick to the inflation target but to lower the floor on the
nominal interest rate. A floor below zero would reduce the likelihood that the floor would
ever become a binding constraint on policy. In addition, the option of further lowering the
floor, would provide a mechanism for escaping from a liquidity trap even after a country had
been caught in it.
That nominal interest rate floor at zero is not a God-given immovable barrier. It is the

result of a policy choice -

the

decision by governments or central banks to set the

administered nominal interest rate on coin and currency at zero, rather than at some other
(negative) level. Coin and currency are government bearer bonds'°. A bearer bond is a debt

° Bearer securities are securities for which ownership is established by possession, without

any need for registering title, Thus, a bearer bond is a bond with no owner information
attached to it. The legal presumption is that the bearer is the owner. If the issuer of the bond
is credit-worthy, they are almost as liquid and transferable as cash. Cash (coin and currency)
is a special case of a zero interest (or zero-coupon) bearer bond issued by the state (generally
through the central bank). Currency can be viewed as a zero coupon bearer consol or bearer
perpetuity, since it can be interpreted as having aninfinite maturity.. (It is always amusing
to ask a finance expert to price a zero coupon perpetuity in a world where positive coupon
perpetuities co-exist). In Appendix 1, we argue that it may be more informative to view
currency as a zero couponjinite maturity bearer bond, which is issued and redeemed at par,
with redemption taking the form of the one-for-one exchange of old currency for new
currency which is indistinguishable from the old currency.
The vast majority of 'international bonds', historically called 'eurobonds' are bearer. Bearer
bonds can take two main forms. First, the traditional 'definitive' style,where the bonds
literally are individual pieces of security-printed paper in denominations of, say, $10,000,
which individual holders bring in to paying agents so as to receive payment of interest and
principals. Second, 'global' bonds, which are technically bearer instruments but consist of a
single piece of paper representing the entire issue (and so worth hundreds of millions or even
billions of dollars). In practice, the terms of the global bond say that only Euroclear (the
settlement system based in Brussels) or Cedelbank (the settlement system based in
Luxembourg) are entitled to the proceeds of the global bond, and that Euroclear and
Cedelbank will in turn divide the proceeds up amongst the end-investors whose details are
stored in their electronic records. Thus the global bond is not an instrument which in practice
can be passed from one owner to another, even though it is technically 'bearer'. Effectively
the bonds are dematerialised.
Bearer bonds are legal and quite common in the UK. Whilethe bearer debenture went out of
use, replaced by the non-negotiable debenture or debenture stock, transferable (in the same

security in paper form whose ownership is transferred by delivery rather than by written
notice and amendment to the register of ownership. We shall refer to all bonds that are not

bearer bonds as registered bonds. Bearer bonds are negotiable, just as e.g. money market
instruments such as Treasury Bills, bank certificates of deposit, and bills of exchange are

negotiable. A financial instrument is negotiable if it is transferable from one person to

another by being delivered with or without endorsement so that the title passes to the
transferee.1' Coin and currency therefore are bearer bonds. They are obligations of the
government, made payable not to a named individual or other legal entity, but to whoever

happens to present it for payment - the bearer. Coin and currency have three further
distinguishing properties: they are government bearer bonds with infinite maturities
(perpetuities or consols)'2; their coupon payments (which define the own (or nominal) rate of

way as common stocks) by entry in the company's register, a number of new negotiable
investment securities have evolved. They include the modern bearer bond, the negotiable
certificate of deposit, and the floating rate note. A limited number of guts have also been
issued with a bearer option.
Before July 1983, municipal securities in the U.S. were issued for the most part in certificate
form with coupons attached. Some of these so-called old-style bearerbonds are still available
in the marketplace. The issuer has no record of who owns these bonds. The owner clips the
coupons and collects the interest from the issuer's paying agent. Transferring the bonds
requires physical delivery and payment. Bearer bonds issued by municipal authorities were
made illegal in the U.S. in 1982 (no doubt because they provided ideal investments for those
who did not welcome close examination of their financial position). Bearer bonds with a
negative interest rate are especially awkward to administer, because inducing the bearer to
present the issuer with coupons obliging the bearer to make a payment to the issuer presents
non-trivial enforcement problems. This creates the need for mechanisms such asthe
compulsory conversion of old cash into new cash (on terms implying a negativenominal
interest rate), backed by the credible threat of confiscation of the old cash, asdiscussed in the
body of the paper.
II
Key elements of negotiability include the following: (1) transfer by physical delivery; (2)
transfer is such as to confer upon its holder unchallengeable title and (3) a negotiable
instrument benefits from a number of evidential and procedural advantagesin the event of a
court action.
2
see Foonote 9 and Appendix one on a different interpretation.

interest on coin and currency) are zero, and they are legal tender (they cannot be refused in
final settlement of any obligation).

There are two reasons why interest is not paid on currency.

13

The first and currently

less important one, has to do with the attractions of seigniorage (issuing non-interest-bearing

monetary liabilities) as a source of government revenue in a historical environment of
positive short nominal rates on non-monetary governmentdebt.'4
The second, and more important, reason why no interest is paid on coin and currency,
are the practical, administrative difficulties of paying a negative interest rate on bearer bonds.
It can be done, but it cannot be done elegantly. Significant 'shoe leather' costs are involved.

There is no practical or administrative barrier to paying negative nominal
interest rates (market-determined or administered) on those private financial instruments or

on government interest-bearing securities that are not bearer bonds but have registered
owners.'5 The reason is that, for registered securities, whether issued by private or public
agents, the identities of both the issuer and the holder (the debtor and the creditor) are easily
established. This makes it easy to verify whether interest due has been paid and received, be
it at a positive or at a negative rate. Thus the non-bearer bond part of the monetary base, that
is, banks' balances with the central bank, could earn a negative nominal interest rate without
any technical problems. For these balances, the debtor (the central bank) and the creditor (the

13

here on, 'currency' will be taken to include both coin and currency. There obviously

are more severe technical problems with attaching coupons or stamps to coin than to currency
notes.
14140f course, issuing negative interest-bearing monetary liabilities would be even more
attractive, from a seigniorage point of view.
'5The only exception is that it would not be possible to have a consol or perpetuity with a
negative nominal interest rate. Assume the constant nominal coupon payment of the consol is
positive. If the infinite sequence of short nominal rates is negative, the value of the consol
would be unbounded positive. A negative coupon would yield an unbounded negative value
for the consol.

commercial bank) are easily identified.

Positive interest payments or negative interest

payments just involve simple book-keeping transactions, debit or credit, between known
parties.

We will highlight the technical, administrative problem with paying negative interest

on bearer bonds (be they private or public) is by considering the problems of paying a
negative coupon on the bearer bond part of the central bank's monetary liabilities, coin and

currency. While the identity of the issuer (the debtor, that is the Central Bank) is easily
verified, the identity of the holder (the creditor) is not. There is no obligation to register title

to currency in order to establish ownership. Possession effectively provides complete title.
This creates problems for paying any non-zero interest rate, because it is difficult to verify

whether a particular note or coin has already been credited or debited with interest. With
verifiability of interest payments, currency could be turned into an interest-bearing bearer
bond, and the interest rate could be negative (or positive), if circumstances required this.

The problem of verifying whether interest due on bearer bonds has been paid is
present, in a milder form, even when the interest rate is positive. However, the problem of
getting the (anonymous) owner of the currency to come forward to claim his positive coupon

receipt from the government is much less acute than the problem of getting the (anonymous)
owner to come forward to make a payment to the government. In both cases, however, each
individual monetary claim has to be marked, or identified clearly, as being 'current', that is, as

having all interest due paid or received. Without such clear marking, positive interest-bearing

money could be presented repeatedly for interest payment. Historically, the problem of
paying positive coupons on bearer bonds was solved by attaching coupons or stamps to the

title certificate of the bearer bond. When claiming his periodic coupon payment, the

appropriate coupon was physically removed ('clipped') from the title certificate and retained
by the issuer. Clipping coupons used to be a popular pastime among investors.'6

Without further amendment, the 'coupon clipping' or stamping route would not work

for bearer bonds with negative coupons. The enforcement problems involved in getting the
unregistered, anonymous holders of the negative coupon bearer bonds to come forward to pay

the issuer would be insurmountable. The only practical way around this problem, is to make

the bearer bond subject to an expiration date and a conversion procedure. In the case of
currency, this could be achieved by periodically attaching coupons or stamps to currency,
without which the currency would cease to be 'current'.

For currency to cease to be 'current', it is not enough for the monetary authority to
cease to
declare that after a certain date, tj, currency issued before another date to < tj shall
be legal tender. Being legal tender certainly enhances the attractiveness of currency as a store

of value, medium of exchange and means of payment, but these advantages need not be
enough to induce holders of 'old' currency, which is about to lose its legal tender status, to

come forward and exchange it, at a price, for 'new' currency which does have legal tender
status. What serves as medium of exchange and means of payment is socially determined.
Being legal tender is but one among many considerations that induce people to use certain
classes of objects as means of payment and medium of exchange. For currency to cease to be

current, it effectively has to be subject to confiscation if the appropriate coupon or stamp has
not been attached. In other words, there have to be periodic 'monetary reforms'7.

There is a long tradition on the crankier fringes of the economics profession of
proposals for taxing money or taxing liquidity, which is another way of describing negative
attaching the coupons to the ownership certificate would not work for consols
(perpetuities), as certificates of infinite size would be awkward stores of value.
16

interest-bearing currency. Many of these proposals were part of wider, and generally harebrained, schemes for curing the world's economic and social ills. The mechanics of taxing
currency are straightforward main-stream economics, however.

The best-known proponent of taxing currency was probably Silvio Gesell (18621930), a GermanlArgentineafl businessman and economic scribbler of suspect political
judgement, but admired by Keynes, who wrote of him "I believe that the future will learn

more from the spirit of Gesell than from that of Marx" (Keynes [1936, p. 355]). Gesell
wanted to stimulate the circulation of money by getting the state to issue money that, like

capital assets, depreciated in value.'8 If inflation could not be relied upon to do the job of
making holding money unattractive, an alternative was "Stamp Scrip" - dated bills that would

lose a certain percentage of value each year unless new stamps were put on them. Stamp
Scrip was actually issued briefly during the Great Depression of the Thirties in parts of the
Canadian province of Alberta by the Social Credit provincial governmentof the day. '

The

scheme was a resounding failure, not least because the provincial government in the end
of negative interest
Appendix 1 contains a slightly more formal discussion of the payment
on currency.
of or escape from
18
Gesell's motivation was not, as far as we can determine, the avoidance
liquidity traps. His aim was to eliminate the interest component of costs and prices
completely from the economic system, not just in the extreme circumstances of the liquidity
trap, but as a permanent feature. Our reading of his works suggest that he was a bit vague
about the distinction between real and nominal interest rates. While, by stamping currency,
the nominal interest rate on non-monetary assets can indeed be brought down to zero (or to
any other level), the endogeneity of the rate of inflation means that the ability of the monetary
authorities to influence the long-run real interest rate is much more doubtful. The formal
model analysed in Section IV of this paper has the property that the monetary authorities
cannot influence the long-run real interest rate.
In August 1935 the first social credit government was elected in the Canadian province of
Alberta. While its ideology owed more to the writings of two other great economic cranks,
Alfred Richard Orage [1917] and Major Clifford Hugh Douglas [1919] (and to the personal
involvement of the latter as economic adviser to the provincial government), the Alberta
Prosperity Certificates introduced in 1936 by Premier William Aberhart, were pure Gesell.
Similar in appearance to a dollar bill, the certificates required a weekly endorsement of a 2c
17

refused to accept its own scrip in payment.2° Similar local currency experiments were tried in

Worgi, Austria during the 1930s.

Thus, for negative interest on bearer bonds such as currency to be enforceable, the
bearer bond has to expire after a certain date. The desired (negative or positive) interest rate
on currency would be determined by the terms on which the old, expiring currency could be

exchanged with the central bank for new currency. The 'conversion' could be effected by

stamping the old currency, or by issuing completely new currency which was verifiably
distinct from the old currency.

Taxing currency (or paying negative interest on currency) through expiration of old
currency and conversion into new currency can be visualised as follows. After the expiration

date, tj , the issuer (the central bank) or its agents can confiscate the

old currency without

compensation.2' Provided the forces of the law are strong enough, this could induce holders

of the old currency to convert it, at a price, on or before the expiration date, rather than
continue to use it in transactions or as a store of value after the expiration date and risk having

it confiscated. At fixed intervals of length & (Gesell periods, say) whose duration could, for
convenience, be set at a year (or several years, in order to reduce conversion costs), and on a

specific day, (Gesell day), old currency would legally revert to the issuer (the central bank).
After Gesell day, the old currency has no value (because of the credible threat of confiscation)

stamp, amounting to a 104 percent annual capital levy (see Hutchinson and Burkitt [1997]
and Mallory [1954]).
201t also had failed to convince the Federal government in Ottawa to match its negative
interest rates. Since Federal currency was at least as useful as a means of payment, this
would require to scrip to trade at a discount with respect to the Federal currency and to
appreciate vis-à-vis the federal currency at a rate that compensated for the interest differential
between Federal and provincial currency.
21Less drastic penalties might work also. For instance, old moneyfound in circulation after
its 'expiry' date would be forcibly converted into new money at the rate offered on the
conversion date, but subject to an additional penalty. The confiscation scenario makes the
key point very clearly, however.

and will not be used in transactions or as a store of value. On Gesell day, 1 £ worth of new
currency would be issued in exchange

for et £s worth of old currency, where 1M would be

the policy-determined (instantaneous) nominal interest rate on currency.22 For simplicity, we

assume iMto be constant, although it could be time-varying. The nominal rate of interest on

currency would be administratively determined, that is, set by the central bank. To avoid
long queues at the central bank's conversion offices on Gesell days, earlier exchanges of old

for new money might be allowed at the rate of 1 £ worth of the new currency for

Jti'ls
"

£s worth of the old currency, where tj is the date of the next Gesell day, te

t1

is the time before the next Gesell day on which the old currency is exchanged for the new,
and i is the instantaneous nominal interest rate on the government's non-monetary liabilities.

For currency to remain rate-of-return-dominated as a store of value, it is necessary that
1M

<j• Both rates could be negative, and may have to be, if liquidity traps are to be ruled

out. Coin and currency would effectively become time-limited, finite maturity financial
claims.

New currency could, in principle, be used in transactions before midnight on the
Gesell day before they are formally introduced. During this earlier Gesell period, the value of

the old currency in terms of the co-existing new currency would decline steadily. The

relative value of the old currency in terms of the new currency would change at an
and the
instantaneous rate M , so as to ensure that, at the moment the old currency expires
new currency comes in officially (at midnight on Gesell day), there is no discrete jump in the

22

e'' — I would be the effective (Gesell) period tax rate on currency. The instantaneous tax

rate would be —IM.

value of old money in terms of new money, or of goods and services in terms of money.23 It

follows that, during the period of coexistence of old and new money, the rate of inflation of
the prices of goods and services would be higher in terms of old money than for in terms of

money, with the excess of the old money inflation rate over the new money inflation rate
equal to -M• If the coexistence of two currencies is thought to be confusing, one could try to
enforce a ban on the use of new currency in transactions before its Gesell day.

Clearly there are costs associated with such a scheme, even if one can come up with a

slightly higher-tech (and tamper-proof) alternative to physically stamping currency. These

shoe leather costs have to be set against the benefits of removing the zero floor on the
nominal interest rate.

There are costs (and benefits) other than shoe-leather costs associated with taxing

currency. Taxing currency would be regressive, since only the relatively poor hold a
significant fraction of their wealth in currency. Taxing currency would, however, have the
nice feature of constituting a tax on the grey, black and outright criminal economies, which
are heavily cash-based.

(IV) A Simple Model of the Escape from a Liquidity Trap

Through Gesell Money
We model a simple, closed endowment economy with a single perishable commoditythat can
be consumed privately or publicly.

Households

23

This is just like the ex-dividend price of a share of common stock being equal, on the day

the dividend is paid, to the dividend-inclusive price of the stock minus the dividend. In our
example, the dividend would be negative

A representative infinite-lived, competitive consumer maximises for all I 0 the

utility functional given in (1) subject to his instantaneous budget identity (2), solvency
constraint (3) and his initial financial wealth. We use the simplest money-in-the-directutility-function approach to motivate a demand for money despite it being dominated as a

store of value. We define the following notation; c is real private consumption, y is real
output, r is real (lump-sum taxes), Mis the nominal stock of base money (currency), B is the
nominal stock of zero maturity non-monetary debt, i is the instantaneous risk-free nominal
interest rate on non-monetary debt, M is the instantaneous risk-free nominal interest rate on
money, p is the price level in terms of money, a is the real stock of private financial wealth, m
is the stock of real currency and b the stock of real non-monetary debt.

+

l+i

'1+i

lnm(v)]dv

(1)

!?+Ep(y_r—c)+iB+iMM
(2)
c 0; M 0

lim e51 u{M() + B(v)] 0
M(0) + B(0) = A(o)

(3)
(4)

Using

a

M+B
P

(5)

the household budget identity (2) can be rewritten as follows

âra+y_r_c+(iM_i)m

(6)

where r, the instantaneous real rate of interest on non-monetary assets, is defined as
(7)

r—i—7i

and r

is the instantaneous rate of inflation.

p
The household solvency constraint can now be rewritten as

urn

v —p

Co

ejt:tta(v) 0

(8)

and the intertemporal budget constraint for the household sector can be rewritten as:

Co

St e

JVr(u)du

-

{c(v) + r(v) + [z(v) 1M

(v)]m(v) -

y(v)]dv

a(t)

(9)

The first-order conditions for an optimum imply that the solvency constraint will hold

with equality. Also,
(10)
and for

m=1 '

(11)

II' <lM currency would dominate non-monetary financial assets ('bonds') as a
store of value. Households would wish to take infinite long positions in money, financed by

infinite short positions in non-monetary securities. The rate of return onthe portfolio would
be infinite. This cannot be an equilibrium.
=

currency and bonds are perfect substitutes as stores of value. Because of the

direct utility of money, the equilibrium will be the Friedman equilibrium, characterised by

satiation in money. With the logarithmic utility function, satiation occurs only when the
stock of money is infinite (relative to the finite consumption level). Providedthe authorities

provide government money and absorb private bonds in the right (infinite) amounts, this can
be an equilibrium.

There is a continuum of identical consumers whose aggregate measure is normalised

to 1. The individual relationships derived in this section therefore also characterise the
aggregate behaviour of the consumers.

Government
The budget identity of the consolidated general government and centralbank is given

in (12). The level of real public consumption is denoted g 0.
(12)

If+3=—_iB+iM+p(g—r)

Again, the initial nominal value of the government's financial liabilities is
predetermined
M(0) + B(0) = A(0)
This budget identity can be rewritten as
(13)

aEra+g_r+(i—i)m
The government solvency constraint is

lim e

_5(u)dua(v)

0

(14)

Equations (13) and (14) imply the intertemporal government budget constraint:

$ eJT'[v(v) + [i(v)

—

M (v)]m(v)

—

g(v)]dv

a(t)

(15)

Government consumption spending is exogenous. To ensure that public consumption

spending does not exceed total available resources, > 0, we therefore have to impose

gzy
With a representative consumer, this model will exhibit debt neutrality or Ricardian
equivalence. Without loss of generality, we therefore assume that the government's solvency

constraint is always satisfied because lump-sum taxes are continuously adjusted to keep the
nominal stock of public debt (monetary and non-monetary) constant, A(t) = 0, t 0, that is,

—g+ia+(if —i)m

=g+i

(16)

A(O)

p

Monetary policy is specified as an exogenous value for the nominal interest rate on
currency and either an exogenous value for the short nominal interest rate on non-monetary
financial claims or an exogenous value of the initial nominal money stock and a subsequent

exogenous growth rate of the nominal money stock. In either case, the short nominal bond
rate is required to be no lower than the short nominal rate on currency.
Thus, monetary policy is characterised by

1M =

(17)

l—lM

(18)

and either

or

M(0)= M(o)>o

!1(t) =
M(t)

(t),

t 0

(19)

i(t)iM,
I will only consider in detail the case where the short nominal bond rate is the
instrument. The case where the nominal money stock path is the instrument only involves
trivial amendments to the earlier analysis.

Equilibrium and the liquidity trap with full employment

In the full-employment, flexible price version of the model, output always equals the
Therefore

exogenously given level of capacity output,

(20)

c+g=y=y
The equilibrium instantaneous real interest rate is given by

cy cg
For simplicity, let g =

0.

(21)

Let the exogenous growth rate of capacity output be denoted

n(t) -. It follows that the equilibrium instantaneous real rate of interest simplifies to
y

r(t) = S + n(t)

(22)

The remaining equilibrium conditions can be summarised as follows

i(t) = r(t) + ,r(t)

(23)

lr(t)

(24)

p(t)

M(t) _________
P(t) :(t)—zM)

i(t)iM

(25)

(26)

Note from (22) and (23), that

i(t) = 8+n(t)+r(t)

(27)

When the short nominal bond rate is exogenous (equation (18)), the model exhibits
price level indeterminacy. Since the behaviour of real money balances, the inflation rate and

the nominal and real interest rates are not affected by this, and since the conditions under

which a liquidity trap occurs or its consequences are not affected by the nominal
indeterminacy, no further attention is paid to this issue.

In the flexible price level version of the model, the equilibrium real interest rate and
real private consumption sequences are the same when the economy is in a liquidity trap as

when it isn't. The liquidity trap matters here only because is may stop the economy from

achieving an inflation target. Of course, in the model under consideration, the welfare
motivation for an inflation target is not obvious. Pareto-efficiency requires that the economy

be satiated with real money balances, that is, that i =M

All Pareto-efficient equilibria are

therefore liquidity trap equilibria.

Whatever the motivation for the inflation target, it is clear that a liquidity trap may

prevent the authorities from achieving the target. Let r * be the target rate of inflation,
assumed constant.
From (26) and (27), it follows that an inflation target cannot be achieved if
(28)
Since 8>0, a non-negative inflation target can be achieved, even with the nominal

interest rate on currency at zero, unless the growth rate of capacity output were sufficiently

negative. This hardly seems a serious concern. Nevertheless, equation (28) makes it clear,
that an inflation target is always achievable, if the authorities set the nominal interest rate on

currency, M' at a sufficiently low (negative) value. Note that by setting =

i

= 8+ n +

r

the authorities can follow the Friedman rule for Pareto-efficiency (satiation in real money
balances) and achieve the inflation target at the same time.

The analysis is not affected in any material way when the initial value and subsequent

growth rates of the nominal money stock are the monetary policy instrument and the short
nominal bond rate becomes endogenous. This is most easily seen when both the growth rate

of capacity output and the growth rate of the nominal money stock are constant at ff and
respectively.

Under this monetary rule, the inflation rate is given by

if 8+pi
if ö+Ji<LM

—lM(S+fl)

It follows that an inflation target below 1M — (8 + n) cannot be achieved. It also
follows that by setting a sufficiently negative nominal interest rate on currency, any inflation
target can be achieved.

The liquidity trap in the Keynesian variant
In the Keynesian variant, output is demand-determined, the price level and the rate of
inflation are assumed to be predetermined, and the rate of inflation adjusts to the gap between
actual and capacity output through the simplest kind of accelerationist Phillips curve.

c+g=y

(29)

fr=fl(y-)
(30)

p8>0
For simplicity, we assume capacity output to be exogenous and constant.

Monetary policy

The monetary authorities are again assumed to peg the nominal interest rate on
currency exogenously

=
We assume in what follows that the other monetary instrument is the short nominal

interest rate on bonds, rather than the level or the growth rate of the nominal money stock.
There are two reasons for this. First, it simplifies the exposition. Second, it is how monetary
policy is actually conducted.

The monetary authorities are assumed to follow a simplified Taylor rule for the short
nominal interest rate on non-monetary financial claims, as long as this does not put the short

nominal bond rate below the interest rate on currency. A standard Taylor rule for the short

nominal bond rate which restricts the short nominal bond rate not to be below the short
nominal rate on currency, would be

i=1+yr+y if i+yr+i 1M
if i+pr+y <IM
For our purposes, all that matters is the responsiveness of the short bond rate to the

inflation rate. We therefore omit feedback from the level of real GDP (or from the output
gap) in what follows. The short nominal interest rate rule therefore simplifies to

i=:+7r if :+77rZM
1M

if

(31)

l+721<ZM

The Taylor rule is sometimes justified as a simple, ad-hoc rule consistent with
inflation targeting. If the target rate of inflation is constant at r * (and equal to the steady-

state rate of inflation), the intercept in the Taylor rule, I ,

can

be given the following

interpretation

1=8+(1_y),r*

(32)

This implies

(33a)
or

(33b)

The behaviour of the economy can be summarised in two first-order differential
equations in the non-predetermined state variable c and the predetermined state variable r.

The equation governing the behaviour of private consumption growth switches, however,

when the floor on the short nominal interest rate becomes binding (when the economy is in a
liquidity trap).

r—fl(c+g—y)

(34)

if l+YITLM

â={T+(y—1),r—6]c

jf l+72Z<i

={IM—,r—8]c

(35

When the liquidity trap constraint is not binding (we shall refer to this as the 'normal'

case), saddlepoint stability for the dynamic system requires y > 1. A higher rate of inflation
leads, through the policy reaction function, to a larger increase in the short nominal bond rate

so as to raise the short real rate. As shown in Figure 10, the ê = 0 locus in the normal case

(denoted ( = 0) N)' is vertical in a phase diagram with r on the horizontal axis and c on the
= *• 24

vertical axis, at =
1—y

Figure 10 here

In the liquidity trap regime, the ê = 0 locus (denoted (è = O)L )

is vertical at

2r=i —8. With M =0, the locus (è—O)L is to the left of (=0)N. This is the case we
shall be considering as the benchmark henceforth.
—

As long as the rate of inflation exceeds 1M
7

, the short nominal bond rate exceeds

the short nominal interest rate on currency, and the economy is in the normal regime. For
—1

inflation rates at or below 1M
7

24

, the economy is in the liquidity trap regime. The switch

and in what follows we ignore the c = 0 segment of the c isocline.

from the normal to the liquidity trap regime occurs at

=

8

=

y

1] *

We

shall refer to the boundary of the normal and the liquidity trap locus as the LN locus in Figure

10. Taking again as our reference point the situation where M = 0 and noting that 8> 0 and

that y > 1, we need only assume that the target inflation rate r *

is

nonnegative, for the

switching value of r to lie between the two è = 0 loci. This is assumed in Figure 10 and
thereafter. The LN locus could either be to the left or to the right of the caxis.

The steady state of the model is as follows. There are two steady states (the normal
one and the liquidity trap one) for the nominal bond rate and the rate of inflation. The normal
steady state values are given first.

c=—g
r=8
= *

(Normal case)

or

if =

—8

(Liquidity trap)

=

(Normal case)

y—1

or
=

(Liquidity trap)

When y > 1, as we assume throughout, the equilibrium configuration in the
neighbourhood of the normal steady state is a saddlepoint.

The linear approximation of the normal dynamics at c = ë and r =

is

[e1J(r_1)_8 (y_1)1[c—
,8

At the normal steady state, with = — g and

0

j[if_

= 8—i , this reduces to
y—l

11J0 (y_l)(_g)jc—
0
LrLfi

ik-

The determinant of the state matrix is (1—
characteristic roots are

—

g)/3 < 0

if y > 1.

The two

1)( — g).

—

in Figure 10 illustrates the saddlepoint

The normal steady state configuration
property of the normal steady state.

From (34) and the normal version of (35) it follows that the slope of the integral
curves in c — 7r space is given by

dc [I—8+(y—1),r}c

dr

fl(c+g-5)

This can be rewritten as

fl(1+

3)dc={[_5+(_1),r]dr

As this is separable in c and 'r, it can be integrated to yield

2 +k
where k is an arbitrary constant of integration.

Provided (Tb)2 +2(1—y)(k—J3[c+(g—y)lnc])0,
—

the integral curves in the normal case (c> 0, r> 1M

7

=

) are given by:

i_s±f(r_s)2 +2(1—y)(k—J3[c+(g—y)lnc])
1—y

The equilibrium configuration near the liquidity trap steady state

neutral and cyclical (the linearised dynamic system at

in Figure 10) is

has two complex conjugate roots

—

with zero real parts). The integral curves for the liquidity trap case (c > 0, ir 1M

7

) are

given by

2TlM

j(1M

5)2 +2(k—/3{c+(g—y)lnc])

The liquidity trap steady state is a center.25 Some neighbourhood of this steady state is

completely filled by closed integral curves, each containing the steady state in its interior.
Figure 10 also shows the behaviour of the system near the liquidity trap steady state.

At a common level of consumption, the slope of the integral curve in the normal case,
N

dir

L

is the same as the slope of the integral curves in the liquidity trap case

boundary of the two regimes (when

dc

N

—

=

7

dc

d7c,47 dir ,ri±
7

on the

). It is easily checked that

[(—1.
II

L

dir

1-

['7) 7

1

j

18(c+g-)

We want to consider shocks for which the liquidity trap can be sprung, that is, shocks

for which the constraint j i becomes binding. In our model that has to be either a demand
shock or a supply shock that lowers current aggregate demand below current capacity output.

As regards demand shocks, the simplest candidate in our model is the unexpected
announcement, at time t = t0 of a future increase in public spending, g, starting at t1 > t0. For
simplicity, we will treat the expected future increase in public spending as permanent.

An anticipated future increase in public spending is contractionary between the
announcement date (to) and the implementation date (tj) because forward-looking Ricardian
households realise that higher future public spending means a higher present discounted value

of future taxes. Human capital falls and with it private consumption. Because of the Taylor-

style interest rate reaction function, the profile of expected future short real rates is actually

lower with the public spending shock than without. Future after-tax endowments are
therefore discounted at a lower rate, but this is not enough to negate the negative effect on
aggregate demand.26. Essentially the same results obtain when we consider the unexpected
announcement of a lower future path of capacity output. This was the main shock considered

by Krugman [1998d]. Figure 11 represents the behaviour of the system following the public
spending shock.

Figure 11 here

Assume the system starts in steady state at the normal steady state equilibrium c,

with government spending expected to be constant. An unanticipated, immediate, permanent
increase in public spending will result in an immediate transition to the new steady state at
In the new steady state, the rate of inflation, and all real and nominal interest rates are

the same as before. The level of private consumption has fallen by the same amount as the
level of public consumption has increased.

When the increase in public consumption is not immediate, the transition is as
follows. Assume that at the announcement date, to, there is news of a future permanent
increase in public spending, starting at tj

> t. The increase in public spending, when it

occurs, is of the same magnitude as the immediate increase in public spending analysed
25 Anne Sibert provided the mathematical solution and graphical representation for the
behaviour of the system in the liquidity trap zone.
26 If instead of the logarithmic instantaneous utility function we had adopted the constant
elasticity of marginal utility function with an intertemporal substitution elasticity larger than
1, the negative effect on consumption would have been reinforced.

earlier. We shall refer to tj as the implementation date. For a 'moderate' postponement in
the implementation of the public spending increase (defined below), private consumption
drops immediately (on the announcement date to) to

,

say.

The reason again is that a

higher sequence of future taxes is anticipated by the Ricardian consumers, immediately upon

the announcement of the future spending increase. Human capital falls and with it private
consumption, albeit by less that when the public spending increase was immediate. Between

the announcement date, to, and the implementation date, tj , consumption and inflation both
fall gradually as the system moves from

to

, where it arrives at tj when the public

spending increase in actually implemented. From tj on, the system moves along the
convergent saddlepath through the new steady state (f ), from

c

to the new steady state

at '
The initial jump in the level of consumption at t is such as to place the system on that

divergent trajectory, drawn with reference to the initial steady state, that will put it on the
unique continuously convergent trajectory through the new steady state,

, at the moment

the public spending increase is actually implemented (at the implementation date tj). Note

that the rate of inflation is assumed to be predetermined in the Keynesian version of the
model.

A moderate delay in the public spending increase in defined by the requirement that

the intersection of the disequilibrium trajectory drawn with reference to the initial steady
state, and the saddlepath through the new steady state, be at a level of inflation greater than or

equal than the one that triggers the liquidity trap. In Figure 11 this means that the
disequilibrium trajectory passing through

is the trajectory with the longest gap between

the announcement of the future spending increase and its implementation that is consistent

with the system not ending up in the liquidity trap region. This solution trajectory intersects

the convergent saddlepath through f at Q, which corresponds to an inflation rate equal
to

, which separates the normal region from the liquidity trap region.

With any longer postponement of the public spending increase, the initial drop in

consumption would be to, say, c in Figure 11. From there the system would travel along
the divergent trajectory drawn with reference to

that would bring it to

on the LN

locus some time before tj. The system would then switch to the closed orbit, drawn with
reference to

that passes through Q . It would travel in clockwise fashion around this

orbit until tj. Assume that at tj it has arrived at c

. At tj , it would switch (without a

discontinuous jump in either c or ir) to the closed orbit drawn with reference to the new

liquidity trap steady state ( )

that passes

through c

. If this orbit (labelled aco) stays

entirely within the liquidity trap domain (that is, if this orbit does not cross the LN locus) the

system would continue to circumnavigate the new liquidity trap steady state on this closed

orbit. This is the case drawn in Figure 11. If the aw orbit leaves the liquidity trap domain

again, the behaviour of the system becomes very hard to pin down. It is possible that no
equilibrium exists in this case.

In the Keynesian case also, it is clear how a reduction in the nominal interest rate on

currency, M' can help avoid a liquidity trap. A lower value of 1M shifts both the ( = 0)L
locus and the boundary separating the liquidity trap region from the normal region (the LL
locus) to the left. For any shock to demand or supply, it is always possible to find a value of
1M low enough to stop the economy from entering the liquidity trap region.

Furthermore, if the economy were to get caught in the liquidity trap region, an
unexpected permanent reduction in the nominal interest rate on currency could always land it

back in the normal region. Cutting the nominal rate on currency can therefore be cure as well
as prevention.27

(V) Conclusion
The credible targeting of a low rate of inflation should result, on average, in low

nominal interest rates. The administratively determined zero nominal interest rate on
currency sets a floor under the nominal interest rate on non-monetary financial claims. An
important policy issue then is the following: how likely is it that the economy ends up, as a

result of shocks or endogenous fluctuations, in a situation where the zero short nominal
interest floor becomes a binding constraint, that is, how likely is the economy to end up in a
liquidity trap?

If low average nominal interest rates also tend to be stable rates, the risk of ending up

in a liquidity trap need not be enhanced much by targeting a low rate of inflation. The
empirical evidence on the relationship between the level and volatility of short nominal rates

is, however, mixed. The cross-sectional evidence supports a strong positive correlation. The
27 A very similar, but technically more complicated, analysis can be conducted for the case
where the growth rate of the nominal money stock rather than the short nominal bond rate is
the monetary instrument. When the growth rate of nominal money is the exogenous
monetary instrument, the equations of motion of the economic system can be summarised as
follows: When j > , we have the following three-dimensional dynamic system.
c
c
.

i

d(c'\

m
dtm)
=(M +77---—8—7Z•)c

m

-

= /3(c + g j7)

Note that when i = 1M and the economy is stuck in a liquidity trap, the dynamic
system reduces to
—5—ff)c
= /3(c + g

-

time-series evidence for the UK is ambiguous, but if anything is consistent with a weak
negative correlation.

Once an economy lands itself in a liquidity trap, there are just two policy options.

The first is to wait for some positive shock to the excess demand for goods and services,
brought about through expansionary fiscal measures or through exogenous shocks to private

domestic demand or to world demand. The second option is to lower the zero nominal
interest rate floor on currency by taxing currency. A negative interest rate on currency would
also reduce the likelihood of an economy landing itself in a liquidity trap.

The paper revisits a proposal by Gesell for implementing a negative nominal interest
rate on currency. The transactions and administrative costs associated with what amounts to
periodic currency reforms would be non-negligible. Such currency conversion costs could be

reduced by lengthening the interval between conversions, but they would remain significant.
These 'shoe-leather costs' would have to be set against the risk of ending up in a liquidity trap,

if a very low rate of inflation is targeted without taxing currency, or against the cost of
targeting a higher rate of inflation.28 It may take a lot of shoe leather to fill an output gap or

to rub out the distortions of a higher inflation tax. If there are indeed benighted countries

threatened by, or even caught in, a liquidity trap, the policy makers there have one more
option

they

might

wish

to

consider on

its

merits:

Gesell

money.

which is the same as the liquidity trap-constrained dynamics when the short nominal bond
rate was the policy instrument.

28 On

the costs of even low rates of inflation see Feldstein [1997], Tödter and Ziebarth [1997]
and Chadha, Haldane and Janssen [1998]. On the costs and benefits of low inflation see
Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1996]. For a general survey see Fischer [1994].

Appendix 1: Paying Negative Nominal Interest Rates; Some Further
Considerations.
In this section, we ignore uncertainty and time is measured in discrete periods of unit
length.

is the one-period nominal interest rate between periods t and t+1. At time t,

a

security

obliging the issuer to pay the holder (owner) 1 unit of money in period t+i, i = 1,...,N, will be

worth D7 units of period t money. In an efficient market it will be the case that

D'=fl

1

€=1

This pricing formula makes sense, for finite N, as long as

> —1, for all t: the price

of money tomorrow in terms of money today, D,N, or the N-period nominal discount factor,
cannot be negative. The sequence of interest rates can, however be negative. A negative oneperiod interest rate simply means that 1 £ tomorrow is worth more than 1f today: the discount

factor exceeds 1. As N — cc, the infinite sequence of single-period nominal interest rates
cannot all be negative, lest the discount factor become unbounded. A consol or perpetuity
with a constant positive coupon would have an infinite price if the infinite sequence of period
rates were negative.

Assume that a borrower issues, at time t, a security committing him to pay the lender

(the owner or holder of the security) Ct+] 0 units of money in periods t+i, i =

1

N. The

price of the security in period t, V" is
VN

Assume

—D'C+1

the purchase price is paid by the lender in period t. The problem for the

lender now becomes to enforce payment of the coupons, C+1, by the borrower in each of the

N periods after the security is issued. Unless we can rely on borrower honesty, or unless the

lender and borrower are locked into an infinitely repeated lender-borrower relationship, a
necessary condition for performance by the borrower is that the lender knows the identity of

the borrower. The borrower need not know the identity of the lender, because the borrower

has already received all he wants out of the relationship: money up front. To enforce
performance on the contract by the borrower, once the present discounted value to the
borrower of the continuation of the relationship has become negative, the lender must be able
to identify the borrower to a third party enforcement agency (the courts).

Conventional bearer bonds are therefore incentive-compatible. The anonymous
holder of the bearer bond knows the identity of the issuer and it is the issuer who owes money

to the holder of the bearer bond. It is of course key that there is a way to establish whether
coupon payments have in fact been made. With bearer bonds, negotiable instruments that can

change hands freely, the security must be marked unambiguously as 'current' in regard to all
payments due. Without such clear and unambiguous marking, the same bearer bond couldbe

presented again and again for payment by the same or by different anonymous holders.
Clipping coupons off a bearer bond is a time-honoured technology for establishing whether
payments due have indeed been made.

I restrict the discussion to pure fiat currency, which does not have intrinsic value
either as a consumption good or as a capital good. A useful way of viewing currency is as an

IOU of the state that has a one-period maturity, pays no interest, but can be redeemed at par

after one period. Each unit of the 'old' currency is returned to the issuer after one period in
exchange for one unit of 'new' currency which is identical in all respects to the old currency.

In particular, it is impossible to determine whether a given imit of currency is new or old.

Note that this makes one-period currency redeemable at par for indistinguishable new

currency equivalent to a zero coupon bearer perpetuity or consol. The value of one unit of
1

currency as a store of value is therefore, in period t,

+ it,t+l

Currency,

of course, yields further utility services (as a means of payment and

medium of exchange). The value of the flow of non-pecuniary returns in period t (measured

in terms of currency) will be denoted v(M), where M denotes the nominal stock of
currency. The total, pecuniary and non-pecuniary value of an additional unit of currency
issued in period t is therefore

v'(M)+ 1 +

1
1tt+1

Interest-bearing currency involves replacing the assumption that one unit of currency

can be exchanged for 1 unit of identical currency after one period, with the assumption that
one unit of currency can be exchanged for l+Nf units of identical currency after one period.
The value of the interest-bearing currency is therefore

v'(M1)+ 1 +
Clearly, if M 0, money's bearer-bond status remains consistent with incentive-

compatible enforcement of the terms of the contract. The anonymous lender (the holder of
the bearer bond) knows the identity of the borrower (the state through its agent, the central

bank), who owes the lender money. The anonymous party can be relied upon to claim the
positive interest due. The problem of marking currency when interest has been paid will of
course be present, as with all bearer bonds. Coupons will have to be clipped off currency or
currency will have to be stamped.

When the interest rate on money is negative, the anonymous party is also the party
who owes money to the known party. This presents a problem in that the anonymous bearer

may try to avoid paying interest due to the borrower simply by not turning up to have the
currency stamped or have non-detachable coupons attached to it. If private agents continue
among themselves to exchange (and accept in payment) old but unstamped money and new or

stamped money at par, the attempt to pay negative interest on money would be vitiated. The
issuer (the state) has to be able to force the bearer of its currency liabilities to come forward

to pay the 'tax on currency'. Tax enforcement when the tax authorities do not know the
identity of the tax payer is problematic. The only solution is, first, to make currency on
which interest has been paid clearly distinguishable from currency on which interest has not

been paid (by stamping or attaching coupons to it) and second, to penalise those holders of
currency who are in arrears. The simplest penalty would be partial or completeconfiscation
of currency on which interest payments are not current.

Appendix 2: A Time-Series Investigation of the Association Between the
Level and Volatility of the Short Nominal Interest Rate, the Inflation Rate
and the Exchange Rate Depreciation Rate.
(1) UK 3-month interbank rate 1975-1 999.

Let i denote the UK 3-month interbank rate. The time series model estimated for
Table 1 was
— 4-1

=

= a + bi1 +
+ Ut + 9u11,
2

E(e1IW1) = O,E(s, j'P11) =

(A2.1)

2

= w+flo1 +y +&
This time series model includes AR(1) and MA(]) terms in the conditional mean

equation to account for the autocorrelation of standardised

residuals.

It includes

GARCH(1, 1) terms in the conditional variance equation to account for the autocorrelation of
squared standardised residuals, as well as, a linear function of the lagged interest rate level to
capture the potential dependence of the conditional variance on the lagged interest rate level.

Weekly data of the UK 3-month interbank rate from Jan 75 to April 99 were used for
the model estimation. The estimation results using maximum likelihood were:

Table A2.1

Coefficient Std. Error Prob

a

0.047

0.030

0.119

b

—0.0062

0.0038

0.103

p

0.86

0.06

0.000

9

—0.78

0.08

0.000

co

—0.00042

fi

0.975

0.007

0.000

0.022

0.008

0.005

8 0.000069

0.00036 0242

0.000059 0.243

R2 (adjusted) = 0.0 16

Standard errors are estimated using Quasi Maximum Likelihood. The estimates of the
parameters are consistent even if the conditional normality assumption is violated. They can,
however, be inefficient.

The coefficient 8, that determines the dependence of the conditional variance on the
lagged interest rate level is insignificant. Alternative models of the conditional variance that

include higher order powers or higher order lags of the lagged interest rate level, were also
estimated.29 The coefficients of the higher order powers or higher order lags of the interest

rate level were also insignificant. Therefore, the dependence of the conditional variance on
past interest rate levels is weak.

However, the ex-post contemporaneous relationship between the interest rate level i
and the conditional variance o- is strong. In fact the two variables have a correlation of 0.66.

This is mainly because of the large information shocks in 1970's and 1980's when short
interest rates were high. After the introduction of inflation targeting in UK (in late 92) the

29

includes a version replacing the conditional variance equation in (A2.l) by

+ ye + 8i, a specification suggested by Chan, Karolyi, Longstaff
flo
and Sanders [19921.

=w+

relationship between the interest rate level i1 and the conditional variance o is weaker. In
fact they are slightly negatively correlated, with a correlation coefficient of -0.26.

The steady state forecast of the level of the 3-month interbank rate is 7.546. The 95%

confidence intervals are 4.02 and 14.41. The confidence intervals were constructed by
assuming that the standardised steady state forecast follows the in-sample distribution of the

standardised residuals which, of course, has finite support. In particular the assumed
skewness and kurtosis were 0.846 and 10.49 respectively.

Using ln(1 + i1) rather than i as the specification of the interest rate variable in the
regressions did not result in significantly different results.

(2) UK base rate 1800-1998:

Let i denote the UK base rate. The time series model estimated was an EGARCH
model of the form:
i-1 = a + bi_1 + e,,
=
+U+

—

E(eI'P,_1) =0, E(eIP1_1) =

o,

log(o) = +fllog(1)+a--'- +
0.1_i

(A2.2)

0.€i

The coefficients a and y capture the potentially asymmetric impact of last periods
shocks on conditional variance.

The time series model also includes AR(10) and MA(2) terms in the conditional
mean equation to account for the autocorrelation of standardised residuals.

Annual data for the UK base rate from 1800 to 1998 were used for estimation. The
estimation results using maximum likelihood were:

Table A2.2

Coefficient Std. Error Prob

a

0.34

0.11

0.002

b

—0.071

0.023

0.002

p

0.12

0.07

0.099

9

—0.28

0.08

0.000

w

—0.064

0.086

0.45 5

0.29

0.07

0.000

/3

0.91

0.02

0.000

a

0.078

0.102

0.446

R2 (adjusted) = 0.120

Standard errors are estimated using Quasi Maximum Likelihood. The estimates of the

parameters are asymptotically consistent even if the conditional normality assumption is
violated. They can be inefficient, however, in this case.

The EGARCH model was chosen over alternative GARCH models, because its long

run unconditional variance was non-explosive30. The coefficient ' is significant3t, but the
effect is the opposite of the "leverage32" effect, that is, a negative shock has a negative impact
on the conditional variance.

The steady state forecast of the base rate is 4.88. The 95% confidence intervals are 1.02 and

10.1. The confidence intervals were constructed by assuming that the standardised steady
state forecast follows the in-sample distribution of the standardised residuals. In particular the
assumed skewness and kurtosis were 0.49 and 4.197 respectively.

(3) UK annual inflation (RN annual % changes) 1800-1998:
30 An asymmetric component ARCH model had also a non-explosive unconditional variance,
but the convergence was much slower than EGARCH model.
at 95% confidence level.

Let p denote the RPI and ir1 = Pt

—

its annual proportional rate of change. The
Pt-i

time series model estimated was
—

+

a + bit1

= Pit-S P2 t-8'
E(e1IP11) = 0, E(e'P11) =

o,

Q2 =a)+fl(71+ye1
This time series model includes AR(5) and AR(8) terms in the conditional mean

equation to account for the autocorrelation of standardised residuals.

It includes

GARCH(1,1) terms in the conditional variance equation to account for the autocorrelation of
squared standardised residuals.

Annual data of the UK RN annual proportional changes from 1800 to 1998 were used
for the model estimation. The estimation results using maximum likelihood were:
Table A2.3

Coefficient Std. Error Prob

a

0.013

0.006

0.03 1

b

—0.46

0.08 5

0.000

p1

0.15

0.08

0.053

p2

0.24

0.08

0.00 1

w

0.00009

fi

0.81

0.12

0.000

0.16

0.104

0.114

0.000103 0.380

R2 (adjusted) = 0.294

Standard errors are estimated using Quasi Maximum Likelihood. The estimates of the

parameters are asymptotically consistent even if the conditional normality assumption is
violated. They can be inefficient, however, in this case.

32 The "leverage" effect is the negative correlation between current returns and future
volatility, found mainly in stock returns data.

Alternative models of the conditional variance that include inflation rate dependence,
were also estimated. The coefficient of the inflation rate dependence was insignificant.

The steady state forecast of the inflation rate is 2.7%. The 95% confidence intervals

are -10.7% and 21%. The confidence intervals were constructed by assuming that the
standardised steady state forecast follows the in-sample distribution of the standardised
residuals.

In particular the assumed skewness and kurtosis were 0.434 and 5.286

respectively.

(4) £/$ annual changes 1800-1998:

Let s denote the annual spot exchange rate and e =

S1 —

its proportional rate of

St-I

change. The time series model estimated was

e,, = a + br1 +

—

Pf- +U +i9U3,
E(e1I'I'1) =0, E(s1 flP11) =
2

(A2.4)

= w+/1o +ye +&2
This time series model includes AR(2) and MA(3) terms in the conditional mean equation to

account for the autocorrelation of standardised residuals. It includes GARCH(1 , 1) terms in

the conditional variance equation to account for the autocorrelation of squared standardised

residuals, as well as a linear term in the square of the growth rate of the exchange rate to

capture the potential dependence of the conditional variance on the proportional rate of
change of the exchange rate. Annual data on annual percentage changes of the £I$ exchange

rate from 1800 to 1998 were used for the model estimation. The estimation results using
maximum likelihood were:

Table A2.4

Coefficient Std. Error Prob

a

—0.0059

0.0016

0.000

b

—0.75

0.09

0.000

p

—0.18

0.05

0.000

9

—0.25

0.08

0.00 1

o

0.00101

0.00027

0.000

/3

0.10

0.06

0.113

y

—0.13

0.06

0.034

8

0.89

0.32

0.006

R2 (adjusted) = 0.422

The coefficient 8, which measures the dependence of the conditional variance on the
squared proportional exchange rate change is highly significant. The steady state forecast of

the £/$ annual percentage change is -0.8%. The 95% confidence intervals are -10.6% and
4.2%. The confidence intervals were constructed by assuming that the standardised steady
state forecast follows the in-sample distribution of the standardised residuals. In particular
the assumed skewness and kurtosis were 0.864 and 7.57 respectively.

References
Akerlof, G.A., W.T. Dickens and G.L. Perry [19961, "The Macroeconomics of Low
Inflation", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 1-76.

Ball, Laurence and Cecchetti, Stephen G. [1990], "Inflation and Uncertainty at Short and
Long Horizons", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 215-254.

Buiter, Willem H. [1977], "Crowding out and the effectiveness of fiscal policy", Journal of
Public Economics, 7, pp. 309-3 28.

Chadha,Jag, Andrew Haldane and Norbert Janssen [1998], "Shoe-leather costs reconsidered"
Bank of England Working Paper No. 86, October.

Chank, K.C., G.A. Karolyi, F.A. Longstaff and A.B. Sanders [1992], "An Empirical
Comparison of Alternative Models of the Short-Term Interest Rate", Journal of Finance, 47,
pp. 1209-1227.
Douglas, C.H. [1919], Economic Democracy, reprinted Sudbury: Bloomfield, 1974.

Feldstein, Martin [1997], "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price
Stability", in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation
and Strategy, pp. 123-156, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press.

Fischer, S. [1994], "The Costs and Benefits of Disinflation", in J.A.H. de Beaufort
Wijnholds, S.C.W. Eijffinger and L.H. Hoogduin (eds.), A Framework for Monetary
Stability, pp. 3 1-42, Dordrecht, Kiuwer Academic Publishers.

Gesell, Silvio [1949], Die Natuerliche Wirtschafisordnung, Rudolf Zitzman Verlag, available
in English as The Natural Economic Order, Peter Owen Ltd, London, 1958.

Hicks, John R. [1936], "Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics': A Suggested Interpretation",
Econometrica. Reprinted in J.R. Hicks, Critical Essays in Monetary Theory, Oxford
University Press, 1967.

Hutchinson, Frances and Brain Burkitt [1997], The Political Economy of Social Credit and
Guild Socialism, Routledge Studies in the History of Economics, Routledge, London and
New York.

Ito, Takatoshi [1998], "Japan and the Asian Financial Crisis: The Role of Financial
Supervision in Restoring Growth"; paper presented at a conference on "The Japanese
Financial System", New York: Columbia University, October.

Keynes, John Maynard [1936], The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
reprinted Macmillan St. Martin's Press, 1973.
Krugman, Paul [1998a], "Japan's trap", mimeo, May.

Krugman, Paul [1998b] "Further notes on Japan's liquidity trap", mimeo, June
Krugman, Paul [1998c] "Japan: still trapped", mimeo, November.

Krugman, Paul [1998d], "It's baaack! Japan's slump and the return of the liquidity trap",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 137-205.

Krugman, Paul [1999], "Inflation targeting in a liquidity trap: the law of the excluded
middle", mimeo Februaiy 1999

Mallory, J.R. [1954], Social Credit and the Federal Power in Canada, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.

McKinnon, Ronald and Kenichi Ohno [1999], "The Foreign Exchange Origins of Japan's
Economic Slump in the 1990s: The Interest Rate Trap", Mimeo, Bank of England, March.
Meltzer, Allan H. [1999],"The Transmission Process", mimeo, March.

Okun, Arthur M. [1971], "The Mirage of Steady Inflation", Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, No 2, pp. 485-498.
Okun, Arthur M. [1975], "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs", Brookings Papers on
EconomicActivityNo. 2,pp. 351-390.
Orage, A.R. [1917], An Alphabet of Economics, London: Unwin.

Porter, William [1999], "Negative Rates — An Exploration", Credit Suisse First Boston
Market Analysis, 25 May.
Romer, David [1996], Advanced Macroeconomics, McGraw-Hill, New York

Taylor, John B. [1981], "On the Relation Between the Variability of Inflation and the
Average Inflation Rate", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Autumn,
pp. 57-86.

Tödter, Karl-Heinz and Gerhard Ziebarth [1997], "Price Stability vs. Low Inflation in
Germany: An Analysis of Costs and Benefits", NBER Working Paper No. 6170, September.

</ref_section>

1982 1984 1986 1988
(a) US bonds mature in 2002

UK

1

Figure
54

1992

1990

1994

1996

1998

USA

Five year real interest rates in the UK and USA(a)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

I__________________
I
I

1986 1988

I

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

USA 4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

55

Figure 2

(a) UK bonds mature in 2009, US bonds in 2008, Frenchbonds in 20

1982 1984

I

UK

USA and France

Long term year real interest rates in the UK,

1970

I

—

1955

1960 1965

1975 1980

1985

56

Figure 3

1990 1995

0

-15
1945

1950

0.5

-10
I

1

-5

I

1.5

0

3

2

Bank

5

/

3.5

4

2.5

£/$ exchange rate (rhs)

I

Inflation (lhs)
I'I'

4.5

US dollar

10

15

20

25

30

Per cent

Bank rate, inflation and £/$ exchange rate,
1945 to date

-25

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

57

Figure 4

Price Level and Inflation, UK 1800-1914

1914

changed

1817

—20

.15

.10

-5

0

5

10

15

Per cent

1827

1837

1847

1867

58

Figure 5

1857

1877

1887

________________-—

1897

Bank rate, inflation and £I$ exchange rate, 1817-1914

1907

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

US dollar

athi
irTpüed

-)

0

— irried

9

0)

Figure 6

voabiity

C)

-rTtlnth

-,

0)

U)

rate

Q)

U)

C

CO

59

*Constt maturity of 6 months

Correlation1987-1999:-0.26 , 95% confidence intervals: -0.22 -0.30
Correlation 1993-1999: -0.41 , 95% confidenceintervals:-0.35 -0.46

H—

C)

Short-Sterling Futures OptionUFFE)*

16

4

2

3

1

Fiure

7

5

6

7

8

9

60

10

11

12

UK Base Rate 1800-1999

13

14

15

16

>16

0

Frequency
(%)

100

200

300

400

61

1.005875
0. 846027

10.49388
3118.290
0.000000

Skewness
Kurtosis

Jarque-Bera
Probability

Std. Dev.

7. 955724

Maximum
Minimum

-5.209383

0.022144
-0.009907

Mean
Median

Sample 1/1 7/1 975 4130/199c
Observations 1268

Histogram of Standardised Residuals: UK 3-month interbank rate 1975-1999

Figure 8

20

30

40

62

4.196770
18.93341
0.000077

Jarque-Bera
Probability

-0.008235
-0.056227
3.380759
-2.702496
0.991252
0.496179

Skewness
Ku rtosis

Mean
Median
Maximum
Minimum
Std. Dev.

Sample 1811 1998
Observations 188

Histogram of Standardised Residuals: UK base rate 1800-1998

Figure 9

•—

z
I

I

(.n

aru

(CO)L

C

64

LN

(cO)N

g0

=0)

7r

Gr=o)

Figure 11

Co

-,

C

r

O

0)

N.

CØ

0

0)

rN.

Z

0

•

N-

Z

0

0)
N.
(I)

C?

()

<

0)

0)

C

X)

-,

-,
conditional

0)
09
C

) )

(0
0?
C

Table I

1'0?

C?

(0

_____ month interbank rate

W
Cl)

C)

C'J

>.
(0

,-

variaI

>
(0

0

-0

.

0?
.

I-

I

In

65

Steady state 3-month interbank rate: 7.55 ; 95% confidence intervals: 4.02, 14.41

Correlation 1975-1999: 0.66 , 95% confidence intervals: 0.72 0.59
Correlation 1993-1999: -0.26 , 95% confidenceintervals:-0.13 , -0.38

0

°?

-

Time Series Model

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

3

ardva

66

Steady state base rate: 4.88%; 95% confidence intervals: 1.02%, 10.10%
Correlation 0.81, 95% ; confidence intervals: 0.66 , 0.97

Table 2

•

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Table 3

m4TIbavaiae

67

Steady state inflation 2.7%; 95% confidence intervals: -10.7% , 21.0%
Correlation: -0.27 ; 95% confidence intervals: -0.43 , -0.12

UKaTL

0.016

£I$ aTLEI da%e

Table 4

__ ccrdticnvaiace]

68

Steady state £/$ annual change: -0.8%; 95% confidence intervals: -10.6% , 4.2%
Correlation: -0.03; 95% confidence intervals: -0.19 , 0.13

L—'—

0.01

o.c2

0.03

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

(0

(5

.

0I-

0

'5
>

0

0.

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

10

.
20

30

I

50

69

Correlation: 0.89

Table 5

average (percent)

40

I

.

(source:1 FS)

60

..
70

80

Scatter plot of the standard deviation and average level of
treasury bill rates in 59 countries, January 1988 - January 1999

.
.

90

