                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                DISTORTIONARY TAXATION,
                             EXCESSIVE PRICE SENSITIVITY, AND
                                  JAPANESE LAND PRICES

                                         Kiyohiko G. Nishimura
                                           Fukujyu Yamazaki
                                             Takako Idee
                                          Toshiaki Watanabe

                                           Working Paper 7254
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7254


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 1999




This paper was presented at the NBER/TCER Japan Project Meeting held in Tokyo, October 29-30, 1998.
We are indebted to Yoshihisa Asada of Bunri College and Kouichiro Sawano of Osaka University in carry
simulation reported in Section 2, and John Leahy and conference participants for their insightful comments
on an earlier draft. The first author’s research is supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS), Research for the Future Program (RFTF), Information Technology and Market Economy
Project. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Kiyohiko G. Nishimura, Fukujyu Yamazaki, Takako Idee, and Toshiaki Watanabe. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Distortionary Taxation, Excessive Price
Sensitivity, and Japanese Land Prices
Kiyohiko G. Nishimura, Fukujyu Yamazaki,
Takako Idee, and Toshiaki Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 7254
July 1999
JEL No. G12, G19, H31, H32, R33

                                                ABSTRACT

        Japan has experienced turbulent behavior of land prices after World War II, especially after 1985.
This paper first examines the explanatory power of a simple present-value model and shows its limitation.
We then investigate two additional (not mutually exclusive) factors affecting the Japanese land price
behavior: distortionary inheritance and capital-gains taxation, and excessive price sensitivity due to the non-
Walrasian structure of the land market. Empirical results show that distortionary taxation is a major culprit
of high residential land price, and that the non-Walrasian price behavior magnifies the effect of underlying
change in the market fundamentals.


Kiyohiko G. Nishimura                              Fukujyu Yamazaki
University of Tokyo                                Sophia University
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo                            Kioicho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
113-0033 Japan                                     102-0094 Japan
nisimura@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Takako Idee                                        Toshiaki Watanabe
Seikei University                                  Tokyo Metropolitan University
Kichijyoji Kitamacchi, Musashino, Tokyo            Minami-Osawa, Hachioji, Tokyo
180-8836 Japan                                     192-0364 Japan
1 Introduction
Japan has experienced turbulent behavior in land prices after the World War II as is depicted in Figures
1 (level) and 2 (rate of change) 1• Between 1955 and 1990, the residential land price in the metropolitan
area (six largest cities) soared by more than two hundred times, whereas the stock price rose by ninety
times. Since the consumer price index was increased by eight times during the same period, the real
value of land increased tremendously. This spectacular increase in the land price until 1990 was behind
the so-called Tochi Shinwa (the Myth of Land) that land was an ultimate safe harbor always beating
any other assets with ever-increasing prices. The myth was firmly entrenched in the post-war Japanese
economic history.
    There were three distinctive episodes for this phenomenon. The first one was from the end of the
1950s to the middle of the 1960s when Japan enjoyed high economic growth. The second was just before
the first oil crisis in 1974, which was triggered by the national development planning proposed by the
central government to alleviate the income differences between urban and non-urban areas. The third
one was in the late 1980s, which was often attributed to the increased demand for office space in Tokyo
 under the expectation that Tokyo would become the center for international financial transactions. It is
 remarkable to note that except for one year (1975) the land price did not fall between 1955 and 1990.
    In light of the tremendous increase in land prices until 1990, the magnitude and the duration of their
 downfall in the 1990s are also astonishing. The price was halved in five years from the peak of 1990,
 and it is still declining as of the end of 1997. It is now well-known that bad loan problems plagued in
 the Japanese banking system in this period stemmed from these "ever-declining" land prices. The sweet
 "Myth of Land" went sour: it turned into a "Nightmare of Land".
    This turbulent behavior of land prices just described needs explanation, and the resulting turmoil in
 the Japanese economy needs prescription. Thus, land price behavior has been attracting much attention
 of economists as well as policy makers. In analyzing the land price behavior, most economists and policy
 makers have been using the present value (PV) model as a starting point. However, the PV model is
 based on the assumption of a well-organized asset market with no transaction cost. The Japanese land
    1The land price is the Residential Land Price Index of Six Largest Cities, poblislted by the Japan Real Estate Institote.
 (Japan Real Estate Institute, Shigaichi Kakaku Shisnu [Urban Land Pt-ice mdcxl, varioos issoes). This price index is based
 on the assessment of licensed real estate appraisers. Since their standardized assessment procedoreofis thebased on actual
                                                                                                               Tokyo Stock
 transaction prices, the index reflects the movement of market prices. The stock price is the TOPIX
 Exchange, and the consomer price index is that of Tokyo's Twenty-Three Wards, both taken 1ron the Nikkei Data Base.

                                                              1
market is full of various distortions and high transaction costs, so the PV model may not be valid in this
market.

    The purpose of this paper is to examine the applicability of the PV model and to show its limitation
as a theory for the Japanese land market. We then investigate two additional (not mutually exclusive)
factors affecting the Japanese land price behavior: the effect of distortion in the inheritance and capital
gains tax systems, and excessive price sensitivity due to the non4Valrasian market structure of the
Japanese land market.
    The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we examine the PV model as a theory
for the Japanese land market. We extend the PV framework to incorporate quasi-rent in the form of
tax saving, stemming from distortionary inheritance and capital-gains taxation in which land is treated
differently from financial assets with respect to the tax rate and the tax base. \Ve test the validity of
this augmented PV model as a long-run theory for Japanese land price behavior. We then turn to
short run price behavior in Section 3. We develop a short-run model of land price behavior based on
the non-Walrasian nature of the land market, and test its validity in both in commercial and residential
properties. Section 4 concludes the paper with remarks of the limitations and possible extensions of this
research.


2 Distortionary Taxation and Long-Run Land Price Behavior
2.1 Simple and Augmented Present Value Models
2.1.1 Frictionless Asset Market and a Simple PV Model

The present value (PV) model in its simplest form assumes that the land market can be approximated
as a frictionless asset market with no distortionary taxation. Then, further assuming the risk neutrality
of investors, we have the familiar no-arbitrage condition:

                                               —



where P and R respectively denote the current (real) price of land and its (real) rent, 11Z-i the expected

land price, i, the nominal rate of interest, and lr the expected rate of inflation. Rearranging terms in
the no-arbitrage condition, we have a current land price that is equal to the "fundamentals" that are the
present value of current rent plus the expected future price as follows:




                                                    2
                                                  n        ne
                                               —
                                            At —      it -r11
                                                  1   + i — ill
2.1.2   Special Treatment of Land in the Tax System and an Augmented PV Model

There are, however, two factors that make the Japanese land market deviate from the perfect asset market
of the simple PV model. First, the land market is characterized by high transaction costs (e.g.,high
brokerage fees, and high registration and acquisition taxes). It is not centralized and the buyer and the
seller search out their counterparts. The land price is usually determined in the negotiation between the
seller and the buyer who happeu to meet. The seller has his reservation price: the minimum selling price
under which the seller does not want to sell. Similarly, the buyer has his reservation price: the maximum
purchasing price over which the buyer does not want to buy. If the buyer's maximum purchasing price is
no less than the seller's minimum selling price, the trade takes place. The transaction price lies between
the seller's minimum selling price and the buyer's maximum purchasing price. The determination of the
actual transaction price depends on the structure of bargaining and the bargaining skills of the seller and
the buyer. This market structure implies that the no-arbitrage relationship of the PV model may not
hold in the short run, although it eventually prevails iu the long run.
   Secondly, there may be additional benefits other than land rent for investors to hold land in their
portfolio. For individuals (especially farmers), it is widely pointed out that land has been a very good
tax shelter (Ito 1994, ICanemoto 1997). This means the rent in (2.1) should include not only the land rent
but the quasi-rent for tax saving purposes. Distortion in the inheritance and capital gains tax systems
in Japan has often been suggested as a most probable culprit that makes the land price deviate from
the simple PV model (Nishimura 1995). Land is undervalued in the inheritance tax base, and thus
individuals can lessen their tax burden by holding their assets in the form of land.
   The "tax-shelter service" of land is found only for individuals, not for corporations since there is no
inheritance tax for the latter. However, Japanese corporations had in the past their own incentive to
hold land in addition to earning the land rent. Land was considered as the most desirable collateral by
banks. Thus, to own land made borrowing easy even in difficult periods for corporations (Nishimura
1996: p.154). This "collateral service" should also be included in the quasi-rent.
   Therefore, in order to examine the PV model in the Japanese land market, we should consider an




                                                       3
augmented PV model incorporating these quasi-rents, insteadof the simple PV model (2.1), such that

                                         =              +[PVQRh,

where [PVQRI denotes the present value of future quasi-rents. Moreover, we should take the augmented
PV model as a long-run relationship rather than a short-run relationship.
   In this section, we calculate the present value of quasi-rent, and assess the explanatory power of the
augmented PV model. As for individuals, we calculate the tax shelter value of land for individuals in
Section 2.2, which is the discounted present value of tax saving from holding the land. We consider the
tax shelter value both for farmers and non-farmers. Unfortunately however, it is difficult to calculate
the present value of the collateral service of land for corporations, so we are obliged to omit it in the
following investigation. Thus, the augmented flY model we consider is


                                                           + FSV]                                       (2.2)

where
                                        [TSV] = TaxShelterValue.

   It is worthwhile to show the practical importance of the tax shelter value of land for individuals in
explaining land prices. If marginal sellers of land are corporations, then the tax shelter value of land for
 individuals does not have practical importance. However, Table 1 shows that most marginal land sellers
 have been individuals both nationwide and at the center of Tokyo. The corporatesector has been the
 net buyer except for 1978 and 1993-96 at the national level, and except for 1982 at the center of Tokyo.
 Thus, factors affecting individuals' decision to sell land, of which the tax shelter value is most important,

 are likely to influence land price behavior.
    This is especially the case in farmland conversion to residential land. Farmland conversion has
 been a major supply source of residential land in the post-World War II urbanization. Under Japanese
 agricultural laws, no commercial corporation has been allowed to own farmland. Thus, the tax shelter
 value of land for farmers as individuals, is likely to influence residential land price. We will see its
 influence in the following two sections.

 2.2 Calculation of the Tax Shelter Value of Land
  In this section, we briefly summarize the characteristics of distortion in the Japanese tax system with
  respect to land, and then calculate the tax shelter valueof the land due to this distortion, which will be

                                                       4
used later in the empiricnl analysis.2 A more detailed discussion can be found in Appendix A.

2.2.1 Distortion in the Japanese Tax System

Inheritance Tax Three distinctive characteristics should be pointed out concerning the Japanese in-
heritance tax system. First, there is a substantially favorable treatment for land in the inheritance tax
base. Although all bequeathed assets, securities, and real estate are valued at their fair market value
in principle, land is assessed, in practice, substantially lower than their market value (Barthold and Ito
1992, pp. 250-251). Since the assessment is not open to the public and sometimes vary among locals,
it is hard to obtain information about the magnitude of under-assessment. However, experts say it was
around 60% of the market value before the 1990s.3 There is no such special treatment for financial
assets. Their value is assessed at the market value.
   Secondly, there is an even more favorable treatment for farm property. After 1975, the value of
farmland in the Tokyo metropolitan area has been, in fact, assessed based on agricultural income from
the land if the farmer's heir pledges to continue farming,4 even though his farmland is traded as residential

land in the market place. For example, in 1995, the average agricultural income per square meter was
about 173 yen,5 and its capitalization value was 3,460 yen if we use a 5% interest rate. In contrast, the
corresponding average land price was about 500,000 yen, implying that the assessed value of the farmland

was 0.7% of the market value. Thus, by pledging to continue farming, the farmer's heir could virtually
avoid paying the inheritance tax.
    Finally, changes in the tax system have been not systematic but haphazard (see Table A. 1 in Ap-
pendix A). There was some inflationary adjustment in basic exemption between 1958 and 1974, but this
was not adequate in light of the considerable land price inflation depicted in Figures 1 and 2. Then, a
sharp rise in land prices in 1973 brought an even heavier tax burden, triggering political pressure on the
government to ease the burden. The government increased basic exemptions by more than three times.
An even more haphazard movement is found in the tax schedule. The schedule was unchanged from 1958
to 1987, which was just incredible in a period of skyrocketing land price inflation. As political pressure
mounted to change the schedule in the last half of the 1980s, the government finally changed the schedule
   2Here we follow the lead of Kanemoto (1094). There are several differe,ices between our approach arid Kaue,notu's. In
particular, Kanemoto considers the tax distortion in only uric point in tirue, while we consider the dynaniic behavior of the
tax distortion.
    3See Hayashi et al (1090). Land is assessed at Roscn-Ka said to be aroond 70% of Koji-Chika, wluch in torn was aroorid
80 % of the market price before tIne 1990s. Connbiidng these hlgores, the assessment was aroond 60% of the market valoe.
    4Formnally, tIme difference between the nmarket value of time land and its farming valae based on its agricoltoral proceeds
is exempt from the value of land, which inmplies tIme land is assessed at its farming value.
    5See Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry arid Fisheries, Statistics for Agricaltzmral .frmcome 1995.


                                                               5
in 1988. Since then, the schedule has changed twice in seven years (see Table A.1 in Appendix A for

details).



Capital Gains Tax The capital gains tax is far more complicated and its changes have been even more
haphazard than the inheritance tax changes6 (see Table A.2 in Appendix A). We identify four distinctive
features.
    First, the capital gains tax on land holding is substantial. This is in sharp contrast with the financial
assets, since there is virtually no capital gains tax on them. Moreover, long-term landholdings and
short-run ones are taxed differently.          In general, short-run landholdings are more heavily taxed than
long-run holdings. Overall capital gains tax on short-term holding is in general almost twice as much as
those on long term holdings.
    Secondly, the capital gains tax system has been pendulatiag between progressive taxation and a flat
rate. Before 1968, the capital gains tax was progressive. Between 1969 and 1975, it was a flat rate
taxation. Between 1976 and 1988, it was a two-part taxation, in which a flat rate was applied to a
certain amount and progressive taxation followed beyond that amount. Between 1988 and 1991, it was
still a progressive system, but it had only two rates in which the degree of progressiveness was greatly
reduced. Between 1992 and 1994, it returned to a flat rate. After 1995, it went back once more to a
progressive system with two or three rates depending on particular years.
    Thirdly, the definition of "long-term holding", special exemption, and the tax rates changed quite
frequently. Until recently, the direction of the change was to increase tax burdens on land. For example,
the required length to be eligible for long-term holdings increased from three years (1968) to ten years
(1982). The tax rate was also increased from fourteen percent (1969) to thirty nine perceat(1992). There
was no economic rationale for this haphazard change.
    Lastly, between 1973 and 1992 a special provision lowered tax rates on farmland in the Tokyo, Osaka,
and Nagoya metropolitan areas. This provision was a result of heavy lobbying by urban farmers to lessen
their tax burden.
   6Ito (1994) provides us with a concise sunirnary of taxes levied on land, including capital gains taxes.




                                                              6
2.2.2 Tax Shelter Values for Farmers and Non-Farmers

Let us now estimate the tax shelter value
                                             of land, due to distortion in the inheritance and capital gains
                                                                                         differ considerably
tax systems described in the previous section. The tax savings from landholdings
                                   their income, the size and location of their land, and so on. Since we
among individuals depending on
                                                                                           consider a model
are concerned with land prices in metropolitan areas, especially the Tokyo area, we
                                           the Tokyo Metropolitan Area. Its tax shelter value will be used
 family with substantial landholdings in
 as a proxy of the tax shelter value in estimating the augmented PV model (2.2).
                                                                                                consider two
     Since farmers and non-farmers are treated differently in the inheritance tax system, we
types of families: a farm family and a non-farm family.
                                                                                                                   is
       (a) A farm family here is in fact a token farmer. The family's primary income source
       outside farming, and it is in the essence a land speculator. To make this clear, we assume
       that the family leaves its lot virtually vacant (growingsome token crops of negligible economic

       significance).
                                                       and most of its lots are vacant or used as a
       (b) A non-farm family here has a large premise,
                                                                                              The
       garden. Like the farm family, the non-farm family is also a de facto land speculator.
                                                      leases them to someone, it loses many rights on them
       family keeps the lots vacant, since if it
        under the current Tenancy Law (Shalcuchi-Shakka Ho).7
                                                                                                                        but it
     The above description of a model family with large landholdings is somewhat exaggerated,
                                                                                                  of
  reveals common characteristics of large landholdings in the Tokyo Metropolitan Area. Regardless
  agricultural or residential landholdings, they are the means of intertempOral speculation.
                                                                                                   and its
     In order to investigate the effect of tax distortion, we have to specify the family structure
                                                                                          Appendix A).
  change in time because the tax exemption depends on the number of statutory heirs (see
                                              consists of the father, the mother, and two children (son
  We assume that one generation of the family
                                                                                   scenario:8
  and daughter). As to the change in the family structure, we assume the following
                                                                                                                     to
         (1) The father of each generational family is deceased twenty-five years after his succession
                                                                                              children.9
         his own father, and then the father's assets are bequeathed to his widow and two
                                                                           restrictive conditions. In practice, it is virtoally
     7Most of all, the lessor can terminate    tbe tenancy wily onder very
                                          tbe tenancy once lie leases Ins land to the lessee.
   impossible for tbe lessor to terminate
     5We follow Kairemoto (1994) in assoming this scenario.niotbers at the age 25-29 have occopied the largest sbare for 50
      9Aniong all mothers wbo give birth to the first baby,
                                                 of Health arid Welfare, Vital Statistics of Japan (Jinkon Doutai Ghosa), 1998.
   years, and 48.2% as of year 1990. Ministry

                                                                7
       (2) Within one year after her spouse's death, the widow is also deceased, and her assets are
       inherited by her two children.

       (3) In (1) and (2) above, the daughter gives up her statutory share, and the entire assets of
       the father and the mother are actually inherited by the son, who becomes the head of the
       next generation.1°

   This is one of many possible scenarios, and admittedly a simple one. However, since qualitative results
do not change even if we assume more complex and realistic cases, we use this rather simple one as an
illustrative case.
    Let us consider a model family just after the succession from the previous generation to the current
generation. In this period, the family owns Xm2 of vacant land but has no financial assets.                                  The
family considers its asset position fifty years from now, after two generations. The family will convert
all landholdings into financial assets at that time. Taking this condition as given, the family is now
considering whether to sell marginal land (for concreteness we assume that it is loom2) in this period or
not.
    We define two portfolios:

       No-Sell Portfolio W1: The family does not sell the land in this period. Twenty-five years from
       now, succession from this generation to the next one occurs. The next generation finances
       the inheritance tax payment by selling land, which is at the same time subject to capital
       gains tax.11 Then, another twenty-five years lapses, and another succession occurs. The
       new generation liquidates all land holdings, pays the inheritance tax, and holds their assets
       in only financial assets. The present value of this portfolio in this period is denoted by W1.

       Sell Portfolio W2: In this case, the family sells the marginal land of lOOm2, pays the capital
       gains tax, and holds the proceeds in financial assets yielding interests. When the succession
       occurs, the next generation first tries to pay the inheritance tax by selling financial assets. If
  '°Tlus patrilineal assumption is justified for farm fanulies since the eldest sun of a farmer, who is a successor of the
father's farming, usually inherits most of the family's farmland. This assurnptioir is more proble,natic for non-farm
families. However, it is still tire case the eldest son of a family with substantial land holdings indrerits the principal part of
the holdings. Tl,us, the assumption cant be considered as a first approximation even for non-farm fanulies with large land
holdings.
  '11t is possible to save the inheritance tax by borrowing front banks and at tire same time to buy another land, since
the full anrount of loan balances are deducted from the inheritance tax base but that tire assessed value of new land is
substantially lower than tire market value. See Harthruld arid Itu (1992) fur details. However, we ignore tIns possibility in
our calculation.



                                                                8
     they are inadequate, it starts selling land. Otherwise, this portfolio is the same as the No-Sell
     Portfolio. The present value of this portfolio in this period is denoted by W2.

   In order to calculate W1 and W2, the family must have expectations about current and future land
prices, interest rates, and the tax structure. To highlight the effect of tax distortion as clear as possible
and to make analysis tractable, we make the following expectational assumptions.

     (A. 1) The model family assumes the current and future rate of nominal land price inflation
     will be constant in the future and equal to the average of the nominal interest rates in the
     last three years. That is, the family assumes the expected rate of return on its land (which is
     the expected capital gains under the Assumption (a) above) shall be the same as the financial
     assets.

     (A.2) The model family assumes that the current inheritance and capital gains tax systems will
     be perfectly adjusted to land price inflation in the future. Moreover, the current assessment
     practice in the inheritance tax will continue in which the value of land is assessed at sixty
     percent of the market value, while that of financial assets is assessed at the market value.

   The assumption (A.1) seems to be the most conservative assumption with respect to land price
inflation in most of the post-World War II period which we consider, except for the 1990s. Actual land
price inflation is much higher than the nominal interest rate as shown in Figure 2 until 1990. We make
this assumption in order to highlight the magnitude of the tax distortion's effect on land prices. It will
be shown that we end up with a large distortion, even though we make this very conservative assumption

on the family's expected land price inflation. Thus, if the model family expects higher inflation, the
distortion will be much larger.
   Under (A.2), the family is assumed to expect that inheritance and capital gains taxes do not change
in real terms for the next fifty years. Although actually there are a lot of changes as demonstrated in
Appendix A, the change is rather ad hoc and sporadic. It is difficult for the family to predict the change
in the tax system. Thus, we make this simple expectational assumption.
   In addition to expectational assumptions (A. 1) and (A.2), we ignore property taxes since their effective
rate is very low, between 0.1% and 0.3% depending on a particular year (Iwata et al., 1993). We
also assume that the family earns an average non-capital-gains non-agricultural income of the Tokyo



                                                     9
metropolitan area.12 Then, we can calculate the expected present value of the Sell-Portfolio W1 and
that of the No-sell Portfolio W2.
    Let us now calculate the tax shelter value of the land. We consider how much of the extra price Q
should be added to the market price P to convince the model family to sell the marginal land in the
current period. In other words, we examine the extra price needed to make the Sell Portfolio equivalent
to the No-sell Portfolio. As W1 is the expected present value of the No-sell Portfolio in the current period
and W2 is that of the Sell Portfolio, W1 — W2 is the difference of the expected present value between

not selling and selling the marginal land in the current period. The extra revenue 100Q (recall that the
marginal land is lOOm2) is subject to the capital gains tax in the current period and the inheritance tax
in 25 and 50 years from now. Note that under the assumption (A. 1), the present value of the land in
the future is the same as its current value. Then, the family is willing to sell the marginal land only if

                                   W2 + (1 — t) (1 — T25) (1 — r50) (100Q)         Wi,

where t is the marginal rate of the capital gains tax in the current period, and r25 (r50) is the marginal
rate of the inheritance tax in 25 (50) years from now.
    The minimum of such Q is the tax shelter value of the marginal land. Thus, the Tax Shelter Value
TSV of land per square meter is


                                       TBV]
                                          —                   W1—W2
                                                                                                                       23
                                                   (1—t)(1—r25)(l—Tm)100
    The tax shelter value TSV may be positive or negative depending on the sign of W1 — W2. It may
be negative if the "dis-service" of land or tax penalty on land in capital gains taxation outweighs the
"service" of land as a tax shelter in inheritance taxation. If there is no distortion in taxation, we have
TSV =0.
    In the empirical analysis later in this section, we will use the tax shelter value calculated from W1
and W2 as an explanatory variable of the regression explaining the current price P. In order to avoid
the simultaneity problem in estimation, we construct W1 and 1472 bused on the model family's expected
current price P' based on the previous-period price such that Pj' = P_i(l + r)                  (see   Assumption (A.l)
above), not on the current price P,. This procedure is justified as the first approximation since the result
 '2Tlns average income figure is found in the "Receipts and Disbursements of All Workers Households" section of: Statistics
Bureau of Management and Coordination Agency, Annual Report on Household (Kakei-Ghosa Nenpo).




                                                            10
is almost the same as in cases where we use the actual current price in the calculation. In the actual
calculation, Pt is the land price in Tokyo and r is the real interest rate. 13

2.2.3 Tax Shelter Value for Farm Family TSVF

Let us first consider the tax shelter value of the land for the model farm family TSVF. We assume
that the model family owns 5, 00Dm2 of farmland, which can be converted to residential land with a
negligible cost. We consider 500Dm2 since it is approximately the median farmland holding in the
Tokyo metropolitan area.14 We are concerned with the change in TSV5 of the typical farm family over
the period of our study. Thus, we calculate TSVF each year for a model family just after the succession
to the previous generation.
    Table 2 reports the tax shelter value for farmers as the percentage of the market price between 1958
and 1997. Its movement is astonishing: it started from a negative value of- 7.07% and peaked at 338.33%
in 1991. Even in 1997, the tax shelter value is 128.18% of the market price.
    Before 1969, the tax shelter value of the land for the model farm family was negative, implying that
the family had an incentive to sell its marginal land immediately, even if the buyer's offer price was
lower than the market price. In this period, farmland was valued as residential land in calculating the
inheritance tax base, and thus the model farm family had to pay a heavy inheritance tax on its farmland.
The family had to finance the inheritance tax by selling its farmland, but then it had to pay a heavy
capital gains tax due to very progressive taxation on capital gains in this period. Moreover, since the
tax schedule was fixed in nominal terms and the expected land price inflation was high, the more the
model family waited to sell the marginal land, the heavier its tax burden was. Under the tax system of
this period, it happened to be better for the model farm family to sell the marginal land immediately, to
decrease land holding and thus to reduce the inheritance tax on land.
    In 1969, the progressive taxation on capital gains was replaced by a flat-rate taxation, which consid-
erably reduced the capital-gains tax burden of the model farm family. This reflects an increase in the
   '3The interest rate is tire 3-period Moving Average of average contracted loan rate of all banks (Bank of Japan, Economic
Statistics Annual (Keizai toukei Nenpo)). As to the land price we use tbe average land price in Tokyo. Since the average
land price itself is not available, we compote it by dividing the total valoe of the land in Tokyo by its total area. Here
tire total land valoe is the total value of land and forests of Tokyo owned by private sector (Econmonnc Planning Agency.
Kokumnin Keizai Keisan Nenpo (Annual Report of the National Accounts)), arid the total area is that of the Urbanization
Pronmotion Area (Ministry of Construction, Toshi-keikaku Nenpo (Annual Report on Urban Planning)). These data are
available only fronm 1069 to 1993. We extrapolate tIns average land price backward to 1958 by using tire change in tIne land
price index pnbhsbed by tire Japan Real Estate Research Innstitote, and forward to 1997 by osinig tire change iii tire average
Koji Clnika price iii Tokyo (Land Agency, Chika Koji).
  14Accordimng to the Metropolitan Covernnnnnennt of Tokyo, agricultanal land holding between 2,000 arid 10,000 square meters
is 61.0% of tire total in the Ward area of Tokyo. Tire Tokyo Metropolitan Covernmnnent, Tokyo no Tochi (Land of Tokyo),
1998, p. 198.


                                                             11
tax shelter value, from negative before 1969 to 12-18% of the market value between 1969 and 1974.

   In 1974, a special provision for metropolitan farmers was introduced, in which metropolitan farmland
was assessed by the present value of agricultural returns on the land, although the farmland was valued
substantially higher in the market place as residential land. This implied that the model farm family
no longer paid the inheritance tax on its farmland, which made farmland as an ideal tax shelter for
metropolitan farmers. This provision had an immediate and dramatic impact on the tax shelter value:
it jumped from 12.9% in 1974 to 112.97% of the market value in 1975.
   Since farmers can save on inheritance taxes by holding their assets in the form of farmland, a higher
land price makes the farmland more attractive as a tax shelter for farmers. The tax shelter value for
farmers steadily increased after 1975 and reached its peak in 1991 as high as 338.33%. This implies that,
in 1991, the model farm family was willing to sell the marginal land only if the buyer's offer price was
almost four and a half times as high as the market price.
   The tax shelter value started to decrease in 1992 reflecting a sharp decrease of land prices in the 1990s.
However, the tax reform of 1993 temporarily halted this decline. The 1993 change allowed exemption of
the inheritance tax payment from capital gains if the heirs sold the land in order to pay the inheritance
tax. This change increased the tax shelter value to 257.1% in 1993, because the change exempted the
model farm family from paying the capital gains tax on land sold to pay the inheritance tax.
   One anecdote illustrates the tremendous effect of the distortion in human terms. In 1997, the former
student of one of the authors, a graduate of the University of Tokyo and a career-track employee of one
of the top insurance companies in Japan, quitted his job to become a farmer and the successor of his
father. This means that the tax saving due to his decision to succeed his farmer father far exceeded his
lifelong income as an employee of the well-paid insurance company.
   It should be noted here that the tax shelter value differs among farmers, depending on their particular
conditions. In particular, it depends on the size of the initial landholdings: the larger the holdings are,
the higher the tax shelter value becomes.             Moreover, urgency to sell, or in other words demand for
liquidity, differs considerably among farmers.15 However, the change in the tax system alters the tax
shelter value for various farmers in the same way. Therefore, the model farm family's tax shelter value
can be used as a representative one.
  '5A sudden, unexpected death of the head of a farmer family often means that the family must finance the inheritance
tax by selling a part of its land ininiediately, even though the price is not favorable. Tins finance motive is often singled
out to be the most important in indocing a farmer family to sell its land.



                                                             12
2.2.4 Tax Shelter Value for Non-Farm Family TSVvF

Next, consider a non-farm family having 1, 000m2 of residential land. Here we take 1000m2 since it is
a typical large-scale residential land holding. According to the Metropolitan Government of Tokyo, the
share of residential land holding between 500 and 2,000 square meters occupies 20.2% of total residential
land in the Ward area of Tokyo (The Tokyo Metropolitan Government, Tokyo no Tochi [Land in TokyoJ,
1998, p. 184). Table 2 shows the tax shelter value TSVNF for the non-farm family. Although we have the
non-negligible effect of distortionary inheritance and capital gains taxation on residential landholdings,
the magnitude of the effect is rather small compared with the effect on farmland holdings. There has
been a sizable deviation from zero, and the tax shelter value reached the peak of 35.16% of the market
price in 1993. Thus, we can conclude that the distortionary taxation has some effect on non-farm families
but the effect is far outweighed by the effect on farm families.

2.3 Testing the Augmented Present Value Model
As is well-known, the simple present value (PV) model (2.1) fails to explain the short-run behavior of
Japanese land prices. The model is based on the assumption that the land market is efficient, which
is generally rejected in empirical studies on the Japanese land market. For example, Nakagami (1995)
examines excess returns on residential land using the panel data in forty six Japanese prefectures and
rejects the efficiency. Thus, the issue is not whether the simple PV model explains the Japanese land
price behavior perfectly, but to what extent the augmented PV model (2.2) described in the previous
section has an explanatory power.
   For residential land, we investigate the augmented PV model such that

                          P2 = a0 + b1 [FV]2 + b2 [TS VF]2 + b3 [TSVNF]2 + U2,                      (2.4)

where P2 is the residential land price, [FV]2 is the "fundamental value" of residential land in period t
such that
                                           [FV]2 =
                                                     t1€,                                           (2.5)

and [TB Vp]2 and [TSVNP]2 represent the tax shelter value for farmers and non-farmers in period t,
respectively. The inclusion of the tax shelter value for farmers reflects the fact that farmland is one of
the most important sources of residential land.
   In the case of commercial land, however, it is rather unusual that farmland is directly converted to
commercial land. Thus an appropriate specification of the augmented PV model for the commercial land

                                                     13
is

                                        P' = a'0 + b'1 [FV'], + b'3 [TSVNF] + i4,                                  (2.6)

where Pt is the commercial land price, and [FV'] is the fundamental value of commercial land defined
accordingly. We scrutinize the augmented PV model from both long-run and short-run perspectives.
      In order to investigate the augmented PV models (2.4) and (2.6) directly, we must have the data of
land prices and land rents. However, land rent data have not been readily available, and this difficulty
has plagued previous attempts to assess the PV model in the Japanese land market. One contribution of
this paper is to estimate land rent using various data sources. The method is explained in Appendix B.
Other variables in (2.4) and (2.6) are constructed in the following way. The nominal interest rate i is the
average contracted loan rate of all banks'6. The expected rate of inflation                   is the three-period moving
average of past inflation rates. The expected price P+, is the forecast based on the AR(3) model of the
land price. The tax shelter values TSVF and TSVNF are the ones calculated in the previous section.
All variables are semi-annual.'7 The sample period is 1958-1997 for residential land and 1963-1997 for
commercial land reflecting data availability.

2.3.1 Long-run Land Price Behavior

Let us first examine the order of integration of the key variables in the augmented PV model (2.2).
Table 3 reports the result. In the entire sample period (1958-1997 for residential land and 1963-1997 for

commercial land) , both of the commercial and residential land prices are integrated to order two, i.e.,
1(2). The fundamental value and the tax shelter value for farmers are also 1(2), while the tax shelter
value for non-farmers is 1(1). Thus, the fundamental value and the tax shelter value for farmers are
strong candidates to explain land price behavior.
      As is pointed out by Ito and Iwaisako (1996), the level of land price is sensitive to changes in the
interest rate as well as the expected growth rate of the land rent, so that it is often argtied that these
two variables may explain the turbulent land price behavior. To investigate this issue, we examined the
order of integration of the real interest rate, and the three-period moving average of rent growth rates
as a stand in for the expected rent growth, for both commercial land and residential land (though not
shown here). All of them were found to be 1(1) in 1958-1997. Although the sample size is small (less
than 100), this result suggests the real interest rate and the expected rent growth (1(1)-variables) are not
     '6TIjs is takeii from Kcizai Tovkci Ncnpo [Economic Statistics Annual] (Baiik of Japan, various issues).
     '7Tlie tax shelter values are available only annually. We intrapolate semi-annual series from them.



                                                               14
likely to explain the rampant fluctuations in land prices adequately (1(2)-variables).
   Table 3 also shows the variables' order of integration in the subsample period before the outbreak of
the so-called "bubble economy" around 1935. The land prices and the fundamental values are 1(1) for
1958-1935 for residential land and for 1963-1985 for commercial land. Similarly, the tax shelter values
for farmers and for non-farmers are 1(1) for 1958-1985. The difference between this subsample and the
entire sample periods exemplifies extraordinary land price movement after 1985.
   Let us now investigate cointegration relationship among the key variables in the Augmented PV
model. We then examine the explanatory power of the PV model and the effect of distortionary taxation
on land prices from the following viewpoints:

      (a) In the augmented PV model, b in (2.4) and b in (2.6) must be unity. Otherwise, the
      no-arbitrage condition does not hold. Thus, in order to examine the validity of the PV model,
      we test whether bi and 62 deviate significantly from unity.

      (b) If distortionary taxation on land has significant impacts on land price behavior, 62 and
      b in the case of residential land and b in the case of commercial land must be statistically
      significant and substantially large.

   The equations (2.4) and (2.6) are estimated for the entire sample period and the pre- "bubble economy"
period,18 by the instrumental variables method using the lagged values of regressors in the past two
periods with A(1) error terms. The estimation results are shown in Table 4.
    In the case of residential land price, the coiategration relationship expressed in the augmented PV
model cannot be rejected at the 5 percent significance level in both 1958-1997 and 1958-1985. In 1958-
1997, the coefficient on the fundamental value FV is 0.763 which is significantly lower than unity. The
P value of F statistics reveals that the hypothesis bi = 1 is rejected at the 5 percent significance level.
The tax shelter value for farmers TSVF has the coefficient of 0.081 while that for non-farmers has 0.486.
Both coefficients are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Thus, the PV model is rejected in
the entire sample, while the effect of distortionary taxation, especially the tax shelter value of farmers
has a significant effect on the behavior of residential land price.
    The result of the pre- "bubble economy" period of 1958-1985, however, shows a somewhat different
picture. The coefficient of the fundamental value FV is close to unity, though the hypothesis b = 1
  '5Althuugh the 'Lix Shelter Value fur iiuu farmers TSVNF is 1(1) while uther variables lu (2.4) and (2.6) are 1(2), we
include TSVNF in the estimatiun taking accuunt uf the fact that the sample periud is rather sliurt and that the puwer uf
Augmented Dicky-Faller (ADF) test in Table 3 is nut su strung fur small samples.


                                                           15
is rejected at the 5 percent significance level. Neither of the tax shelter value for farmers nor that for
non-farmers have significant coefficients.
   This implies that actual land price behavior was close to the one that the simple PV model predicted
before 1985 concerning residential land. However, the PV model clearly failed to hold if land price
behavior after 1985 was taken into consideration, even if we augmented the PV model with the tax
shelter values. The result also shows a large impact of the tax shelter values for both farmers and
non-farmers on residential land price.
   In Figure 3, we show the percentage of the actual residential price that is explained by the tax shelter
values in the estimated equation for 1958-1997. The tax shelter values for farmers and non-farmers
increased the residential land price since 1974, and about 15% of the residential land price svas attributed
to the tax shelter values in 1985. It then soared to about 35% in 1991 and 1993, and remained above
20% as of 1996. These results show that the residential land price is substantially affected by distortions

in the tax system.
    In the case of commercial land price, the cointegration relationship of the augmented PV model is
rejected at the 5 percent significance level in both, the entire sample period (1963-1997) and the pre-
 "bubble economy" period (1963-1985), although the coefficient of the fundamental value FV is close to

unity and the hypothesis of b'1 being unity cannot be rejected at the 5 percent significance level. This
result suggests that the augmented PV model does not hold as a long-run relation concerning commercial

land even before 1985.
    However, the tax shelter value for non-farmers does not fare well, either. Although it has a signif-
icantly positive coefficient in the entire sample period, it has a significantly ne9ative coefficient in the
 pre- "bubble economy" period, which contradicts the theory of tax shelter values. This result questions
 the model specification (2.6), suggesting the possibility of a missing variable: the "collateral-service"
 value discussed in Section 2.1. The estimation and incorporation of its effect on commercial land prices

 is an important and pressing research agenda.

 2.3.2 Short-Run Land Price Behavior
 We next examine the short-run price behavior of prices and the effect of the fundamental value and tax
 shelter values. In Table 4, the change in land prices is regressed on the change in the fundamental value
 and that in the tax shelter values:



                                                     16
                       AP = ao + b1zX [FV] + b2A [TSVF] + b3 [TSVNF]t + Wt,

for residential land prices. A similar equation is estimated for commercial land prices.
    Both in 1963-1997 and 1963-1985 the coefficient on the fundamental value is significantly below unity,
around 0.5, for the residential land price. The effect of the tax shelter value for farmers is still significant
in the entire sample, but it becomes insignificant before the "bubble economy". Moreover, the adjusted
fl2 is low both in the entire sample and the pre- "bubble economy" sample. Thus, the augmented PV

model fails to explain short-run land price behavior. The tax shelter values have little effect on short-run
land price behavior before 1985, although the tax shelter value for farmers seems to have a substantial
impact on short-run land price behavior after 1985.
   The fundamental value in the case of commercial land price has the coefficient of 0.587 before 1985,
which rises to 0.949 when we include the data during and after the bubble economy. However, the
adjusted B2 is low, implying that the augmented PV model does not adequately explain the short-run
commercial land price behavior. As is similar to the findings of land price levels, the tax shelter value
for non-farmers affects commercial land price insignificantly before 1985, though it has a significantly
positive coefficient in the entire sample.

   The foregoing results can be summarized in the following way. The residential land price can be
explained relatively well in the PV framework until 1985, the starting point of the "bubble economy."
However, the PV model fails to explain price behavior of the entire sample period, whose time-series
property is heavily influenced by the turbulent price behavior after 1985. This turbulent behavior is
partly explained by the effect of distortionary inheritance and capital gains tax systems. They raised
the land price by more than 20 percent since 1987. The price of commercial land, however, cannot be
explained even by the augmented PV model incorporating the effect of tax distortions.
   The findings obtained in this section for the long- and short-run behavior of residential land price are
in line with the results seen in previous researches. Many empirical researches, using data between 1960
and 1985 (such as those in the various issues of the White Paper of the Economic Planning Agency in
the late 1980s), obtained relatively good results in the simple PV framework. Boone and Sachs (1989)
analyzed the long-run level of land price from the macroeconomic point of view, and showed that the
land price in Japan was not extraordinary high around 1985. However, such attempts broke down as
the price movement of the late 1980s was included in the data set.

                                                     17
    An empirical study by Hutchison (1994) decomposed the variance of the land price change during
the 1955-93 period into the variances of the real CDP change disturbance, the CDP deflator change
disturbance, and the land price change disturbance by a structural VAR model. He found that only a
small part of the land price variance could be attributed to these aggregate demand and supply factors,
while a large part would be attributed to non-macroeconomic factors specific to the land market. Stone
and Siemba (1993) also examined the explanatory power of the PV model. Their conclusion, however,
was not clear-cut, exemplifying fundamental difficulties in using the entire sample period encompassing
the 1960s and the 1980s as a whole to assess the PV model.
    Similar results are obtained in variants of the PV model. For example, Sato (1995) examined whether
the land price change (or more precisely, the change in a proxy of the price-to-rent ratio) could be
explained well by the movement of the mortgage rate, the Marshall's k and the average value product of
urban land. The pattern of residuals suggested that the model had difficulty in explaining the movement
in 1985-88. In another attempt, using an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function, 1dm (1997)
showed that in 1980-1982 the actual value of land was almost the same as the theoretical value. The
actual value then increased sharply in the late 1980s to become 6.4 times higher than the theoretical value
in the three main urban areas, Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya, and 2.3 times higher in non-urban areas in
1992. Fujita and Kashiwadani (1989) paid attention to the differences in the land prices of farming and
residential lots in the middle suburbs of Tokyo, and their simulation results showed that the actual land
prices in 1980 and 1984 were considerably higher than those associated with the efficient urbanization
process.


3 Excessive Price Sensitivity and Short-Run Land Price Behav-
     ior
3.1 Land Market as a Non-Wairasian Asset Market
In the previous section, we have shown that the short-run behavior of land prices is hard to explain in
the framework of the simple as well as augmented PV models. In this section, we will develop a model
of short-run price behavior based on the structure of land markets, and test its validity using residential
and commercial property data.
   We start from the fact that the land market is a far cry from the frictionless Walrasian asset market
that the PV model presupposes. The land market is not centrally organized nor has market makers to


                                                    18
mimic to a certain extent a Wairasian auctioneer. Transaction costs are high. Land is heterogeneous, and
information and thus expectations are imperfect and heterogeneous among sellers and buyers. In many
cases sellers post their asking prices in newspapers and trade networks, and buyers search for the best
buy. If the seller and the buyer meet, sometimes intensive negotiation follows on exact terms of trade. In
such a market, we argue that the price might be excessively sensitive to an unexpected change in factors
affecting the intrinsic value of land.
   Let us consider price determination in such a market. In the following we will explain a simple
version of the model proposed in Nishimura (1999).19 Consider an encounter of a seller and a buyer. To
make the analysis simple, let us consider a situation where no negotiation is involved and assume that
the seller offers the price, and the buyer determines whether to accept it or not. Both the buyer and the
seller are assumed to be risk neutral. Finally, we assume that if the trade between them fails then there
is no further trade on this land.
    Let us consider the seller's pricing problem. Let x2 be the unexpected change in the intrinsic value of
this land i, that is, the value of holding this land. We assume that only the seller knows x1.

    The buyer j    has   his own subjective expectations about x, denoted by Ei(x). The seller does not
know the expectations E3 (x2) of the particular buyer he encounters, but he is assumed to know the
distribution of the expectations among buyers:


                                               Pr (E(x) <y) = F (y)                                                   (3.1)


(For example, an investor survey may be conducted and the result may be made public). The seller
determines his price change p corresponding to x based on this information.
    Since the buyer j is risk neutral, he buys the land if the price change p is no more than his expected
intrinsic-value change x, or equivalently, p <         E (xi). Thus, the probability of successful sale, (p) is a
function of p such that


                                                   q(pj) =   1 —   F(p).                                              (32)


    Taking this iii mind, the risk neutral seller determines p to maximize his expected profit:
  '9Nishurnura (1999) specifies the structure of the non-Walrasian asset market and distribution of investors' expectations
in detail, and derives rational expectations (Bayesian Nash) equilibrium. Since it is rather complicated, we adopt a simpler
approach here.




                                                             19
                        Max Expected Profit1 = qS(p) (p) + (1—                                                (3.3)

It is evident that the optimal price change (3.3) satisfies the following equation.


                                   =
                                       (i
                                            + ;;)y'x =          1—      (1/Xt                                 (3.4)

where



is the price elasticity of the sale probability. If the trade is completed, j will be the market price change
of the land.
   Equation (3.4) shows that the price change p is a mark-up of the unexpected intrinsic-value change
x1. Moreover, the mark-up rate depends on the inverse of the price elasticity 77 of the sale probability
5(p). The smaller is the elasticity, the more sensitive is the price. Moreover, so long as ?7 is positive
and greater than unity, the coefficient of x in (3.4) is always greater than unity. Thus in this case, we
have excess price sensitivity.
   Equation (3.2) implies that the sale probability depends on F, the distribution of buyers' expectations.
Thus, (3.4) shows that the price effect of the unexpected change in the intrinsic value crucially depends
on the shape of the distribution of buyers' expectations.
   To illustrate this point, let us note that the price elasticity of         1   —
                                                                                      F(p1) is small if the absolute

value of 4&'(pj) is small , for given p [> 0] and    Since —ç5'(p) = F'(p1)   = f (p), where f is the density
function, this means that a smaller value of f (p), or in other words, the more dispersed expectations
around the optimal price, implies a higher price sensitivity. Thus, the foregoing analysis suggests that in
some cases an increase in the variance of expectations' distribution may induce excessive price response
to unexpected change in the intrinsic value of land.

3.2 Econometric Methodology
The non-Walrasian asset model developed in the previous section predicts that the sensitivity of land
prices to unexpected changes in their fundamental value depends on the heterogeneity of investors' ex-
pectations. Specifically, the more dispersed investors' expectations are, the more sensitive land prices
are. In what follows, we examine whether it is true using the Japanese land market data.



                                                      20
   Our analysis is based on the single factor model, in which the asset return R is determined by one

factor F,   i.e.


                                                 Rte=ct+fitFt+ut,                                                   (3.5)

where fit is the factor loading which measures the sensitivity of the asset return to the factor. In the
conventional factor model, fit is assumed to be constant. However, our model (3.4) suggests that it varies

over time depending on the heterogeneity of expectations among investors.
   In what follows, we will work with the innovations (i.e. the unexpected parts) of the land return and
of the factor. Assuming that a is constant over time20 and that fit is known in period t — 1, we may

rewrite equation (3.5) as:
                                                    rt=fitft+ut,                                                    (3.6)

where rt is the innovation in the land return and ft is the innovation of the factor, i.e. rt =Rt—E(RtlIt_i)

and ft = F — E(FtlIt_i) where               is the information set available up to time t — 1.

    By definition, we have E(ft lit_i) = 0 and E(utlit_i) = 0. For identification, we assume that
E(f?jIt_i) = 1. We further assume that the t is homoskedastic, i.e. a E(uflit_i) does not depend
on time t.21
    We denote the heterogeneity of investors' expectations by at in what follows. The data used for at will

be discussed in the next section. To examine whether fit depends on at, we must specify the functional
form to represent the relation between fit and at. Assuming a Normal distribution of expectations among
investors, Nishimura (1999) shows us that the sensitivity may be asymmetric: the price (and thus the
return) is very sensitive to the factor innovation when investors are on the average optimistic, while it is
not when investors are pessimistic. To incorporate this possibility, we consider the following specification.

                                              fit = go + (91 + g2Dt1)at,                                             (3.7)



 where D_1 is a dummy variable that takes one if rt_i > 0 and zero otherwise. go, g, and 92 are
 parameters to be estimated. Here we simply assume that investors are on the average optimisticwhen
 the previous period's return innovation is positive, while they become pessimistic when the previous
   20The Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) predicts that a is a linear function of Pt. Hence, if Pt varies over time depending
 on the heterogeneity of expectations among investors, so does a. However, taking it into account will increase the number
 of parameters we must estimate. Since the number of observations we can use is limited, we neglect tIre dependence of a
 on Pt.
   2tSume of the recent empirical studies that apply factor analysis to asset pricing explicitly take into account the bet-
 eroskedssticity in both of the asset returns and factors. (See Engle, Ng, arid Rothchild (1990), Ng, Engle, arid Ruthchild
 (1992), King, Sentana, and Wadwlrarri (1994), Aguliar and West (1998), and Shephard arid Pitt (1998).) The methods
 employed in such studies are, however, computationally expensive. Here, we take a simplified approach.


                                                             21
period's return innovation is negative. If the null hypothesis of g =                  = 0 is rejected, it provides
evidence that fit depends on at. If g is statistically significant, it provides evidence that the effect of at

on fit differs depending on the sign of the innovation in the previous period's return.
   One simple method to estimate these parameters is to select a variable that can be considered as a
proxy for the underlying factor. If we can use the innovation in such a variable as ft, the parameters
in the model that consists of equations (3.6) and (3.7) can be estimated by using ordinary least squares
(OLS). However, if the selected variable and the land return are jointly determined, the obtained result
will suffer from the simultaneity bias. To avoid such a problem, we take a different approach, in which
ft is treated as an unobservable factor.
   We first select variables that are highly correlated with the land return and hence can be expected to
be determined by the same factor innovation ft. Specifically, we choose two variables. Let us denote the
innovations of the selected two variables by Pit and Y2t We assume that the sensitivities of Pit and Y2t
with respect to ft are constant over time. Under this assumption, rt, Pit and ?12t may be represented by
                                        fit
                            Pit =       c1    ft+wt, fit—go+(gi+P2-t_i)(7t,                                    (3.8)
                            112t

where c1 and c2 are the sensitivities of Pit and Y2t with respect to ft. Wt is a (3 x 1) vector of idiosyncratic
error terms, whose first element is itt in equation (3.6). ft and iv are assumed to be distributed as follows.
                                                        /                        \
                                                                           0 0 a ).
                                                                             a 0
                                                            0        cr2  0 0
                        ft'NID(0,1), wt-..NID1 0                 ,         0                                   (3.9)
                                                            0
    We   estimate the parameters in this model in the following way. We first extract the innovations
in the selected economic variables and land return using the vector autoregressive (VAR) model. The
 VAR model is estimated by using OLS. Given the OLS estimates, we take the residual as innovations
 in economic variables and land return. Given the residuals obtained from the VAR, we estimate the
 parameters in the system that consists of equations (3.8) and (3.9) by the maximum likelihood method.
    Let us define
                                                                     cr2       0   0
                                   [pt,pit,p2t]', E = BB     + 0 a? 0                    .                    (3.10)
                             Ct
                                                                     00a
 Then, the log-likelihood may be written as

                        lnL = -3Tln(2)/2— (l/2)E1nIEI — (1/2)ClEJ'(t.                                         (3.11)

 We estimate all parameters in the model that consists of equations (3.8) and (3.9) by maximizing log-

 likelihood (3.11).

                                                       22
3.3 Data
3.3.1    Property Prices and Property Rents

Let us consider the return on "typical" commercial and residential properties in the metropolitan area
(see Appendix B). The return is calculated from the price and rent data by using the procedure adopted
in Nishimura and Sasaki (1995). The typical commercial property here is an eleven-story building located
in a Ward of Tokyo that was the average of commercial office buildings owned by four major real estate

companies (Mitsui, Mitshubishi, Tokyo Tatemono, and Tokyu) in 1975. The typical residential property
is the average of two-story houses located in the six largest cities.

3.3.2 Economic Variables

We collected semi-annual data on several economic variables that may be expected to affect property
returns in Japan. All of the collected variables are listed in Table 5, and source of these variables are
found in Appendix B. All of these variables and the property returns are measured in real values,22 and
the sample period for these data is from 1970:1 to 1996:1. In the following analyses, we take a logarithm of

all variables. The Augmented Dicky-Fuller (ADF) tests do not reject the null hypothesis of the presence
of unit root in all variables except money supply, so that we take the first-order differences in all variables

except money supply. As for money supply, we remove the time trend by regressing the log of money
supply on a constant and on time t = 1,2,. .. , T.
   Table 5 shows the correlation coefficients between the property return and each of these variables. We
select two variables which are highly correlated with the property return. For the residential property, we
select money supply and total bill-clearing volume and construct a VAR model of these variables together
with the residential property return. For the commercial property, we select total bill-clearing volume
and commercial office vacancy rates and construct again a VAR model of these variables together with
the commercial property return. Both of the Akaike (1973) Information Criterion (AIC) and the Shwarz
(1978) Information Criterion (SIC) suggest the lag length of two. We therefore set the lag length in the
VAR models equal to two.
   Table 6 presents the estimation results of the VAR models. LB(12) in the table represents the Ljung-
Box (1978) statistic for up to twelfth order autocorrelation in the residuals. The asymptotic distribution
of this statistic is x2 with six degrees of freedom. Ljung-Box test does not strongly reject the null
hypothesis of no autocorrelation in the residuals of all variables. The null in the residuals of all variables
 22T1ie consumer price index in Japan was used as deflator.


                                                          23
except money supply is not rejected at 10% level, while the null in the residuals of money supply is not
                                                                                                      that
rejected at 1% level. fl2 in the table denotes the coefficient of determination. It is worth noting
the coefficients of determination for the property returns are large. They are 0.799 for the returns on the
residential land and 0.463 for the returns on the commercial land, respectively. It means that 80% of the
variation in the residential property return and 46% of the variation in the commercial property return
can be expected, providing further evidence for the inefficiency of the land market in Japan.

3.3.3 The Heterogeneity of Investors' Expectations
To measure the heterogeneity of investors' expectations, we use the survey data collected by the Bank of

Japan (BOJ). In March, June, September, and December, the BOJ has conducted a survey on whether
the interest rate is expected to fall or rise. We apply the Carlson-Parkin (1975) method to this data to
calculate the standard deviation of the forecasts of interest rate, which is used as at (See Appendix C
for the detail of our procedure). Similar survey data on the property price, if existed, would be more
 desirable, but unfortunately we do not have such data.
    The BOJ's survey data is available in March, June, September, and December, and the data on the
 economic variables are semi-annual. Hence, our estimation is based on two different at. One is at calcu-

 lated using the survey data in March and September, which we call the March/September case, and the
 other is at calculated using the survey data in June and December, which we call the June/December case.

 Figure 4 plots these two different at. The June/December caseis always larger than the March/September

 case, but roughly speaking their movements resemble each other.
     The ADF tests reject the null hypothesis of the presence of unit root and the deterministic time trend
 is not observed in these series. Thus, we use each series as it is for at in equation (3.7).

 3.4 Estimation Results
  Based on the residuals from the VAR model together with at calculated by applyingthe Carlson-Parkin
  (1975) method to the BOJ's survey data on the forecasts of interest rate, we estimate parameters in
  the model that consists of equations (3.8) and (3.9). Survey data on the forecasts of interest rate were
  available since 1974:2. The estimation is conducted using the sample period between 1974:2 and 1996:1,
  which is called the full sample. As extensively discussed in the previous sections, the Japanese asset
  markets experienced a bubble-like behavior and also its crash after 1985. Thus, there is a possibility that

  the full sample analysis may be biased by extraordinary behavior ofthis period. Hence, we also estimate


                                                       24
the model using the sub-period between 1974:2 and 1984:2, which can be considered as the pre-bubble

period.
   Let us first summarize the results on the residential land, which is shown in Table 7, Panel A. The

most important are parameters 91 and g. In all cases, a likelihood ratio test rejects the null hypothesis of
g=        = 0. This provides evidence that the expectation diversity a
                                                                 significantly affects price sensitivity

/3t, which is consistent with our model of non-Walrasian markets.
   The table also presents the maximum value and minimum value for the estimates of /3g. One possible
problem is that in the sub-sample, the maximum value is positive while the minimum value is negative.
The sign reversal of /3 is problematic to our model because the model predicts that the sign of             does

not depend on a      and the absolute value of /3t is increasing in at. The sign reversal, however, is not

observed in the full sample, where both of the minimum and maximum values are positive. This result
in conjunction with positive estimates of g and 92 indicates that a rise in a leads to an increase in the
absolute value of 8. In all cases except the March/September case in the sub-sample, 92 is statistically
significant, providing evidence that the effect of a, on        is larger when the innovation in the previous

period's return is positive. In the June/December case in the full sample, 9i is not significant, indicating

that at   affects /3t only when   the innovation in the previous period's return is positive.
    Next, let us turn to the commercial land. Table 7, Panel B summarizes the estimation results for the
commercial land. In all cases, a likelihood ratio test rejects the null hypothesis of 9i = 92 = 0. The sign

reversal of /3 is not observed in any cases. Hence, the results on the commercial land strongly support
the non-Wairasian model of asset markets.
    In all cases, the estimates of 92 are positive and statistically significant, and hence the effect of at on
is larger when the innovation in the previous period's return is positive. Except for the March/September
case in the full sample, 91 is not significant, indicating that at affects /3 only when the innovation in the

 previous period's return is positive.

 4 Concluding Remarks
 Japan remains exotic to the eye of western observers and her economy seems still mysterious to neo-
 classical economists. The behavior of Japanese land prices is placed atop of such mysteries. In this
 paper, however, we have shown that it is not a mystery but largely a result of the market structure and
 institutional distortions. The failure to recognize the deviation of the land market from the well-behaved


                                                         25
Wairasian financial market simply made the Japanese land price behavior hard to understand. This
paper has shown the limitation of the PV model that assumes a Walrasian asset market, as a long-run
theory of land price. In conjunction with this, we have illustrated the quantitative importance of dis-
tortionary inheritance and capital-gains taxes in understanding turbulent land price behavior in Japan.
It has also been clarified that short-run price behavior is greatly influenced by the non-Walrasian struc-
ture of the Japanese land market and that land prices become sensitive tothe heterogeneity of investor

expectations.
   Factors examined in this paper, however, do not exhaust the list of probable causesof turbulent land

price behavior in Japan. For example, we were obliged to ignore the "collateral service" value of land
for corporations since we were unable to get quantitative data about such a service. We also ignored the
expectational "bubble" explanation in this paper, in order to concentrate "real factors" behind the land
price behavior. However, as many economists argue, the bubble explanation mayhave some relevance in
explaining the land price behavior. For example, Nishimura (1995) argued that a liberal enforcement of
city planning23 and failure to absorb private returns from public investment fostered unduly optimistic
expectations of land prices, regardless of commercial and residential lands. This may trigger a substantial
increase in land prices which is not explained by the movement of the market fundamental, as in the
famous Peso problem in international finance. To assess quantitative importance of these alternative
 explanations is an important agenda for future research.




   23See Thkeuchi et a! (1993) for details.

                                                     26
Appendix A: Transition of Inheritance and Capital Gains Taxes
in Japan: 1958-1997
This appendix summarizes the relevant information about the transition of inheritance and capital gains
taxes in Japan between 1958 and 1997, in calculating the time series of the tax shelter value of land
reported in Table 3.    General discussion is found in Barthold and Ito (1992) for the inheritance tax
system and in Ito (1994) for the capital gains tax.


1. Inheritance Tax. After 1958, the inheritance tax in Japan depends now on (a) the number of
statutory heirs, (b) tax exemption, (c) tax rate schedule, and (d) tax credit. The inheritance tax is
calculated on the basis of the total property bequeathed and the number of statutory heirs (and not
distribution among them or nonstatutory heirs). The spouse and surviving children in our model family
are statutory heirs. Once the total property and the number of statutory shares are determined, the
actual tax is calculated in the following seven steps. Relevant information about tax exemption, rate
schedule and tax credit of each year from 1958 to 1997 is summarized in Table A.l.

      Step 1: Calculate the inheritance tax base. The inheritance tax base is the total net value
      of inherited assets minus basic exemption (fixed and per-statutory-heir exemptions). As
      explained in the text, the land is assessed as 60% of its market value while the financial assets
      are assessed at the market value.

      Step 2: Divide the tax base to each statutory heir according to statutory shares. The share
      is 50% for the spouse and 25% for each of the surviving two children if there is a surviving
      spouse. If not, the share is 50% for each of the surviving two children.

      Step 3: Apply the tax rate schedule to each heir's share of the tax base to get heir-wise taxes.

      Step .4: Sum all heir-wise taxes to get a total inheritance tax.

      Step 5: Distribute the total tax to each heir proportional to actual division of inherited assets
     among heirs.

      Step 6: Calculate tax credits based on actual division of inherited assets among heirs.

     Step 7: Deduct tax credits from the distributed tax to get actual heir-wise taxes.


2. Capital Gains Tax. Capital gains tax is levied when property is sold. It is a part of the income
tax system, and its tax base is the capital gains net of any expenses.


                                                      27
   Capital gains tax is far more complicated than the inheritance tax system, with various provisions for
specific individuals and corporations. Especially, there are many special provisions for small land owners
to reduce their capital gains tax. However, since our objective is to calculate the tax shelter value of
land for long-term large-scale land owners, we are concerned with the tax rate and special exemption for
them selling "quality residential land". The transition of the tax rate and the special exemption are
reported in Table A.2.

Appendix B: Rent and Price Data
Property price and rent data of Section 3 and land price and rent data of Section 2 are constructed by
the procedure explained in Nishimura and Sasaki (1995). We briefly explain their procedure in this
appendix. A detailed discussion of the procedure is found in Nishimura and Sasaki (1995), which also
contains information about publicly available land price data in Japan.
   We consider the price and rent of "typical" commercial and residential properties in the metropolitan
area. The typical commercial property here is an eleven-story building located in a Ward of Tokyo
that was the average of commercial office buildings owned by four major real estate companies (Mitsui,
Mitshubishi, Tokyo Tatemono, and Tokyu) in 1975. The typical residential property is the average of
two-story houses located in the six largest cities (Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya, Kyoto, Kobe, and Yokohama).
   As for the commercial property price and rent, we refine the method of Ueda (1992).            First, we
estimate every six months the average rent on the rental properties owned by the four major real estate
companies, from their financial statements. Secondly, we estimate the average value of these rental
properties in 1975, using information contained in Keizoku Chinryo no Jittai Shirabe [Survey on Actual
Rollover Rents] (Tokyo: Nichizei Fudosan Kanteishi Kai, 1976). The same survey contains the break-
down of the overall property value into the building value and the land value. Using this information
we estimate the average value of the buildings including the value of the land at that time. The land
value in the other years is then calculated utilizing the data contained in Shigaichi Kakaku Shisu [Urban
Land Price Indices] (Tokyo: Japan Real Estate Institute, various issues). The building value in the other
years is calculated using information about building costs contained in Kenchiku Tokei Nenpo [Annual
Report on Construction] (Ministry of Construction, various issues).
   The residential property price and rent are estimated in an analogous way. First, there are rollover
rent data in major cities in Kouri Bukka Chosa [Survey on Retail Prices] (Tokyo: General Administration
Agency, various issues). We calculate the average rent per square meter in the six largest cities. Secondly,



                                                    28
using information contained in Keizok'u Chinro no Jittai Shirabe like commercial properties, weestimate
the average value per square meter of the rental residential properties in 1975 and its breakdown into
the building value and the land value. The land value in the other years is then calculated utilizing
the data contained in Shigaichi Kakaku Shisu. The building value in the other years is calculated using
information about building costs contained in Zenkoku Mokuzo Kenchikuhi Sisun National Price Index
for Wooden Buildings] (Tokyo: Japan Real Estate Institute, various issues).
   The above procedure generates the data of the property rent, the property price, and the latter's
breakdown into the building price and the land price. Remaining is the land rent which is obtained by
subtracting the user cost of the building from the property rent.
   In Section 4, we consider various economic variables that may affect land markets. The variables and
their sources are: (a) commercial building starts (floor space): Monthly Construction Statistics (lvlinistry
of Construction); (b) commercial office rent:, Survey on Actual Rollover Office Rents (Tokyo Building
Association), (c) money supply, total bill-clearing volume, Nikkei average, new loan to real estate industry,
and market value of listed real estate companies in Tokyo Stock Exchange; all are taken from Economic
Statistics Annual (Bank of Japan); (d) GDP and fixed capital formation are taken from Annual Report
of National Accounts (Economic Planning Agency).

Appendix C: Carlson=Parkin (1975) method
 Carlson and Parkin (1975) introduce a method of extracting quantitative information about the distri-
 bution of expected inflation among economic agents from a survey of their expected direction of price

 change.
    Suppose that the proportion of responses in period t is computed for each of three categories: A
 for "go up"; B for "go down"; and C for "stay unchanged" (A + B + Ct = 1.) Carlson and Parkin
 assume that the individual answers as follows: (1) "up" if his or her expected inflation rate mt exceeds
 a threshold number 6; (2) "down" if mt is below —6; (3) "no change" if mt lies between — and             5t.

 Under this assumption, we have

                                        A=       Pr(mt     6),                                         (C.1)

                                        B=       Pr(mt      —t5t),                                     (C.2)

                                             =   Pr(—5t    <mt <ô)                                     (C.3)

 It is convenient to standardize mt by the transformation y = (mt — E (lrt)) /at, where E(rt) and tit are
 respectively the average and the standard deviation of expected inflation among the population. Then,

                                                      29
we have
                                                 = Pr(yt a,),                                       (0.4)
                                                 = Pr(yt <be),                                      (0.5)

with at and b given by
                                            at = (St — E(7rt))/at,                                  (0.6)
and
                                             = (—Se — E(irtfl/at.                                   (0.7)
Equations (0.6) and (0.7) can be solved for E(irt) and cit to give

                                       E(ir) = —St(at + bt)/(at — bt),                              (0.8)

                                                = 28t/(at — bt).                                    (0.9)
Suppose that Yt follows the standard normal distribution. We can then compute at and bt from equations
(C.4) and (0.5) given the A and        data. Suppose further that St is constant over time. Then, the role
of St is simply to scale E(ir) (see equation (0.8)). This scaling can be achieved by making the average
value of E(w) over the sample equal to the actual rate of inflation over the sample period, i.e.


                                                                                                   (0.10)

Substituting the obtained S into S in equations (0.8) and (0.9) will yield E(w) and cit.
   In this paper, we apply the Oarlson=Parkin method to the interest rate forecasts surveyed by the
Bank of Japan, which are obtained from "Nichigin Tankan". Every three months the Bank of Japan has
asked the selected companies in Japan whether they think loan rates will go up, go down or stay the
same over the next three months. Since we are concerned with the interest rate, we use the bank loan
contract rate in stead of lrt in (0.10).
   One problem arises in applying the Carlson=Parkin method to our data. Our data, though it is not
so common, includes periods in which no one answers "go up" i.e., A = 0 or in which no one answers "go
down" Bt = 0. In such periods, at or b2 cannot be obtained (see equations (0.4) and (0.5)). To avoid
this problem, we use the following ad hoc adjustment. If A = 0 (Bt = 0), we set A = 1% (Bt = 1%)
and decrease C by 1%.




                                                     30
References
[1] Aguilar, 0., and M. West (1988), 'Bayesian Dynamic Factor Models and Variance Matrix Discount-
   ing for Portfolio Allocation," Manuscript, ISDS, Duke University.

[2] Akaike, H. (1973), "Information Theory and Extension of the Maximum Likelihood Principle," in
   B.N. Petrov and F. Csaki, eds., Second International Symposium on Information Theory, Akademiai
   Kiado: Budapest.

[3] Barthold, A and T. Ito, (1992) "Bequest Taxes and Accumulation of Household Wealth: U.S.-Japan
    Comparison," in: T. Ito and A.O.,Krueger, eds., The Political Economy of Tax Reform, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 235-290.

[4] Boone, Peter and Jeffery Sachs (1987) "Is Tokyo Worth Four Trillion Dollars?: An Explanation for
    High Japanese Land Prices," Papers and Proceedings of the Seventh EPA International Symposium,
    161-197.

[5] Carison, J.A., and M. Parkin (1975), "Inflation Expectations," Economica, 42, 123-138.

[6] Engle, R.F., V.M. Ng, and M. Rothchild (1990), "Asset Pricing with a Factor-ARCH Structure:
    Empirical Estimates for Treasury Bills," Journal of Econometrics, 45, 213-237.

 [7] Fujita, Masashi and Masuo Kashiwadani (1989) "Testing the Efficiency of Urban Spatial Growth:
    A Case Study of Tokyo," Journal of Urban Economics 25, 156-192.

 [8] Hayashi, Hiroaki, Kyouji Hashimoto, Yoshitugu Hayashi and Hideo Nakai (1989) "Sisan to Zeisei
    (Assets and Taxation)" in: Honma, Masaaki, and Atoda, Naozumi, eds., Zeisei Kaikaku no Ji.sshou
    Bunseki (Empirical Analysis of Tax Reform), Tokyo: Tokyo Keizai, 104-137.

 [9] Hutchison, Michael M. (1994) "Asset Price Fluctuations in Japan: What Role for Monetary Policy?"
    Monetary and Economic Studies (Bank of Japan Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies) 12,
    61-83.

[10] Idee, Takako (1997) 'Chika Baburu to Chiikikan Shihon Ido (Land Price Bubbles and the Role of
    Inter-Regional Capital Movements)," in: K. Asako, N. Yoshino, and S. Fukuda, eds., Gendai Makuro
    Bunseki (Modern Macroeconomic Analysis), Tokyo:University of Tokyo Press, 219-247. [in Japanese]

[11] Ito, Takatoshi (1994) "Public Policy and Housing in Japan," in: Y. Noguchi and J. Porterba, eds.,
    Housing Markets in the United States and Japan, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 215-237.

                                                 31
[12] Ito, Takatoshi and T. Iwaisako (1996) "Explaining Asset Bubbles in Japan," Bank of Japan Monetary
    and Economic Studies, 14, 143-193.

[13] Iwata, K., F. Yamazaki., M. Hanazaki, and Y. Kawakami (1993). Tochi Zeisei no Riron to Jisshou
    (Theory and Empirical Studies on Land Taxation), Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shinposha. [in Japanese]

[14] Kanemoto, Yosbitsugu (1997) "The Housing Question in Japan," Regional Science and Urban Eco-
    nomics, 27, 613-641.

[15] Kanemoto, Yosbitsugu (1994) "Tochi-Kazei (Land Taxation)" in Noguchi, Y., .ed.,Zeisei-Kaikaku
    no Shin-sekkei, 141-184. [in Japanese]

[16] King, lvi., E. Sentana, and S. Wadhwani (1994), "Volatility and Links between National Stock
    Markets," Econometrica, 62, 901-933.

[17] Ljung, G.M., and G.E.P. Box (1978), "On a Measure of Lag of Fit in Time Series Models,"
    Biometrika, 67, 297-303.

[18] Nakagami, Yasuhiro (1995) "Fudosan Shijyo ni okeru Genzai Kacbi Moderu ni tsuite (Present Value
    Model in the Real Estate Markets)," Juutaku Tochi Keizai (Quarterly Jouraal of Housing and Land
    Economics), 16, 20-27. [in Japanese]

[19] Nishimura, Kiyohiko C. (1999) "Expectation Heterogeneity and Excessive Price Sensitivity in the
    Land Market," Japanese Economic Review, 50, p6-43.

[20] Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (1995) Nihon no Chika no Kimarikata (Howls the Price of Land Determined

    in Japan?) Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo. [in Japanese]

[21] Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (1996) "Kakaku Kakumei" no Makuro Keizagaku (Macroeconomics of "Price
    Revolution"), Tokyo: Nihoa Keizai Shinbun. [in Japanese]

[22] Nishimura, Kiyohiko C., and Shinya Sasaki (1995) "Nihon no Tochi no Chouka Shuueki-ritu: Nouchi,
    Juutakuchi, Shougyouchi (The Excess Rate of Returns on Land in Japan: Farmland, Residen-
    tial Land, and Commercial Land)," Keizaigaku Ronshu (Journal of Economics), 61, 124-135. [in
    Japanese]

[23] Ng, V.M., R.F. Engle, and Ni. Rothchild (1992), "A Multi-Dynamic Factor Model for Excess Re-
    turns," Journal of Econometrics, 52, 245-266.


                                                    32
[24] Schwarz, G. (1978), "Estimating the Dimension of a Model," Annals of Statistics, 6, 461-464.

[251 Shephard, N., and M.K. Pitt (1998), "Analysis of Time Varying Covariances: A Factor Stochastic
    Volatility Approach," Invited Paper, Sixth Valencia International Meeting on Bayesian Statistics.

[26] Stone, D. and W.T. Siemba (1993) "Land and Stock Prices in Japan," Journal of Economic Per-
    spectives, 7, 149-165.

[27] Takeuchi, Kazuhiko, Kiyohiko G. Nishimura, Dong-Kun Lee and Hitoshi Ikeguchi (1993) "Land
    Prices and Japanese City Planning: Evaluating the Effects of Land Use Control," in: D. Young
    Kim and Bruce Koppel, eds., Land Policy Problems in East Asia, Honolulu: East West Center, and
    Seoul: Korea Research Institute for Human Settlements, 109-138.

[28] Ueda, Kazuo (1992) Kokusai-Shushi Fukinko-Ka No Keizai Seisaku (Monetary Policy underImbal-
     ance in International Balance of Payments) Tokyo: Toyo-Keizai, Chapter 6.
                                                                                 "
[29] Yamazaki, F. (1999) "The Effects of Bequest Tax On Land Prices and Land Use, Japanese Eco-
     nomic Review, 50, 97-109.




                                                   33
</ref_section>
         Table 1. Net Land Acquisition by Sectors (All Types of Land)

Area                  Nation                                          Center of Tokyo
                  (in billion yen)                 (in m2)
Sector Household Corporate Public        Household Corporate Public
  1970    -2,119         1,624       495        na          na       na
  1971    -3,347         2,706       641        na          na       na
  1972    -4,642         3,791       851        na          na       na
  1973    -6,388         5,531       856        na          na       na
  1974    -3,394         2,343     1,052        na          na       na
  1975     -2,449         1,296    1,153        na          na       na
  1976     -1,953           749    1,204        na          na       na
  1977     -1,524            27    1,497        na          na       na
  1978       -243       -1,593     1,836        na          na       na
  1979     -2,382           327    2,055        na          na       na
  1980     -3,808         1,242    2,566        na          na       na
  1981     -4,175         1,484    2,691      -497         185      312
 1982         -3,560             776          2,784           -618            -80            764
  1983        -3,610             874          2,736           -702            625                 78
  1984        -3,178             465          2,713           -671            541            132
  1985        -5,649          2,795           2,853          -1,291         1,180            110
  1986        -5,899           2,961          2,938          -1,606         1,387            221
  1987        -8,806          5,350           3,456          -1,362         1,309             51
  1988       -12,489          8,437           4,053          -1,163           937            226
  1989       -14,484         10,273           4,211          -1,167           885            255
  1990       -17,710         12,985           4,725          -1,782         1,649             133

  1991       -10,018          5,012           5,006          -1,411         1,072            338
  1992        -8,366          2,456           5,910              na            na             ha
  1993         -4,766        -1,728           6,494            -258           245             45
  1994          2,056        -7,939           5,883              -80           63                 17
  1995         -5,591          -478           6,069              -69            57                12
  1996           -122         -5,394          5,516              -62            43                19
  1997              na            na             na              -52            64            -11

Source: Annual Report on National Accounts 1998, Economic Planning Agency, Tokyo no
Tochi [Land in Tokyo] 1985-1997 Tokyo Metropolitan Government.
Note: "na' denotes "not available'. The corporate sector includes financial and non-financial
organizations, and the public sector includes nonprofit organizations. Entries at the center of
Tokyo before 1989 are the sum of transactions in selected 4 wards and 4 cities, and the
remainders are in 23 wards.




                                                        34
               Table 2. Tax Shelter Value as Percentage of Market Price

 Year         Farmer           Non-Farmer     Year       Farmer           Non-Farmer
    1958          -7.07%              1.67%    1978          96.58%             5.28%
    1959          -5.89%             5.20%     1979          98.84%             9.35%
    1960          -6.30%             6.08%     1980         117.85%            10.47%
    1961          -5.97%            11.29%     1981         137.84%            12.11%
    1962          -7.79%             8.92%     1982         161. 14%           14.64%
    1963         - 10.06%            7.06%     1983         172.75%            15 .65%
    1964          -8.83%             7.99%     1984         172.54%            15.84%
    1965          -9.05%            11.36%     1985         129.11%            15.52%
    1966          -8.38%             9.18%     1986         102.23%             9.18%
    1967          -7.62%            16.89%     1987         184.40%            -2.84%
    1968          -6.13%            10. 16%    1988         258.36%            -3.28%
    1969          15.65%             3.9 1%    1989         271.99%             6.39%
    1970          14.64%             3.63%     1990         256.20%             5.81%
    1971          17.9 1%            3.79%     1991         338.33%            18.60%
    1972          11.56%             2.3 1%    1992         188. 18%           19.00%
    1973          13.21%             2.75%     1993         257.10%            35. 16%
    1974          12.90%             1.67%     1994         199.10%            27.31%
    1975         112.97%             1.45%     1995         169.33%            23.65%
    1976          99. 12%            6.00%     1996         16 1.55%           23. 10%
    1977          82.43%             5.32%     1997         128. 18%           19.65%
Source: Authors calculation.




                                              35
            Table 3. Order of Integration of Key Variables
Period                                                     1958-85      1958-97
Residential Land Price                                             1             2
Residential Land Rent                                              1             1

Residential FV (Fundamental Value)                                  1            2

TSVF (Tax Shelter Value for Farmer)                                 1            2
TSVNF (Tax Shelter Value for Non Farmer)                            1            1




Period                                                     1963-85      1963-97
Commercial Land Price                                               1            2
Commercial Land Rent                                                1            1


Commercial FV (Fundamental Value)                                   1            2


Note: The order of integration is obtained by the augmented Dicky-Fuller (ADF)
test where the length of lags is determined by the AIC criteria.




                                              36
                         Table 4. Estimation Results of Augmented PV models (Semi-annual data)


               Dependent Estimatio    Independent                                                                  Cointegratio
Land Use        Variable n Period       Variable              Coefficient    1-stat.   DW     Adj.R2 Fstat(P)                n
               P         1958-1997 constant                     355.639       0.367     1.709  0.976    0.000                **
                                       FV                          0.763      5.288
                                       TSVA                        0.081      2.118
                                     TSV0                          0.486      2.194
                                     rho                           0.608      4.103
                           1958-1985 constant                   -979.138     -1.302    1.966     0.925     0.025
                                     FV                            1.056      9.218
                                       TSVA                        0.022      0.284
                                       TSV11                       0.020      0.023
                                     rho                           0.423      2.105
Residential                                                                                                                  **
              P-P(-1)      1958-1997 constant                     79.396      0.381    1.608     0.625     0.000
                                     FV - FV(-1)                   0.573      4.211
                                       TSVA-TSVA(-l)               0.134      4.946
                                       TSV11-TSV11(-I)            -0.244     -0.669
                                       rho                         0.463      1.455
                           1958-1985 constant                    134.348      0.760    1.601     0.399     0.000            **
                                       FV-FV(-1)                   0.414      2.116
                                       TSVA -TSVA (-1)             0.007      0.069
                                       TSV11-TSV11(-l)             1.154      1.171
                                     rho                           0.533     0.8 17
              P            1963-1997 constant                -58342.081      -2.263    1.837     0.970     0.007
                                     FV                           1.083      10.969
                                       TSVH                      26.289       2.998
                                     rho                          0.798       5.298
                           1963-1985 constant                  8112.361       0.478    1.790     0.707     0.001
                                     FV                           0.887       7.456
                                       TSVn                     -12.429      -2.133
                                     rho                          0.416       2.070
Commercial                 1963-1997 constant                  -715.651      -0.130                                         **
              P-P(-1)                                                                  1.623     0.621     0.042
                                     FV - FV(-l)                  0.949       7.520
                                      TSV11-TSV11(-1)            24.015       2.680
                                      rho                         0.376       1.960
                           1963-1985 constant                  -234.038      -0.094    1.624     0.354     0.000            **
                                      FV - FV(-l)                 0.587       3.727
                                      TSV11-TSV11(-1)            10.340       0.557
                                      rho                          0.403     0.606
Source: Authors calculation.
Notes: (1) DW is the Darbin-Watson statistics. (2) Fstat(P) is the P value of F statistics for the constraint that the
coefficient of the FV should be unity. (3) Rho is the lag coefficient of AR( I) errors. (4) Sign ** in the Cointegration column
shows that the cointegration relationship among dependent and independent variables cannot be rejected at 5% significance
level.




                                                                       37
Table 5. Correlation coefficients between return and each variable

      variable                           correlation coefficient
  Residential land
   1 Money Supply                                0.411
   2 Total bill-clearing volume                  0.401
   3 Nikkei average                              0.211
   4 GDP                                         0.204
   5 Fixed capital formation                     0.189
   6 New loan to                                 0.177
       real estate industry
   7 Residential rent index                     -0.111
   8 Housing starts                             -0.075
   9 Market value of                            -0.048
       listed real estate companies
       (Tokyo Stock Exchange)
  10 Land transactions                           0.006
  Commercial land
   1 Total bill-clearing volume                  0.402
   2 Commercial office vacancy rate             -0.343
   3 New loan to                                 0.334
       real estate industry
   4 GDP                                         0.315
   5 Money supply                                0.297
   6 Fixed capital formation                    0.268
   7 Commercial building starts                 0.164
       (floor space)
   8 Commercial office rent                     0.132
      (new contracts)
   9 Nikkei average                             0.127
  10 Market value of                            0.090
      listed real estate companies
       (Tokyo Stock Exchange)
  11 Land transactions                          -0.05 5




                              38
                      Table 6. OLS Estimation of the VAR model.

                                Panel A. Residential Land
              =      return on the residential land
              =      detrended log money supply
          Y2 =    first-order difference in the log of total bill-clearing volume

                                                   Dependent variable
                  Independent variables        P          Y1
                  Constant                  0.031***       0.002       -0.019
                                            (0.008)       (0.003)     (0.021)
                  R_1                       O.501***     -0.153"       0.510
                                            (0.143)       (0.065)     (0.402)
                                             -0.082       0.097*      -0.029
                                            (0.121)       (0.055)     (0.341)
                                            0.886*       1.761***      0.080
                                            (0.225)       (0.102)     (0.635)
                  Y1,_2                    -0.935" _0.893***          -0.348
                                            (0.214)      (0.097)      (0.604)
                  Y2,_1                     0.161'        0.022        0.151
                                            (0.054)      (0.025)      (0.153)
                  Y2,_2                      0.084        0.032        -0.072
                                            (0.058)      (0.026)      (0.164)
                                             0.799        0.959        0.186
                LB(12)                       8.66        13.26**        7.16




    Figures in parentheses are standard errors. R2 is the coefficient of determination. LB(12)
is the Ljung=Box statistic fur up to twelfth order autocorrelation in the residuals. The
asymptotic distribution of LR(12) is x2 with six degrees of freedom. x2(6) critical values:
10.64 (10%), 12.59 (5%), 16.81 (1%). ", ", and *detlote statistical significance at 1%, 5%,
and 10% respectively.


                                             39
                               Panel B. Commercial Land

                return on the residential land
       Y1 =     first-order difference in the log of commercial office vacancy rate
       Y2 =     first-order difference in the log of total bill-clearing volume


                                                  Dependent variable
                 Independent variables          P                   Y2
                 Constant                    0.055" 0.080 -0.016
                                              (0.020)  (0.084) (0.021)
                 R—1                          -0.149    -0.143    0.146
                                             (0.145)   (0.615) (0.154)
                 R_2                         0.276"     -0.160    0.239
                                             (0.138)     (0.585)    (0.147)
                 Y1,_1                        0.001      -0.104     -0.038
                                             (0.036)     (0.154)    (0.039)
                                             -0.058       0.231     -0.022
                                             (0.037)     (0.016)    (0.039)
                                             0.359"      -0.501      0.132
                                             (0.145)     (0.617)    (0.155)
                                             0.324"      -0.628     -0.116
                                             (0.155)     (0.659)    (0.165)
                 R2                           0.463       0.163      0.205
                 LB(12)                       10.29       4.04       10.32




    Figures in parentheses are standard errors. R2 is the coefficient of determination. LB(12)
is the Ljung=Box statistic for up to twelfth order autocorrelation in the residuals. The
asymptotic distribution of LR(12) is x2 with six degrees of freedom. x2(6) critical values:
10.64 (10%), 12.59 (5%), 16.81 (1%). ", ", and deiiote statistical significance at 1%, 5%,
and 10% respectively.


                                             40
 Table 7. Maximum likelihood estimation of the model that consists of equations
                               (3.8) and (3.9)

                                Panel A. Residential Land

               yit =    innovation in the log of money supply
               y2t      innovation in the log of total bill-clearing volume


Sample                   Full sample (1 974.2—1996.1)                 Sub-sample (1974.2—1984.2)
Number of                              44                                           21
observations
Interest rate        March/September        June/December        March/September June/December
forecasts
go                        -0.009                    0.013             -0.056"                -0.033"
                          (0.011)               ( 0.008)               (0.019)               (0.010)
91                        0.105**                 0.022                0.188*                0.060
                          (0.043)                (0.016)               (0.010)               (0.012)
92                        0.029"                0.022"                  0.012                 0.030*
                          (0.014)                (0.011)               (0.019)               (0.016)
c1                         0.003                  0.003               -0.010."               -0.011k"
                          (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.002)               (0.001)
C2                         0.010                  0.014                  0.013
                          (0.043)                (0.012)                (0.010)               (0.008)
a                       0.856x10°             0.892x107
                                             (0.126x102)
                                                                       0.014*
                                                                        (0.002)
                                                                                             0.015***
                                                                                              ( 0.002)
                       (0.142x103)
u1                        0.012                 0.012"                 0.005***             0.210x108
                           (0.002)               (0.002)                (0.001)            (0.800 x 10_6)
 2                        0.086"                0.085                  0.036"                 0.036
                          (0.016)                (0.016)                (0.009)                (0.009)
 Log-likelihood            271.3                  269.7                  154.7
 LR for ho
 91 = 92 0                 8.12                     5.02               10.39"                 13.81
  Mm                        0.014                   0.019               -0.017                 -0.017
  Max                       0.069                   0.044               0.059                   0.029




  * Figures in parentheses are standard errors. , • *, and denote statistical significance at
1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. LR is the likelihood ratio statistic to test the null hypothesis of
go = gi = 0. The asymptotic distribution of this statistic is x2 with two degrees of freedom.
2(2) critical values: 4.61 (10%), 5.99 (5%), 9.21 (1%). Miii and Max are tile minimum and
maximum values of the estimates of .

                                               41
                                Panel B. Commercial Land

             yit = innovation in the log of commercial office vacancy rate
             921 = innovation in the log of total bill-clearing volume


 Sample                   Full sample (1 974.2—1996.1)                 Sub-sample (1974.2—1984.2)
 Number of                              44                                          21
 observations
 Interest rate       March/September         June/December        March/September June/December
 forecasts
 go                       0.146"                     0.077              0.072"                  0.032
                           (0.023)                 (0.073)              ( 0.034)               (0.053)
 91                       -0.320'"                  -0.055              -0.139                  0.064
                           (0.054)                 (0.163)              (0.104)               ( 0.137)
 92                       0.194"                 0.103"                 0.310'"               0.158'"
                           (0.036)                 (0.033)              (0.079)                (0.046)
 c                         -0.053                   -0.056              -0.085                 -0.077
                           (0.045)                 (0.043)              (0.060)                (0.060)
 c2                       0.025"                 0.023'"                0.034"                0.028'"
                           (0.009)                 (0.007)              (0.010)                (0.007)
 c,-                     0.118x107             0275x10°                 0.045"              0.151x10°
                        (0.835x i0—°)         (0.133 x 10_2)            (0.020)            (0.825 x 10)
 01                       0.307"                 0.306"                 0.268'"              0.271'"
                           (0.023)                 (0.040)              (0.045)                (0.044)
 2                        0.082'"                0.083'"                0.036'"               0.041'"
                           (0.013)                 (0.013)              (0.006)                (0.009)
 Log-likelihood              90.5                   90.0                  54.1                   54.6
 LR for ho
 91 = 92 = 0              10.23*                   9.36"                 6.60"                 7.59"
 /3
  Mm                        0.007                  0.029                 0.017                  0.052
  Max                       0.117                  0.107                 0.170                  0.164




  * Figures in parentheses are standard errors. "', ", and 'denote statistical significance at
1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. LR is the likelihood ratio statistic to test the null hypothesis of
go = 91 = 0. The asymptotic distribution of this statistic is x° with two degrees of freedon.
y2(2) critical values: 4.61 (10%), 5.99 (5%), 9.21 (1%). Mm and Max are the minimum and
maximum values of the estimates of .


                                              42
                                    Table A.1. Transition of Inheritance Taxation: 1958-1997
                                                                                                                                       Unit = Million yen

Year                1958-1961 1962-1963 1964-1965                1966-1970 1971-1972 1973-1974 1975- 1987               1988-1991        1992-1993       1994-present

Basic_Exemption
Fixed                  1.5             2       I
                                                       2.5                  4                 6              20            40                 48             50

PerStatutory     0.3                         0.5                            0.8               1.2            4              8                 9.5            10
Heir
Marginal Tax Corresponding Tax
Rate               Bracket
             10%      0-2                                                                                                  0-4                0-7            0-8
             15%      2-5                                                                                                  4-8                7-14          8-16
          20%         5-9                                                                                                 8-14               14-25          16-30
          25%         9-15                                                                                                14-23              25-40          30-50
          30%         15-23                                                                                               23-35              40-65         50-100
          35%        23-33                                                                                                35-50              65-100
          40%        33-48                                                                                                50-70          100-150          100-200
          45%        48-70                                                                                               70-100          150-200
          50%        70-100                                                                                              100-150         200-270          200-400
          55%       100-140                                                                                              150-200         270-350
          60%       140-180                                                                                             200-250          350-450          400-2000
          65%       180-250                                                                                             250-500          450-1000
          70%       250-500                                                                                                                   1000         2000-
                                                                                                                          500-
          75%         500-
Special Exemp lion and Tax Credit for Surviving Spouse
Exemption                     no special provision                   2            4           6                         no special provision
                                                                                                                     amount of inheritance   on

                                                                                                      Max [40          Mm [X, spouse's actually inherited asset
                                                                                                      million yen,                    value]
Tax Credit                                           no special provision                             1/2 of,         x = Max [Y million yen, value of spouse's
                                                                                                      spouses
                                                                                                                                      statutory share]
                                                                                                      actually
                                                                                                      inherited
                                                                                                      asset value]                  Y = 80                Y = 160

Special Exemption for Farmer's Heirs


Source: Ministry of Finance, Tax Bureau, An Outline of Japanese Taxes (various issues).
Note: This table shows only the part of the inheritance tax system which is relevant to the   model family described in the text.




                                                                                      43
  Table A.2. Transition of Capital Gains Taxation on Long-Term Large-ScaleLand Holding: 1958-1997
Unit = million yen
Year                                      '-'68
Eligibility of "long-                                                                                    over 5 years
term holding
            •,,                     over 3 years
                                                                                                                           combination of separate and
                  .
                                                  .
                                                                           separate (flat rate)                                                 .
Type of Taxation                   comprehensive                                                                                      comprehensive

Special Exemption                                                                                                                        30
                                                                          10                        17
Residential land                        .       .
                                 no special provision                          1.5               2.5                                      5
Farmland
Marginal Tax Rate (%)
          Bracket
                                                                                                                                 26
           0-20                                                                                                                                       26
           20-40
                                                                     14                   20               26           progressive rate
           40-60                  progressive rate(*)
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Marginal Tax Rate for Farmland in Metropolitan Area (%)
      Bracket
                                                                                                                                 20
       0-20                                                                                                                                            20
                                           .      . .                                                      20
                                   No special provision                                        14
                                                                                                                                 26
                                                                                                                                                       26
              40-


 Year                            82183184185186187                             881891901 91192193194195196197198
 Eligibility of 'long-                         over 10 years                                                     over 5 years
            .
 term holding
                                                                                                                                                        Sc1JL1 41W

                                                                                                         separate (flat)                              (progressive
 Type of Taxation                         separate (progressive)

 Special Exemption(****)
                                                                                               30
 Residential land
                                                            5                                                                8
 Farmland
 Marginal Tax Rate (%)

             0
       Bracket

             20-40
                                                      26
                                                                                      26                                    20
                                                                                                                                                             20

             40-60                                                                                                                                           26
             6080                                     125
               80-
  Marginal Tax Rate for Farmland in Metropolitan Area (%)
            Bracket
                                          20                       26                          26            I
                                                                                                            -j 35.5                   No special provision
                                          26                       32.5                        29.5
                40-
                                                                        Taxes (various issues). This table shows oniy a part of the capital gain system which is
   Source: Ministry of Finance, Tax Bureau, An Outline of Japune,ce
   relevant to the model family described in the text.
                                                                                                           and is taxed as usual income; () 3/4 of this part is
   Notes: (5) 1/2 of capital gain with an exemption of 0.3 million yen is added to usual income tax base,                    1/2 of this part is added to usual
   are added to usual income tax base, and is taxed as usual income. The resulting tax is added to the first 26% tax; (*5*)
                                                                                              of that part is added to usual income tax base. The resulting tax
   income tax base, and is taxed as usual income, If capital gain exceeds 80 million yen, 3/4
                                              tax reform of 1993 allowed exemption of the inheritance tax payment from capital gains if the heirs sell the land
   is added to the first 26% tax. (5*5*) The
   in order to pay the inheritance tax.




                                                                                     44
                Figure 1 Nominal Residential Land Price, Stock Price and CPI
                                       (1955.3=1)


250.00



200.00



150.00



100.00



 50.00



                                                            eeeeeeeeeeeeOeeeO
  0.00
         1955      1960     1965      1970     1975      1980      1985       1990     1995


     ropolitan Residential Land Price                            -0 - - CPI       —   — Stock

Source: Land Price (Urban Land Price Index, Japan Real Estate Institute), Stock Price (TOPIX, Tokyo Stock
                                               Exchange),
         CPI (Annual Report on the Consumer Price Index, Management and Coordination Agency)




                                                  45
            Figure 2 Rate of Change of Nominal Land Price, Stock Price and CPI


70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

 0%
   ii
-10%

-20%

-30%

-40%

        •                                            "0 - - CPJ—-
                                                                               StJ
            Metropolitan Residential Land Price                            —
 I




                                           46
                                        Figure 3
             Contributuions of Tax Shelter Values to Residential Land Prices


40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

 5%

 0%
                           1969       1974         1980      1985        1991     1996
      1958     1963


             Source: Authors calculation from the estimated results of Table 4.




                                              47
                        Figure 4.
         Heterogeneity of Investors' Expectations
0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6



0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0       I   I             I   I      I      I   I         I    I I I I I   I   I   I   I




      74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95


                           March/September           June/December




                                    48
