                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF
                            ORGANIZATIONAL PRACTICES ON THE
                              PRODUCTIVITY OF UNIVERSITY
                             TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER OFFICES:
                                AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

                                            Donald Siegel
                                            David Waldman
                                             Albert Link

                                         Working Paper 7256
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7256


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 1999




A previous version of this paper was presented at the April 1999 NBER Conference on Organizational
Change and Performance Improvement in Santa Rosa, CA. We thank Leanne Atwater, Susan Helper, Adam
Jaffe, Robert Sauer, Jonathan Silberman, Jerry Thursby, Marie Thursby, Steve Zylstra, and seminar
participants at the NBER, Purdue, LSU, and the University of Nottingham for their insightful comments and
suggestions. We are also deeply indebted to the many administrators, scientists, managers, and entrepreneurs
who agreed to be interviewed. Martha Cobb and Melissa Zidle provided capable research assistance.
Financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through the NBER Project on Industrial Technology
and Productivity is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Donald Siegel, David Waldman, and Albert Link. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Assessing the Impact of Organizational Practices on the
Productivity of University Technology Transfer Offices:
An Exploratory Study
Donald Siegel, David Waldman, and Albert Link
NBER Working Paper No. 7256
July 1999
JEL No. D23, L31, O31, O32

                                             ABSTRACT

        We present quantitative and qualitative evidence (field research) on university
technology transfer offices (TTOs). These offices negotiate licensing agreements with firms
to commercialize university-based technologies. A stochastic frontier production function
framework is used to assess the relative productivity of 113 university TTOs. Our field
research provided a useful reality check on the specification of the econometric model. The
empirical findings imply that licensing activity is characterized by constant returns to scale.
Environmental and institutional factors appear to explain some of the variation in TTO
efficiency.
        Relative productivity may also depend on organizational practices in university
management of intellectual property, which potentially attenuate palpable differences in the
motives, incentives, and organizational cultures of the parties to licensing agreements.
Unfortunately, there are no existing data on such practices, so we rely on inductive, qualitative
methods to identify them. We present detailed information on our use of these methods. This
information may be useful to economists who are contemplating fieldwork. Based on 55
interviews of managers/entrepreneurs, scientists, and administrators at five research
universities, we conclude that the most critical organizational factors are likely to be reward
systems for faculty, TTO staffing and compensation practices, and actions taken by
administrators to extirpate informational and cultural barriers between universities and firms.

Donald Siegel                                                 David Waldman
School of Management                                    School of Management
Arizona State University West                           Arizona State University West
Phoenix, AZ 85069-7100                                  Phoenix, AZ 85069-7100
dsiegel@asu.edu                                         David.A.Waldman@asu.edu

Albert N. Link
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Greensboro, NC 27412
Al_Link@uncg.edu
                                                                                                                3



I. INTRODUCTION

        Universities have been criticized in some circles for being more adept at developing

new technologies than moving them into private sector applications. This is potentially

problematic since success in university/industry technology transfer (henceforth, UITT)

could be a critical factor in sustaining the global competitiveness of U.S. firms. Some

federal agencies have responded to this concern by providing incentives for universities to

form partnerships with firms.1 Expectations regarding a quicker commercial "payoff' to basic

research have risen accordingly. To build political support for their institutions, university

leaders frequently cite the role of technology transfer in stimulating local economic

development. Facing tighter budgets, these administrators often promise to deliver more

"bang for the buck" in technology transfer. The private sector has also chimed in,

expressing frustration with obstacles that impede the process of commercialization, such as

disputes that arise with the university regarding intellectual property rights.

        These concerns have raised the visibility of UITT in the public policy arena. In recent

years, universities have attempted to formalize UITT and capture a larger share of the

economic rents associated with technological innovation by establishing technology transfer

offices (henceforth, TTOs). TTOs facilitate technological diffusion through the licensing to

industry of inventions or intellectual property resulting from university research. Many

institutions established a TTO in the aftermath of the University and Small Business Patent

Procedure Patent Procedures Act of 1980, otherwise known as the Bayh-Dole Act.


1 For instance, as noted in Cohen et at. (1998), NSF has established Science and Technotogy Centers and other
 programs that require universities to attract matching funds from industry.
                                                                                                                   4



         Bayh-Dole dramatically changed incentives for firms and universitieg to engage in

U ITT. It simplified the UITT process by instituting a uniform patent policy and removing

many restrictions on licensing. Furthermore, it allowed universities to own the patents that

arise from federal research grants. The framers of Bayh-Dole asserted that a streamlined

federal UITT policy and university ownership and management of intellectual property would

accelerate commercialization because universities would now have greater flexibility in

negotiating licensing agreements and firms would be more willing to engage in them.2

         It appears that Bayh-Dole has indeed resulted in a more rapid rate of technological

diffusion. According to the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM (1997)),

the annual number of patents granted to U.S. universities surged from about 300 in 1980 to

approximately 2,000 in 1996, while licensing of new technologies has increased almost

twofold since 1991. Annual streams of revenue accruing from these licenses have risen

from about $160 million in 1991 to $611 million in 1997, now constituting about 2.5% of

university R&D expenditures (GAO (1998)). Major products in a wide variety of industries

have been developed through UITT, such as the Boyer-Cohen "gene-splicing" technique

that launched the biotechnology industry, diagnostic tests for breast cancer and

osteoporosis, internet search engines, music synthesizers, computer-aided design (CAD),

and environmentally-friendly technologies.

         Despite the potential importance of UITT as a mechanism for generating local

technological spillovers and as a source of revenue to the university, there is little

2 "We came to the realization that this failure to move from abstract research into useful commercial innovation was
largely a result of the government's patent policy and we sought to draft legislation which would change this policy
                                                                                                                 5




systematic empirical evidence on any dimension of the performance or prdductivity of UITT

activity. The purpose of this paper is to fill this void.

        Our measures of relative productivity are constructed from benchmarking surveys

conducted by AUTM for the years 1991-1994. We adjust these estimates of relative

efficiency to reflect environmental and institutional factors that can influence the rate of

technological diffusion at a given university. We postulate that relative performance in UITT

may also depend on organizational practices in university management of intellectual

property, which potentially attenuate palpable differences in the motives, incentives, and

organizational cultures of the parties to licensing agreements (university administrators/TTO

directors, managers/entrepreneurs, and academic scientists).

        Unfortunately, there are no existing data on such practices, nor is it precisely

clear which organizational factors are most critical to effectiveness in UITT. Therefore,

we rely on inductive, qualitative methods (field research) to identify these variables,

which are typically ignored in conventional productivity studies. The field research also

provided a useful reality check on the specification of our econometric model.

Accordingly, we conducted 55 structured, face-to-face interviews of UITT stakeholders

(15 administrators, 20 managers or entrepreneurs, and 20 scientists affiliated at five

universities). We sought feedback from these individuals on the nature of the UITT

"prod uction process," the barriers to effective U ITT, recommendations to improve the

process, and the importance of networks and relationships in UITT.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe a set


in a way to quickly and directly stimulate the development and commercialization of inventions" (Bayh (1996)).
                                                                                             6



of internal and external factors that influence the extent of UITI activity at given university.

Differences in the actions, motives, and organizational environments of the parties to

licensing agreements are also considered. We conjecture that these differences can

potentially undermine efforts to commercialize university-based technologies. This

discussion serves to underscore the potential importance of organizational practices as a

determinant of the extent of UITT activity at a given university. Section III outlines the

method for assessing the relative productivity in UITT. Preliminary empirical results are

presented in Section IV. Section V describes our qualitative research design and methods.

Section VI presents the qualitative findings. The final section consists of preliminary

conclusions and suggestions for additional research.


II. DETERMINANTS OF UITT

Internal Inputs
       Figure 1 presents a schematic of the process of the transfer of a technology from a

university to a firm or entrepreneur, through the negotiation of a licensing agreement. It also

identifies the three key stakeholders involved at each stage of the transfer: academic

scientists, TTO personnel/university administrators, and firm/entrepreneurs.

       The first stage of the process is scientific discovery. According to the Bayh-Dole Act,

the scientist is then required to file an invention disclosure with the TTO. Our field research,

which is described in greater detail in Sections V and VI, revealed that this rule is rarely

enforced. Thus, TTO personnel must spend a portion of their time encouraging faculty

members to disclose inventions.
                                                                                             7




       Once the invention is formally disclosed, the TTO must simultaneoii%ly evaluate

the commercial potential of the technology and decide whether to patent the innovation.

Often, interest in the technology by an industry partner provides sufficient justification

for filing a patent. In other instances, the TTO must make these judgements before

industry expresses an interest in the technology. Furthermore, universities must decide

whether to seek global or domestic patent protection. Domestic protection is

substantially cheaper, but often much less valuable to potential licensees, particularly

when foreign markets are perceived to be highly lucrative relative to the U.S. market.

As confirmed in our interviews, this decision poses a dilemma for many TTOs because

they have limited resources for filing patents.

       If the patent is awarded, the TTO will often attempt to market the technology. Faculty

members are frequently involved in the marketing phase because they are often in a good

position to identify potential licensees and because their technical expertise often makes

them a natural partner for companies that wish to commercialize the technology, It is

important to note that Figure 1 potentially overstates the role of patents in U ITT. As

reported in Jensen and Thursby (1998) and confirmed in our field research, many firms will

frequently license a technology before it is patented. Furthermore, according to AUTM,

university technology managers tend to view patents as both as an input and output of

UITT. This implies that the key "raw material" in UITT is the invention disclosure. Invention

disclosures constitute the pool of available technologies for licensing.

       The final stages of UITT involve the negotiation of a licensing agreement with firms or
                                                                                           8



individual entrepreneurs. These agreements could include such benefits t the university as

royalties, "follow-on" sponsored research agreements, or an equity stake in a new venture

based on the licensed technology. We discovered on our field visits that many universities,

especially public institutions, are quite sensitive to the charge that they are "giving away"

university-based, taxpayer-funded technologies that yield substantial windfall profits. As a

result, many TTOs are adopting a hard line in licensing negotiations.

         Interviews with university administrators revealed that TTO involvement does not end

with the licensing agreement. It is quite common for ITOs to devote substantial resources

to the maintenance and renegotiation of licensing agreements. This is attributed both to the

embryonic nature of the technologies and to the fledgling nature of many of the firms that

license university-based technologies.

         We wish to stress that our qualitative analysis greatly improved our ability to

model the "production process" of U ITT, by helping us identify the appropriate set of

outputs and inputs to include in the production function. For instance, we began this

project with the view that there are multiple outputs of UITT. Discussions with university

administrators, the "producers" in our model, revealed that licensing activity is by far the

most critical output, so we have now focused our attention on this critical dimension of

UITT performance. Our qualitative work also revealed that we had greatly

underestimated the importance of faculty involvement or "buy-in" to UITT. This

stemmed, in part, from our literal interpretation of the language contained in the Bayh-

Dole Act. As noted earlier, Bayh-Dole stipulates that faculty members working on

 See   AUTM (1997) pp. 20-2 1.
                                                                                                                 9



federal research grants must disclose their inventions to the TTO. During ur

interviews, however, we discovered that this provision is rarely enforced, so that
                                                                                             -
disclosure is actually not mandatory.

        Thus, invention disclosures are essentially an intermediate input. The number

of disclosures will depend, to some extent, on the efforts of the TTO to elicit disclosures

and faculty interest in UITT. This, of course, raises the critical issue of organizational

incentives for faculty and TTO personnel to engage in these activities. Consistent with

the findings of recent theoretical and empirical studies summarized in Lazear (1999),

we hypothesize that human resource management and other organizational practices

that influence such incentives could explain some of the variation in UITT performance

across universities.

         In sum, our analysis reveals that the following internal factors should be

considered (internal) inputs of UITT: invention disclosures (a proxy for the set of

available technologies), labor employed by the TTO, and (external) legal fees incurred

to protect the university's intellectual property.4



Environmental/Institutional Variables

         University licensing activity may also depend on a vector of environmental and

institutional variables. For instance, the presence of a medical school on campus and the

public status of the university may be important institutional factors. Pressman et al. (1995)


  This amount includes expenditures in support of prosecution, maintenance, litigation, and interference costs
  relating to patents and/or copyrights (see AUTM (1997)).
                                                                                         10



report that over 60% of university licenses result from a biomedical inventin. Public

universities may have less flexible UITT policies than private universities regarding the

formation of startup companies and interactions with private firms. Furthermore, public

universities may be less focused on UITT as a source of revenue than private universities.

An example of an environmental variable is a measure of state-level economic growth,

which can be viewed as a proxy for the ability of firms in the local region to sponsor R&D

projects at the university.

       In explaining the relative efficiency of TTOs, it may also be important to control for the

R&D activity of local firms. A plethora of recent studies provide support for the notion that

university research generates local technological spillovers. Bania, Eberts, and Fogarty

(1993) find that there is a positive relationship between university R&D and the number of firm

startups in the same SMSA. Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) report that patents

(new technologies) generated within the same state (and SMSA) are more likely to be cited

by firms in the same state or SMSA. Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998), Zucker and Darby

(1996), and Audretsch and Stephan (1996) directly examine interactions between academic

scientists and local firms and find that these formal and informal linkages play an important

role in promoting innovation in biotechnology.



Organizational Factors

       An understanding of the potential importance of organizational practices

begins with a consideration of the actions, motives, and organizational cultures of

UITT stakeholders. As shown in Table 1, we assert that a primary motive of
                                                                                         11



university scientists is recognition within the scientific community, which eranates

from publications in top-tier journals, presentations at prestigious conferences, and

federal research grants. This is an especially strong motive for untenured faculty

members. Other possible motives include financial gain and a desire to secure

additional funding for graduate assistants, post-doctoral fellows, and laboratory

equipment/facilities. The norms, standards, and values of scientists reflect an

organizational culture that values creativity, innovation, and especially, an

individual's contribution to advances in knowledge (basic research).

       The TTO must work with scientists and managers or entrepreneurs to

structure a deal. We hypothesize that the primary motive of the TTO is to protect

and market the university's intellectual property. Secondary motives include

promoting technological diffusion and securing additional research funding for the

university via royalties, licensing fees, and sponsored research agreements.

Recall that a primary reason for the federal government's relinquishment of

intellectual property rights, as stipulated in Bayh-Dole, was to accelerate the

commercialization of university-based technologies. Many managers and

scientists remarked that TTOs were especially committed to their role as guardian

of the university's intellectual property. As such, technology licensing officers tend

to be somewhat inflexible and conservative in structuring deals. This inflexibility is

consistent with the bureaucratic organizational culture of the university.

       Firms and entrepreneurs seek to commercialize university-based

technologies for financial gain. They are also concerned about maintaining
                                                                                         12



proprietary control over these technologies, which can potentially be achieved

through an exclusive worldwide license. The entrepreneurial organizational culture

of most firms (especially startup companies and high tech firms) rewards

timeliness, speed, and flexibility. Reflecting the values of this culture, a number of

the managers we visited with stressed the importance of "time to market" as a

determinant of success in UITT, in part, because they are convinced that there are

significant first mover advantages in high technology markets.

       It is apparent from Table 1 that there are palpable differences in the motives,

incentives, and organizational cultures of UITT stakeholders that could potentially

impede technological diffusion. Therefore, we hypothesize that some of the

variation in UITT performance across universities can be attributed to

organizational behaviors that potentially help to resolve these differences. Our

inductive, qualitative analysis, described in Sections V and VI, will help us identify

these factors.



III. ASSESSING RELATIVE PRODUCTIVITY IN UITT

       In the previous section, we identified a set of potential determinants of U ITT, which

be can expressed in equation form as:

                 (1) UITT = f (tNT, ENV, ORG)

where tNT denotes a vector of internal inputs used to generate UITT output, ENV

represents a vector of environmental and institutional variables, ORG is a vector of

organizational practices.
                                                                                             13



      To assess relative productivity in UITT, we use the stochastic frontier estimation

(henceforth, SFE) methodology developed by Aigner, Lovell, and Schmidt (1977) and

Meeusen and Van den Broeck (1977). SFE generates a production (orcost) frontier with a

stochastic error term that consists of two components: a conventional random error ("white

noise") and a term that represents deviations from the frontier, or relative inefficiency.

       SFE can be contrasted to data envelopment analysis (DEA), a non-parametric

estimation technique that has also been used extensively to compute relative productivity in

service industries (see Charnes et al. (1994)). Thursby and Kemp (1998) use DEA to

assess the relative efficiency of university TTOs. DEA and SFE each have key strengths

and weaknesses. DEA is a mathematical programming approach that does not require the

specification of a functional form for the production function. It can also cope more readily

with multiple inputs and outputs than parametric methods. On the other hand, DEA models

are deterministic and highly sensitive to outliers. SFE allows for statistical inference but

requires restrictive functional form and distributional assumptions. We believe that SEE

and DEA should be viewed as complements, not substitutes.

        In SFE, a production function of the following form is estimated:

                           (2)   y, =xJ3+e1

where the subscript I denotes the ith university, y represents output, x is a vector of

inputs, 13 is the unknown parameter vector, and       is an error term with two

components,       = V - U1, where U, represents a non-negative error term to account

for technical inefficiency, or failure to produce maximal output, given the set of

inputs used. V1 is a symmetric error term that accounts for random effects. The
                                                                                          14



standard assumption (see Aigner, Lovell, and Schmidt (1977)) is that the 15 and V,

have the following distributions:    U,     i.i.d. N(O,a2), u, 0
                                     V      i.i.d. N(0,y2)

That is, the inefficiency term (U) is presumed to have a half-normal distribution,

which indicates that universities are either "on the frontier" or below it. An

important parameter in this model is y = 2/ (o.2÷ a2), the ratio of the standard

error of technical inefficiency to the standard error of statistical noise, which is

bounded between 0 and 1. Note that y = 0 under the null hypothesis of an absence

of inefficiency, signifying that all of the variance can be attributed to statistical

noise.

         In recent years, SFE models have been developed that al!ow the technical

inefficiency term to be expressed as a function of a vector of environmental and

organizational variables. This is consistent with our notion that deviations from the

frontier (which measure relative inefficiency in UITT) are related to institutional and

organizational factors. Following Reifschneider and Stevenson (1991), we assume

that the U are independently distributed as truncations at zero of the N( m12)

distribution with

                      (3) rn =z,ö
where z is a vector of environmental, institutional, and organizational variables that

are hypothesized to influence efficiency and ö is a parameter vector.5

         Following Battese and Coelli (1995), we derive maximum likelihood
                                                                                                  15



estimates of the parameter vectors 3 and ö from simultaneous estimation d1 the

production function and inefficiency term equations, using the FRONTIER

statistical package (See Coelli (1994)). Based on these parameter values, we will

compute estimates of relative productivity.

        Our empirical specification of equation (2) is based on the knowledge

production function framework developed by Griliches (1979), here extended to

university licensing, our proxy for UITT output. We assume a three-factor, log-

linear Cobb-Douglas production function, relating licensing to three inputs:

invention disclosures, TTO staff, and legal expenditures:

(4) ln(LICENSE) 13 + ln(INVDISC,) + j2 ln(STAFF) +                           ln(LEGAL,) + V - U

where LICENSE = average annual licensing agreements or revenue
      INVDISC = average annual invention disclosures
        STAFF = average annual TTO employees
        LEGAL = average annual external legal expenditures


with the technical inefficiency (Ui) term expressed as:

       (5) Ui =      + k k ENV1 + m 4m ORG1 ÷ p1


where ENV and ORG are defined as in equation (1) and j.i is a classical

disturbance term. As noted in the previous section of the paper, we do not have

systematic measures of ORG. The equation we actually estimate contains only the

following environmental and institutional factors:

      (5a) U = + öM MED + 8 PUBLIC + 6R lNDRD+ 6 INDOUTJ +


 Battese and Coelli (1995) have recently extended this model to incorporate panel data.
                                                                                                            16



where MED and PUBLIC are dummy variables denoting whether the univsity has

a medical school and whether it is a public institution, respectively: and INDRD and

INDOUT are average annual industry R&D intensity and average annual real

output growth in the university's state (j), respectively, during the sample period.6

         The characteristics of our data and parameter estimates of equations (4)

and (5a) are presented in the following section.



IV. DATA and RESULTS

        Our primary data source is a comprehensive survey conducted by AUTM.

The survey was completed by TTO directors at 183 academic institutions for the

years 1991-1994. We eliminated teaching hospitals, research institutes, and

Canadian institutions, leaving us with 113 U.s. universities. This is by no means a

random sample of research universities, as evidenced by the fact that 80 out of 89

U.S. "Research 1" institutions are included in our final sample.'

         The AUTM file contains annual data on the number of licensing agreements

(LICENESE1), royalty income generated by licenses (LICENSE2), invention

disclosures (INVDISC), number of full-time-equivalent employees in the TTO

(STAFF), and legal expenditures on UITT (LEGAL). Our data sources for state-

 level industrial R&D (INDRD) and real output growth (INDOUT) are NSF and the


 6 An alternative is to use MSA-level R&D data on industrial innovations and R&D employment, provided in
 Anselin, Varga, and Acs (1997). Unfortunately, these data (from 1982) do not correspond to our sample period.
  Source: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching-To qualify for Research I status, a university must
 award 50 or more doctoral degrees and receive at least $40 million annually in federal research grants.
                                                                                                             17


                                                                                              P
BEA.8

        Several difficulties with the output data should be noted. First, licensing

agreements vary substantially in their significance, making it dangerous-to draw

inferences about aggregate technology flows based on the number of deals. To

address this concern, we use licensing revenue as an additional measure of

output. Another limitation is that we focus only on two UITT outputs: (I) licensing

agreements and (2) royalties. Sponsored research and the formation of startup

companies can also be viewed as outputs of U ITT. However, it is important to note

that startups and sponsored research agreements are often corollaries to licensing

agreements. Along similar lines, one could also assume a broader view of

technology transfer and consider patents, invention disclosures, and even students

as UITT outputs. Given the uncertainty surrounding this issue, we asked UITT

stakeholders to identify the outputs of UITT in our field research.

        Descriptive statistics for the inputs and outputs of the licensing production

function are presented in Table 2. The average university in our sample generates

12 licensing agreements per year, earns $1.6 million in licensing income,

generates 46 invention disclosures, employs eight workers in the TTO, and spends

$300,000 on external legal fees to protect its intellectual property.

        Table 3 contains two sets of parameter estimates of the stochastic frontier


8 Source: NSF-Research and Development in Industry (1991-1994), U.S. BEA (1999)-Gross State Product data
reported in Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth.
  A similar problem is encountered with patents. Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993), Trajtenberg, Henderson,
and Jaffe (1997) and Henderson, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (1998) weight patents on the basis of the number of
                                                                                                                           18



production function and inefficiency models outlined in the previous section

(equations (4) and (5a)) for two dependent variables: average annual number of

licensing agreements and average annual licensing revenues, respectively.

Columns (1) and (4) present OLS results, which are used to obtain starting values

for the regression parameters in the SFE model.'° Columns (2) and (5) contain

maximum-likelihood estimates of the SFE model without the environmental and

institutional variables, while Columns (3) and (6) present the coefficients of the "full"

version of the SFE model, including the inefficiency model with environmental and

institutional variables.

           The production function model appears to fit quite well, based on the R2

values. Across all variants, the estimated elasticity of licensing output with respect

to invention disclosures is positive and highly significant. The results also imply

that hiring more staff in the TTO results in more licensing agreements (columns (1)-

(3)), but not additional licensing revenue (columns (4)-(6)). This result suggests

that university administrators have established TTO incentives in a manner that is

consistent with the spirit of Bayh-Dole, i.e., to maximize the number of licensing

agreements.

           On the other hand, the findings imply that spending more on (external)

lawyers reduces the number of licensing agreements, but increases licensing

revenue. One interpretation of this result is that using outside lawyers provides a


citations they receive.
10
     Coelli (1994) points out that, except for the intercept term, the OLS estimates are consistent, albeit inefficient.
                                                                                         19



signal that the university is aggressively protecting its intellectual propertytThis

results in fewer, but more lucrative, licensing agreements. Of course, it is difficult

to assess the validity of this hypothesis without additional information or the

composition of the ITO staff. That is because substantial external legal expense

could actually reflect outsourcing of legal functions or defensive actions in the

aftermath of a major lawsuit.

       The F statistics imply that the production process for licensing agreements is

characterized by constant returns to scale. This finding is consistent with the results of

a recent study by Adams and Griliches (1996). The authors examined the research

productivity of universities, using papers and citations as outputs and R&D

expenditures as inputs, and found evidence of constant returns to scale.

       It appears that licensing revenue, on the other hand, is subject to increasing

returns. An implication of this finding is that a university employing a revenue

maximization strategy should spend more on lawyers. Perhaps this would free up TTO

staff to spend more time "matching" scientists to firms. These results should be

interpreted with caution because licensing revenue, even when computed over a four-

year period, can be a somewhat misleading indicator of the current performance of a

ITO, because royalty streams may reflect transactions that were consummated many

years ago. For instance, the University of Florida has consistently ranked among the

top 10 U.S. universities in licensing income due to Gatorade.

       Next, we focus on parameter estimates of the "full" SFE model (SFE2),

including the inefficiency equation (eq. (5a)). For the most part, the coefficients on
                                                                                                                   20



the environmental and institutional variables have the appropriate signs, bat are

uniformly insignificant. The findings do imply, however, that universities in states

with higher levels of industrial R&D activity are less inefficient, that is, closer to the

frontier. Thus, our evidence suggests that there may be an association between

R&D conducted by local private firms and UITT activity at research universities in

the same state. Despite the lack of significance of many of the individual

coefficients, the y values are highly statistically significant, indicating that the (null)

hypothesis that inefficiency effects are absent from the model can be decisively

rejected.

        Further evidence that external factors provide some explanatory power is shown

on the bottom of Table 3, which contrasts the mean technical efficiency in the versions

of the model excluding (columns (2) and (5)) and including (columns (4) and (6)) the

environmental and institutional variables. The latter set of findings indicate that these

external factors explain some of the variation in technical inefficiency across

universities, 20.8% and 15.4%, respectively.11

        As noted in the previous section, we hypothesize that some of the variation in

relative productivity can also be attributed to organizational practices in university

management of intellectual property. These practices could potentially serve to mitigate

conflict caused by palpable differences in the motives, incentives, and organizational

cultures of scientists, firms, and administrators. Unfortunately, there are no existing


  That is, the mean technical efficiency is closer to one when we include these variables in the stochastic frontier
model (.051(1 - .76) =.208 and .04/(1 - .74)) .154).
                                                                                                                 21



data on organizational practices in U ITT, nor is it even precisely clear wharneeds to be

measured.

        Accordingly, we outline our inductive, qualitative approach to the

examination of organizational issues in the next section of the paper. We also

provide detailed information on qualitative research methods as they relate to field

studies, given that most economists are unfamiliar with these techniques. This

information may also be beneficial to economists who are contemplating fieldwork.



V. Qualitative Research Methods-Field Studies

        As shown in Table 4, a researcher who wishes to conduct an interview-

based, field study confronts four key methodological issues:12

        1) Sample Selection
        2) Nature of Interview Questions
        3) Procedures for Conducting Interviews
        4) Qualitative Data Analysis

That is, in designing the qualitative component of this study, we had to select an

appropriate sample of organizations and individuals to visit, formulate a set of

interview questions, determine how to conduct the interviews, and choose an

appropriate method for analyzing the qualitative data (from the interviews). Table 4

summarizes how we addressed each of these issues. In doing so, we borrowed

heavily from long-standing literatures in the fields of management, psychology, and

sociology, where qualitative methods are prevalent.

12 This is by no means an exhaustive list of such concerns. For a comprehensive review of qualitative research
                                                                                                     22



          To assess the nature and relevance of organizational factors in UITI, we

interviewed TTO stakeholders affiliated with five research universities in the

Southwest and Southeast. This clearly constitutes a convenience sample of

universities because of our familiarity with these institutions and the surrounding

regions. However, as noted in Yin (1989), convenience samples of organizations

are common in inductive, exploratory studies, especially when researchers have

limited funding.

           Note that our focus on these two regions precludes an examination of major

hubs of technology transfer activity, such as Cambridge/Boston (MIT, Harvard, and

Boston University) or the San Francisco Bay area (Stanford and UC-Berkeley). We

contend, however, that the schools we visited are probably far more representative

of the modal university experience with technology transfer, as compared to top-tier

schools that have more favorable environmental conditions for promoting the

commercialization of university R&D.

           Table 5 presents some information on the characteristics of the five

 universities that we examined. Our sample consists of private and public

 universities, land grant institutions, and universities with and without a medical

 school. There is also considerable variation with respect to the size of the TTO,

 the extent of licensing activity, and relative productivity (technical efficiency).13

 Note also that each of these schools established a TTO soon after the enactment


 methods, see Miles and Huberman (1994) and Yin (1989).
                                                                                      inefficient.
 13
      That is, some institutions are close to the frontier, while others are highly
                                                                                                               23



    of Bayh-DoIe (1980).                                                                            p

           Returning to the issues outlined in Table 4, another sample selection

 concern is the representativeness of the interviewees. Recall that ourgoal is to

 examine what may be three different perspectives on UITT organizational issues

 (scientists, administrators, and managers/entrepreneurs). Given this objective, we

 attempted to draw a sample of respondents that best reflected representative

 attitudes of these stakeh older groups.

           Potential respondents were selected in two ways. First, we identified the

TTO director and other administrators with UJIT responsibilities, such as a Vice

Provost, Vice President, or Vice Chancellor for Research.14 Second, to identify

managers/entrepreneurs and scientists, we solicited feedback from two nonprofit

organizations that serve as technology transfer "facilitators" in each region. By

design these facilitators have a balanced view on U ITT. Furthermore, they are

well connected to all UITT stakeholders because they have interacted extensively

with them. These facilitators helped us select managers and scientists with

different perspectives on UITT.15

          In sum, a stratified approach (Miles and Huberman (1994)) was used for the

selection of interviewees, so that they would be drawn from each of the constituent

groups described above. At each of the five universities, we conducted interviews

with academic scientists, TTO directors, and high-level university administrators


'
14 Typically, the TTO director reports to a Vice President, Vice Provost, or Vice Chancellor for Research.
    In one region, a facilitator had published a voluminous report on UITT, which contained the names, phone
                                                                                       24



who oversee the TTO. Within the surrounding region of the university we iso met

with founders of startup firms, directors of business development, intellectual

property managers and other research executives of large companies, and

executives of patent management firms and nonprofit organizations with an interest

in UITT. We conducted 55 interviews: 20 managers/entrepreneurs, 15

administrators (5 TTO directors and 10 top-level administrators), and 20 scientists.

Although there were only 55 face-to-face meetings, we actually interviewed 98

individuals, since multiple respondents were present at some meetings.

        Another methodological issue concerns the nature of the interview

questions. In formulating our list of questions, we adopted a "semi-structured"

approach, as suggested by Miles and Huberman (1994), whereby interviewees

within each of three stakeholder categories were asked the same questions.

According to these authors, the best approach for an inductive study is to ask

open-ended questions, such as "What are the outputs of U ITT?," "What are the

barriers to effective U ITT?," and "How would you improve the process?" We asked

such questions to all stakeholders (scientists, administrators, managers, and

entrepreneurs), although some queries were tailored to a particular group. For

example, TTO directors were asked about managerial practices in the TTO;

administrators were asked broader questions about the university's strategic goals

for UITT.

        As shown in Table 4, we also had to establish interview procedures.


numbers, and addresses of these potential respondents.
                                                                                        25



Sekaran (1992) contends that face-to-face interviews are best when cond'bting an

inductive study on a controversial topic. She notes that in-person interviews offer

several advantages. First, it is often easier to clarify questions and sense any

discomfort on the part of a respondent in a face-to-face interview, rather than by

telephone. Second, qualitative researchers report that eye contact often elicits

more accurate and comprehensive information because it can raise the

interviewee's comfort level. Eye contact may also help to build trust, which can be

important if the issue under consideration is sensitive. Finally, there may also be a

guilt effect. That is, interviewees may feel obliged to "reward" researchers who

have traveled long distances to visit them by providing more candid and

provocative information.

      To further improve the quality of information collected during the interviews,

we employed a team approach, by pairing an economist with a management

professor.16 Although the two economists on this paper have previously conducted

field studies (Link and Scott (1998) and Siegel (1999)), management professors

have much more extensive experience and training in qualitative research

techniques. Economists who are contemplating fieldwork should draw on the

expertise of colleagues in other disciplines. Also, the use of teams (regardless of

expertise) can also enhance the overall effectiveness of a face-to-face interview by

increasing the likelihood that a researcher can respond to a clarifying question or

establish a rapport with the interviewee.
                                                                                                                  26



          Following Waldman et al. (1998), we also employed three tactics in'

conducting our interviews that have been shown to increase the accuracy and

reliability of qualitative data. The first is neutral probing of answers, to avoid unduly

influencing the respondent when following up on a resp'onse to an open-ended

question. Second, we provided a pledge of confidentiality, to increase the

likelihood that interviewees provide candid and forthright responses. Finally, each

interviewee had prior knowledge of the goals of our study and the credentials of the

interviewers. According to Yin (1989), this serves two useful purposes. First, it

indicates the researchers' concern and respect for the value of the respondent's

time. Second, it reduces uncertainty and suspicion regarding the intentions of the

researchers.

          The final methodological issue is qualitative data analysis, or how to

organize, examine, and display the information we collected during the lengthy

interviews, which lasted, on average, for about one hour. Not surprisingly, there

was considerable variation in the duration of interviews, given the open-ended

nature of the questions. Interviews were tape recorded and then transcribed by a

third (clerical) party. Eisenhardt (1989) contends that a third-party transcription

ensures a complete and unbiased recording of interview data.'

           Once we generated the 55 transcripts, we implemented the three stages of




     5 professors (2 management professors and 3 economists) conducted the 55 interviews (see Siegel et al. (1999)).
17
     Following Bryman (1989), interviewees were also promised a study report of aggregated findings.
                                                                                       27


qualitative analysis of interview data outlined in Miles and Huberman (1 994.18

These are data reduction, data display, and conclusion drawing/verification. Data

reduction involves the selection, simplification, and transformation of raw data

(interview responses) into an analyzable form. The first step was the development

of a list of general categories for content analysis. These categories were largely

based on general research questions, such as identifying the barriers to U ITT.

        As demonstrated by Miles and Huberman (1994), it is common for coding

categories to be modified because of a poor fit or the need to add and combine

classifications. Indeed, an initial review of fifteen transcripts indicated that

comments relevant to one of our initial categories (i.e., aspects of the TTO) should

be combined with other categories. We also followed the advice of Miles and

Huberman (1994) by having multiple assessors of interview transcripts. The

authors assert that the use of multiple assessors reduces the degree of bias in

interpreting such transcripts.

        Thus, for each transcript, all comments were independently categorized by

at least two members of the research team into four areas: (1) UITT outputs, (2)

networks/relationships in UITT, (3) barriers to UITT, and (4) proposed

improvements to the UITT process. The researchers' lists of comments within a

topic area were then compared, and discrepancies were discussed between the

two researchers until agreement was reached regarding comments that were



18 See Miles   and Huberman (1994), pp. 10-12.
                                                                                                         28



pertinentto each category.19
       Following identification of relevant comments in each topic area, each

researcher then worked with five interview transcripts to generate a list of more

specific themes within the four categories. The research team then met and

discussed the themes that emerged. There was a great deal of similarity in the

lists of themes that emerged from the separate samples of comments.

       After a consensus was reached regarding the themes, we returned to the lists of

comments pertinent to the each of the four general categories and sorted them into the

themes identified for that respective category. For data display purposes, we tabulated

frequency counts for each major theme that emerged. In Tables 6-9, we display

percentages of respondents who identified a particular theme relating to UITT outputs,

relationships/networks, barriers to effective U ITT, and suggested improvements to the

UITT process. For example, as shown in the first column on Table 6, seventy-five

percent of the managers/entrepreneurs we interviewed identified licenses as an output

of U ITT. Note that these analyses are conducted separately for each stakeholder

group. Proportion tests of differences (Z-tests) were computed to compare whether the

proportion of respondents mentioning a theme in a given group differs from the

proportion of respondents mentioning a theme in another group. For instance, Z12

compares managers/entrepreneurs (Group 1) and TTO directors/university

administrators (Group 2).

19 These methodsare similar to those employed by Butterfield, Trevino, and Ball (1996), who identified
  unique "thought units" pertinent to their subject of interest (employee discipline).
                                                                                        29



                                                                              p

VI. QUALITATIVE FINDINGS

       Table 6 demonstrates that licenses and royalties were identified as outputs

of UITT by a substantial majority of TTO directors and university administrators.

Managers and entrepreneurs also frequently mentioned licenses, but stressed

informal aspects of UITT a bit more, as well the economic development aspects of

U ITT. Scientists emphasized product development and somewhat surprisingly,

failed to mention sponsored research agreements.

       Another key finding is that there is considerable heterogeneity in stakeholder

perspectives regarding UITT outputs. There appears to be a "Rashomon" effect,

as demonstrated by the numerous output categories identified by respondents and

by the many significant differences between each class of interviewee (16 out of 30

Z statistics are significant at the 5% level). This result is perhaps not surprising,

given that university management of intellectual property through a TTO is a recent

and somewhat controversial development. Some interviewees perceived the

mission of the TTO (protection and marketing of the university's intellectual

property) as being inconsistent with the traditional "public domain" philosophy

regarding the dissemination of information that typically pervades research

universities.

       As shown in Table 7, respondents in each stakeholder category mentioned

personal relationships in UITT much more frequently than contractual relationships.
                                                                                                              30



One scientist phrased it in this manner:

  "I would say right now that I feel that the one-on-one interaction is somewhat more
  successful in effectively transferring technology [than is research formally sponsored
  by a consortium]"
                                                                          -


       This raises the possibility that the formation of "social networks" could be

important in U ITT. These networks include academic and industry scientists,

graduate students and post-doctoral fellows who do most of the experimental work

in laboratories, former graduate students who have accepted positions in industry,

entrepreneurs, and perhaps, university administrators and TTO directors. As

defined by Liebeskind et al. (1996), social networks, like markets, involve

exchanges between legally distinct entities. However, unlike markets, social

networks support these exchanges without using competitive pricing or legal

contracting. Instead, they rely on shared norms among the exchange partners,

where information is the currency of exchange.2°

        Moreover, in a high technology business context, organizations must devise

arrangements that enable them to source a critical input--patentable/licensable

scientific knowledge -- in a highly efficient manner. Efficiency here refers to rapid

development and availability of scientific knowledge with relatively low sunk costs,

i.e., internal R&D costs. Liebeskind et a!. (1996) provided evidence of how the

existence of social networks can increase organizational learning and flexibility in

biotechnology.

20 Powell (1990) argued that social networks are the most efficient organizational arrangement for sourcing
                                                                                                          31



        Table 7 also indicates that knowledge transfer appears to work in beth

directions. Sixty-five percent of the scientists we interviewed noted that interacting

with industry has influenced their basic research. Some scientists explieitly

mentioned that these interactions improved the quantity and quality of their basic

research. A representative comment from a scientist was:

  "There is no doubt that working with indust,y scientists has made me a better
  researcher. They help me refine my experiments and sometimes have a different
  perspective on a problem that sparks my own ideas. Also, my involvement with firms
  has allowed me to purchase better equipment for my lab, which means I can conduct
  more experiments."

This observation is consistent with the findings of Zucker and Darby (1996), who

observed an increase in the scholarly output of "star" academic scientists who become

involved in commercialization efforts in biotechnology.21

        As shown in Table 8, all three groups identified a lack of understanding

regarding university/corporate/scientific norms as a barrier to effective UITT

(90.0%, 93.3%, and 75.0%). It appears that these cultural and informational

barriers are pervasive. That is, university scientists and administrators often do not

understand or appreciate the industry environment, and vice versa. An illustrative

comment from a scientist was:

   "Industry has a lack of understanding of what an academic institution does and a lack
   of understanding of what a university faculty members responsibility is to their
   institution. There are some companies I don't even deal with because their approach
   to dealing with an academic entity is so poor. They feel that basically we owe them
   by our position at the university because the state pays our salaries."


information because information is difficult to price and communicate through a hierarchical structure.
21
   Mansfield (1995) reported similar results for a variety of scientific fields.
                                                                                                           32



       Our qualitative evidence is consistent with the view that UITT stakeolders

operate under different organizational environments and cultures, which implies

that they have different norms, standards, and values. For example, Nelson (1998)

noted how universities and firms differ in their perspective on the role of

knowledge. Managers and entrepreneurs usually do not share the academic

values of publishing results and sharing information with colleagues and the

general public. Instead, new knowledge and technology is to be kept proprietary

and exploited to achieve or sustain a competitive advantage.

        Table 8 also indicates widespread belief that there are insufficient rewards for

faculty involvement in UITT. Sixty percent of the university administrators and seventy

percent of the scientists reported this as a barrier. In their comments, administrators

and scientists specifically referred to two types of (pecuniary and non-pecuniary)

rewards: a) tenure and promotion policies and b) the university's royalty and equity

distribution formula. The latter refers to the split in licensing or equity income among

the inventor(s), the department or college of the inventor(s), and the TTO or another

general research fund within the university. For example, at one school we visited, the

formula was 40%-inventor, 40%-inventor's department, and 20%-'invention

management fund," which is managed by the TTO.22 An administrator at a university

with a relatively low payout rate to inventors noted that:

    "Some faculty members have complained about the low share of revenue they
   receive. They may be right. We hope to bring that up to say 40% in the near future.
   I don't think we'll have much of a struggle on that one."

22 Jensen   and Thursby (1998) surveyed 62 TTOs and found that the mean payout rate to inventors is 40%.
                                                                                         33



                                                                         p
      The vast majority of interviewees also specifically commented on the fact that

tenure and promotion decisions continued to be made almost strictly on the basis of

publications and grants. For example, one scientist remarked:

  "Technology transfer has not played a role in the performance evaluation process.
  Performance evaluation is based on publications."

From this scientist's perspective, the existing reward structure at his university is

inconsistent with the organizational objective of increasing UITT, a goal that is

featured prominently in that university's mission statement and promotional

brochures.

       Managers/entrepreneurs (80.0%) and scientists (70.0%) also frequently

pointed to university bureaucracy and inflexibility as barriers to effective U ITT.

Many scientists and managers provided us with examples of rigid, cumbersome,

and unclear policies and procedures that impede U ITT. Faculty members who had

tried to form startup companies were especially vocal on this point. A typical

remark from a scientist was:

    "I don't think they understand the flexibility within the framework and what they can
   do. / think they have a set of forms and a set of ways of doing things, and if it
   doesn't fit nicely into that, then they make you go through a whole bunch of hoops."

       Staffing practices within the TTO are also a matter of concern. Recall that a

university technology licensing officer is responsible for coordinating the activities

that result in the consummation of an agreement between the university (and its

scientists) and a firm. Fifty-five percent of the managers and entrepreneurs we

interviewed expressed dissatisfaction with the marketing and negotiation skills of
                                                                                         34



TTO personneL An intellectual property manager stated:

  "These guys (TTOs) need to be marketing facilitators rather than lawyers. They
  need to be able to step into the company and into their customer's shoes and look
  back."

Other respondents noted that TTOs are either too narrowly focused on a small set

of technical areas, or too concerned with the legal aspects of licensing.

       There is also a strong belief on the part of industry (80.0%) that universities

exercise their intellectual property rights too aggressively. Of course, this is not a

surprising observation given the inherently adversarial nature of negotiations. One

former TTO director, now in industry, stated:

  "I think the frustration for commercial licensees who go to a university is that it seems
  as though the attitude they are hitting at the university is 'oh we've got this wonderful
  thing and we're going to drag every nickel out of you that we can get for it'."


       Table 9 presents some suggested improvements to the UITT process, as

provided by our respondents. These recommendations are fairly consistent with

the impediments identified in Table 8. With virtual unanimity, respondents

suggested that universities and industry should devote more effort to developing

better mutual understanding. Several respondents noted that this could easily be

achieved through such events as "Town Hall" meetings involving the three

stakeholder groups, as well as by targeting each individual group with additional

information to help facilitate U ITT. For example, one university scientist pointed

out that new faculty orientations at his university did not include a module on

technology transfer issues:
                                                                                            35



  "It's appalling that new faculty members don't receive any in formation o how to get
  involved in technology transfer at their orientation sessions. What does that tell
  about this school's priorities?"


      Another consistent theme was that universities should modify reward

systems to be consistent with technology transfer objectives. Although we do not

have systematic measures of the intensity of feeling regarding a particular theme,

our perusal of the transcripts reveals that the recommendations regarding changes

in reward systems were by far the most direct and vivid of the suggested

improvements to the UITT process. Many university administrators specifically

mentioned the need to reward UITT activities more in promotion and tenure

decisions. One department chair phrased it as follows:

  "It's the height of hypocrisy for universities to claim that they value technology
  transfer, or that it's supposed to be a top institutional priority, and then fail to reward it
  in their promotion and tenure decisions. At some point, we've got to resolve this
  discrepancy."

More importantly, several managers/entrepreneurs and administrators discussed

the need for incentive compensation for university technology managers. A

representative comment from a manager was:

  "The TTO people need to push the deals through ... You've got to look at how they
  are rewarded. Perhaps if they were paid on the basis of the number of deals they
  complete or the revenue they generate for the university, you would see more
  technologies licensed. / guess that they are so terrified of negative publicity if a bad
  deal goes through, that they're afraid to make this change."

Our respondents noted that some private universities, and even some public

institutions, such as the University of Washington and Wayne State University,

have recently instituted incentive compensation programs in the TTO. Other
                                                                                            36



universities are known to be contemplating implementing these programs.'

       Table 9 also demonstrates that, to a lesser extent, there was support for the

notion that universities should devote additional resources to UITT, altheugh most

of these recommendations were somewhat nebulous. Many respondents also

suggested that universities provide more education and/or community outreach to

overcome informational and cultural barriers. A predictable recommendation from

managers and entrepreneurs is that universities should be less aggressive in

exercising intellectual property rights.



VII. CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR ADDITIONAL RESEARCH

       In this paper, we present quantitative and qualitative evidence on several

aspects of U ITT. A stochastic production function framework is used to assess the

relative productivity of university TTOs. Our parameter estimates of this stochastic

frontier imply that licensing activity, our proxy for U ITT, is characterized by constant

returns to scale. The deviations from the frontier, which represent technical

inefficiency, are assumed to be a function of a vector of environmental and

institutional variables. We find that these variables do indeed explain some of the

variation in relative productivity across universities.

       We hypothesize that some of the remaining variation in relative efficiency

can be attributed to organizational practices in university management of

intellectual property. Unfortunately, this hypothesis cannot be formally tested

because there are no systematic measures of these factors. Thus, an analysis of
                                                                                                             37



UITT organizational practices is fertile ground for an inductive, exploratoryield

study. As a first step towards identifying these practices, we conducted 55 face-

to-face interviews of key UITT stakeholders at five research universitiesq We

believe that our fieldwork also greatly improved our ability to model the UITT

process, by providing a critical reality check on the specification of the econometric

model.

        The qualitative results imply that the most critical organizational factors are

reward systems for faculty involvement in U ITT, compensation and staffing

practices in the TTOI and actions taken by administrators to extirpate informational

and cultural barriers between universities and firms. More specifically, it appears

that the propensity of faculty members to disclose inventions, and thus, increase

the "supply" of technologies available for commercialization, will be related to

promotion and tenure policies and the university's royalty and equity distribution

formula. ITO compensation practices could also be relevant because UITT activity

will depend on the efforts of technology licensing officers to elicit invention

disclosures and market them effectively to private companies. Thus, we expect

that, ceteris paribus, licensing activity will be higher at universities that have

implemented some form of incentive compensation program for technology

licensing officers.23

         Staffing practices in the TTO may also help explain why some universities


  Lazear (1999) and Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997) report a positive correlation between incentive
compensation and worker and plant productivity, respectively.
                                                                                          38



are proficient than others in managing intellectual property. According to ltarker

and Zilberman (1993), TTOs usually hire either a mix of scientists and lawyers or a

mix of scientists and entrepreneurs/businessmen. In the former case, legal

functions, such as the adjudication of disputes involving intellectual property rights

and negotiating royalty agreements, are performed in-house. In the latter case,

such functions are usually outsou iced. Parker and Zilberman suggest that the

entrepreneur/business model for TTOs may be more conducive to helping

scientists form their own start-ups. It also seems reasonable to assume that TTO s

staffed in this manner would be more effective in the marketing phase of UITT. A

sizable percentage of the managers we interviewed suggested that universities hire

more licensing professionals with stronger technical and marketing skills.

       Our findings regarding informational and cultural barriers suggest that "boundary

spanning" could be an important skill for university technology licensing officers.

Boundary spanning behavior has been studied extensively in the management

literature. 24 In the context of U ITT, boundary span fling refers to actions taken by

university technology managers to serve as a bridge between "customers"

(entrepreneurs/firms) and "suppliers" (scientists), who operate in distinctly different

environments. Without effective boundary spanning, the needs of customers may not

be adequately communicated to suppliers. Similarly, the capabilities and interests of

suppliers may not be adequately communicated to customers. Effective boundary

spanning on the part of the TTO would involve adept communication with both
                                                                                                                39



stakeholder groups in an effort to forge alliances between scientists and firThs.
          The most natural extension of our exploratory study would be to survey UITT

stakeholders at each university in an attempt to measure the organizational factors we

have identified.25 Some variables, such as the university's royalty and equity

distribution formula are easy to measure with a survey and may even be available on

the worldwide web. Other variables, such as measures of the skills of TTO personnel,

tenure and promotion policies, and other policy variables will be more perceptual in

nature. In designing these surveys, we need to mindful of the considerable

heterogeneity in stakeholder perspectives on UITT that was revealed in our interviews.

This finding underscores the importance of surveying scientists,

managers/entrepreneurs, and administrators separately to generate a more accurate

and unbiased view of the organizational environment.

           Taking stock of organizational practices in university management of intellectual

property will be useful in several respects. First, given the embryonic nature of the ITO

enterprise, there is a need to document the nature of these practices. Many

administrators expressed a strong interest in benchmarking their intellectual property

management practices relative to peer institutions.

            Perhaps the most important benefit of collecting this information is that it can be

used to determine the fraction of the variance in relative productivity that can be

attributed to organizational practices. We can also identify specific practices that


 24 See   Caidwell and O'Reilly (1982), and Katz and Tushman (1983).
 25
      We can use an existing survey instrument to measure boundary-spanning skills (Caldwell and O'Reilly (1982)).
                                                                                            40




enhance UITT performance. These results could have important managerTal and policy

implications. Finally, we can use this information to examine the determinants and

consequences of the adoption of complementary organizational practices. Recent

theoretical (Milgrom and Roberts (1990, 1995) and Athey and Stern (1997)) and

empirical (lchniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997)) studies highlight the importance of

clusters or "mixes" of complementary organizational practices in enhancing productivity,

due to interaction effects. It would be interesting to see if such synergies arise in the

context of U ITT.

       Finally, we also envision several extensions to the econometric analysis.

First, we would like to add some additional environmental and institutional factors

as explanatory variables in the inefficiency equation. These include the age of the

TTO, a measure of the strictness of state and university technology transfer

policies (serving as a proxy for the degree of intellectual property protection at the

university), local venture capital activity, and more detailed data on industrial R&D

in the local region. Second, with more recent data on UITT outputs and inputs, we

could examine whether the efficiency frontier is shifting over time. Given the

relatively embryonic nature of the TTO enterprise, it is reasonable to assume that

the absolute (mean) level of technical efficiency has risen in recent years, as

 university administrators learn how to manage intellectual property more

effectively. A final extension to our empirical analysis would be include multiple

 outputs of UITT, such as the number of startups and sponsored research

 agreements resulting from U ITT. This requires a "distance" function approach,
                                                                                                              41



which has been implemented in several recent studies in the stochastic frd'ntier

literature.26




 26 See Lovell (1994) and Grosskopfet al. (1997). This class of models assumes that the relationshipbetween output
   and inputs can be represented by a transformation function 1, where O=T(x,y) and y denotes a vectorof outputs
   (O=y-f(x) for the single output case).
                                                                                      42



                                        References

Adams, J. D., and Z. Griliches. 1996. Research Productivity in a System of
     Universities. NBER Working Paper #6120, November, 1996.

Aigner, D.J., Lovell, C. A. K., and P. Schmidt. 1977. Formulation and Estimation of
      Stochastic Frontier Production Functions. Journal of Econometrics, 6: 2 1-37.

Anselin, L, Varga, A., and Z. Acs. 1997. Local Geographic Spillovers between
       University Research and High Technology Innovations. Journal of Urban
       Economics, 42: 422-448.

Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM). 1997. The AUTM
      Licensing Survey, Fiscal Year 1996.

Athey, S. and S. Stern. 1998. An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories about
       Complementarity in Organizational Design. NBER Working Paper No. 6600,
       June 1998.

Audretsch, D. B. and M. P. Feldman. 1996. R&D Spillovers and the Geography of
      Innovation and Production. American Economic Review, 86(2): 630-640.

Audretsch, D. B. and P. E. Stephan. 1996. Company-Scientist Locational Links:
      the Case of Biotechnology. American Economic Review, 86(2): 641-652.

Bania, N., Eberts, R., and M. S. Fogarty. 1993. Universities and the Startup of
      New Companies: Can We Generalize from Route 128 and Silicon Valley?
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(4): 761-766.

Battese, G. E. and T. Coelli. 1995. A Model for Technical Inefficiency Effects in a
      Stochastic Frontier Production Function for Panel Data, Empirical
      Economics, 20: 325-332.

Bayh, B. 1996. Keynote Address: Sixteen Years of Bayh-Dole, MIT Conference
      on Intellectual Property Rights: Corporate Survival and Strategic Advantage,
      Dec. 9-10, 1996.

Butterfield, K., Trevino, L., and C. Ball. 1996. Punishment from the Manager's Perspective:
       A Grounded Investigation and Inductive Model. Academy of Management Journal,
       39: 1479-1512.

Bryman, A. 1989. Qualitative Research Methods and Organization Studies. London: Unwin
     Hyman.
                                                                                    43



                                                                        p
CaIdwell, 0. F. and C. A. O'Reilly. 1982. Boundary Spanning and Individual Perforrtiance.
     Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(1): 124-127.

Charnes, A., CooperW. W., Lewin A., and L M. Seiford, eds. 1994. Data Envelopment
     Analysis: Theory, Method, and Applications, Boston, MA: Kiuwer Academic
     Publishers.

Coelli, T. 1994. A Guide to FRONTIER Version 4.1: A Computer Program for Frontier
        Production and Cost Function Estimation. mimeo, Department of Econometrics,
        University of New England, Armidale.

Cohen, W. M., Florida, R., Randazzese L., and J. Walsh. 1998. Industry and the Academy:
     Uneasy Partners in the Cause of Technological Advance, in Challenges to Research
     Universities. (R. G. Noll, ed.), Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. Making Fast Strategic Decision in High-Velocity Environments.
      Academy of Management Journal, 32: 543-576.

General Accounting Office (GAO). 1998. Technology Transfer: Administration of the
     Dole Act by Research Universities. Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting
     Office.

Griliches, Z. 1979. Issues in Assessing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity Growth.
       Bell Journal of Economics, 10: 92-116.

Grosskopf, S., Hayes, K. J., Taylor, L. L., and W. L. Weber. 1997. Budget-Constrained
      Frontier Measures of Fiscal Equality and Efficiency in Schooling. Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 79(1): 116-124.

Henderson, R., Jaffe, A. B., and M. Trajtenberg. 1998. Universities as a Source of
     Commercial Technology: a Detailed Analysis of University Patenting 1965-1988.
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1): 119-127.

lchniowski, C., Shaw, K., and G. Prennushi. 1997. The Effects of Human Resource
      Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines. American
      Economic Review, 87(3): 291-31 3.

Jaffe, A. B. 1989. Real Effects of Academic Research. American Economic Review, 79(3):
       957-970.
                                                                                        44



Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., and R. Henderson. 1993. Geographic Localiz'ation of
        Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 108(3): 577-598.

Jensen, R., and M. Thursby. 1998. Proofs and prototypes for sale: Thelale of university
      licensing. NBER Working Paper No. 6698, August 1998.

Katz, R., and M. Tushman. 1983. A Longitudinal Study of the Effects of Boundary Spanning
       Supervision on Turnover and Promotion in Research and Development. Academy of
       Management Journal, 26: 437-456.

Lazear, E. P. 1999. Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions. NBER
      Working Paper No. 6957, February 1999.

Liebeskind, J. P., Oliver, A. L., Zucker, L. and M. B. Brewer. 1996. Social Networks,
      Learning, and Flexibility: Sourcing Scientific Knowledge in New Biotechnology Firms.
      Organization Science, 7: 428-443.

Link, A. and J. Scott. 1998. Evaluating Technology-Based Public Institutions: Lessons from
       the National Institute of Standards and Technology, in Policy Evaluation in Innovation
       and Technology. (G. Papaconstantinou, ed.), Paris: OECD.

Lovell, C. A. K. 1994. Resources and Functionings: A New View of Inequality in Australia, in
       Models and Measurement of Welfare and Inequality. (W. Eichorn, ed.), Berlin:
       Springer-Verlag Press.

Mansfield, E. 1995. Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations: Sources,
      Characteristics, and Financing. Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(1): 55-65.

Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand
       Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts. 1990. The Economics of Modern Manufacturing. American
      Economic Review, 80(3): 511-28.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts. 1995. Complementarities and Fit: Strategy, Structure, and
      Organizational Change in Manufacturing. Journal of Accounting and Economics,
      19(2-3): 179-208.

Meeusen, W. and J. Van den Broeck. 1977. Efficiency Estimation from Cobb-Douglas
     Production Functions with Composed Errors, International Economic Review, 18:
     435-444.
                                                                                    45



National Science Foundation. Research and Development in Industry, 19l,1992, 1993,
      1994. Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Nelson, R. R. 1998. Technology Transfer, in Theory and Practice. Mimeo, Columbia
                                                                    -
      University.

Parker, D. D. and D. Zilberman. 1993. University Technology Transfers: Impacts on Local
      and U.S. Economies. Contemporary Policy Issues, 11(2): 87-99.

Powell, W. 1990. Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization. Research
      in Organizational Behavior, 12: 295-336.

Pressman, L., Guterman, S., Abrams, I., Geist D., and L. Nelsen. 1995. Pre-Production
      Investment and Jobs Induced by MIT Exclusive Patent Licenses: A Preliminary Model
     to Measure the Economic Impact of University Licensing. Journal of the Association
     of University Technology Managers, 7: 77-90.

Reifshcneider, D and R. Stevenson. 1991. Systematic Departures from the Frontier: A
      Framework for the Analysis of Firm Inefficiency, International Economic Review,
      32(3): 715-723.

Sekaran, U. 1992. Research Methods for Managers: A Skill-Building Approach (2'ed.),
      New York, N.Y.: John Wiley and Sons.

Siegel, 0. 1999. Skill-Biased Technological Change: Evidence From A Firm-Level
     Survey, Kalamazoo, Ml: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
     forthcoming.
Siegel, D., Waldman, D., Atwater, L., Link, A. and J. Silberman. 1999. Toward a Theory of
       the Effective Transfer of Scientific Knowledge from Academicians to Practitioners:
       Qualitative Evidence from the Commercialization of University Technologies, mimeo,
       Arizona State University West, March 1 999.

Thursby, J. and S. Kemp. 1998. An Analysis of Productive Efficiency of University
      Commercialization Activities. Mimeo, Purdue University, May 1998.

Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., and A. Jaffe. 1997. University Versus Corporate Patents: A
       Window on the Basicness of Invention. Economics of Innovation and New
       Technology, 5(1): 19-50.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1999. Fixed Reproducible
      Tangible Wealth, Computer-Readable Data Set, Washington, D.C.: Government
      Printing Office.
                                                                                     46



                                                                         p
Waldman, D. A., Lituchy, 1., Gopalakrishnan, M., Laframboise, K., Galperin, B., andZ.
     Kaltsounakis. 1998. A Qualitative Analysis of Leadership and Quality
     Improvement. Leadership Quarterly, 9: 177-201.

Yin, R. K. 1989. Case Study Research: Design and Methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA:
       Sage Publications.

Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R, and M. B. Brewer. 1998. Intellectual Human Capftal and the
      Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises. American Economic Review, 88(1): 290-306.


Zucker, L. G., and M. R. Darby. 1996. Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation:
      Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the Formation of the Biotechnology Industry.
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93: 709-716.
</ref_section>
                                                       FIGURE 1

                   An Example of a Transfer of Technology from a University to a Firm     or Entrepreneur




                                                                                                                       License
                                 Evaluation of                             Marketing of            Negotiation
Scientific   Invention                           I                  I
                                                                                                                       to Firm
                                 Invention for          Patent                            I            of
             Disclosure                                                 I Technology to                           (an existing firm
                                   Patenting                                  Firms
                                                                                                                     or startup)
ove                                                                                             nse
   I                                   I
University   University             University         University           University             University       University
 Scientist    Scientist
             and TTO
                                     Scientist
                                    and ITO
                                                        Scientist
                                                       and ITO
                                                                             Scientist,
                                                                            ITO, and
                                                                                                       1•1
                                                                                                     Scientist,
                                                                                                   TTO, and
                                                                                                                    Scientist,
                                                                                                                    TTO, and
                                                                              Firm!                  Firm!             Firml
                                                                           Entrepreneur           Entrepreneur     Entrepreneur
                                                    Table 1

               Characteristics of University/Industry Technology Transfer (UITT) Stakeholders

                                       Primary                    Secondary               Organizational
Stakeholder      Actions               Motive(s)                  Motive(s)                  Culture

                                                              Financial Gain and a
                                                              Desire to Secure
University    Discovery of        Recognition within the      Additional Research
Scientist     New Knowledge       Scientific Community        Research Funding              Scientific


           Works with                                         Facilitate Technological
                                   Protect and Market         Diffusion and
Technology Faculty and Firms!
Transfer   Entrepreneurs to         the University's          Secure Additional
Office      Structure Deal         Intellectual Property       Research Funding            Bureaucratic

                                                              Maintain Control
Firm!        Commercializes                                   of Proprietary
Entrepreneur New Technology        Financial Gain              Technologies              Entrepreneurial



Source: the Authors
                                                 Table 2

Descriptive Statistics for Inputs and Outputs of the Stochastic Frontier Production Function (Equation (4))
                                                                                  p
                                                                                               t


Variable Name        Description                 Mean             Median           Standard Deviation

                     Average Annual
 LICENSE1            Licensing Agreements         12.2                6                 19.8

                     Average Annual
                     Licensing Revenue
 LICENSE2            ($000)                     1610.4             294.5              4890.5

                     Average Annual
 INVDISC             Invention Disclosures        45.9               24                 68.6

                     Average Annual TTO
   STAFF             Employees                     7.7               4                  15.4

                     Average Annual
                     External Legal
                     Expenditures
  LEGAL              OnUITT(000)                303.7              116.4              631.2


N1 13 universities, 199 1-1994.

Source: AUTM (1997)
                                              Table 3
Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Stochastic Frontier and Inefficiency Models (eqs. (4) and (5a))
                                          Dependent Variable
                       Average Annual # of                      Average Annual
                       Licensing Agreements                    Licensing Revenue
Stochastic Frontier  (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)..     (6)
                    OLS       SFE1        SFE2            OLS          SFE1       SFE2
INTERCEPT              .390**     .207**     .312**          2.514*      1.827*      1.432
                       (.193)     (.101)      (.154)          (.624)      (.803)     (.621)


INVDISC                .678*       .667*      .642*          1.359*       1.410*     1.231*
                       (.085)     (.092)      (.087)          (.273)      (.356)     (.478)


STAFF                  •439*       .385*      .391*           -.293      -.244       -.189
                       (.093)     (.116)      (.099)          (.301)      (.402)     (.304)


LEGAL                  .057**    .059**      .042**           .505*       .480*       .421*
                       (.025)     (.029)      (.020)          (.081)      (.112)     (.137)


Inefficiency   Model
MED                                          -.121                                   -.087
                                             (.211)                                  (.112)


PUBLIC                                        .021                                   .036
                                             (.052)                                  (.082)

INDRD                                        .118**                                  -.087
                                             (.058)                                  (.067)


IINDOUT                                      -.031                                   -.049
                                             (.060)                                  (.070)

R2                      .815                                  .734

Fstatforl3+p2+f33=1     1.16                                  9.87*

Log Likelihood                   -21.13     -20.02                       -23.02     -21.98


                                  .789*       .682*                       .834*      •745*
                                 (.168)      (.231)                       (.341)     (.268)

Mean Technical Efficiency           .76           .81                        .74       .78
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, N=1 13 universities
*
  Significant at the 1% level, ** Significant at the 5% level
SFE 1-Stochastic frontier estimation excluding environmental/institutional determinants of inefficiency
SFE2- Stochastic frontier estimation including environmental/institutional determinants of inefficiency
                                       Table 4
                                                                   p
    Four Key Methodological Issues in a Field Study and How We Addressed Them

                           Nature of                Procedures for         Qualitative
Sample Selection      Interview Questions        Conducting Interviews    Data Analysis

                     • Semi-Structured           • Face-to-Face
         Of            (some questions             Interviews                 Recording
                        were the same                                          And
                        for each group;                                      Transcription
                        some were                                             of Interviews
                        tailored to a                                         by Neutral
                         particular group)                                   Third Party

                     • Open-ended                • Team                  • Identification
           to            Questions                  Approach                 of Themes
                                                                                from
                                                                             Transcripts
                                                                  •

                                                                             by Multiple
                                                                             Assessors




                                                 • Neutral               •            of
                                                    Probing                  Themes


                                                 • Pledge of             • Frequency
                                                    Confidentiality          Tables
                                                                             Displaying
                                                                             Important
                                                                             Themes

                                                 • Interviewees              Z-tests
                                                    Had Prior                Comparing
                                                    Knowledge of             Proportion of
                                                    the Goals of             Responses
                                                    the Study and            Between
                                                     Backgrounds             Stakeholder
                                                     of the                  Groups
                                                     Researchers
                                                 Table 5
                                                                                  p
                         Characteristics of the Universities in our Field Study




                         University    University      University     University      University
                             A             B              C               D               E

Organizational Status     Private        Public            Public      Public           Public
Medical School             Yes            Yes               No           No             Yes
Land Grant Institution      No             No              Yes           No             Yes
TTO Established   in       1984           1985             1982         1985            1988
STAFF                      13.3           10.8             10.0          2.7             8.1

LICENSE1                   27.0           15.8             25.8          2.8            12.8

LICENSE2                  985.7          567.0         1274.6          344.3          150.8

Tecimical Efficiency       87.7           81.1         92.9             70.2           79.2
                                                 Table 6
   Outputs of University/Industry Technology Transfer (UITT) as Identified by Interviees in Our Field Study

                                               Type of Interviewee

                               (1)                (2)                   (3)
                            Managers!         TTO Directors!         University
Outputs                    Entrepreneurs      Administrators         Scientists    Z12     Z13      Z23
Licenses                       75.0                86.7                25.0       -1.37   2.14** 3.24*

Royalties                      30.0                66.7                15.0       -1.74   0.91     2.61*

Patents                        10.0                46.7                20.0       2.91* -0.84      2.23**

Sponsored Research
Agreements                      5.0                46.7                 0.0       2.72* 0.44       333*

Startup Companies               5.0                33.3                10.0       2.07** -0.56     1.64

Invention Disclosures           0.5                33.3                 5.0       2.8l* -0.99      2.28*


Students                       25.0                26.7                15.0       -0.22   0.88     1.22

Informal Transfer
Of Know-how                    70.0                20.0                20.0       2.69*   3.31*    0.03

ProductDevelopment             40.0                 6.7                35.0       2.08** 0.12     2.01**

Economic Development           35.0                20.0                 0.0       0.52    2.98*    2.03**

Number of Interviews            20                  15                   20

Note: The values presented in columns (1) —(3) are the percentages of respondents who identified a particular item
as an output of UITT. The values displayed in the last three columns are test statistics for differences in mean
percentages between each class of interviewee.
** < .05
  p
 * < .01
  p
                                                          Table 7
           Aspects of Relationships/1.etworks in
                                                 University/Indust, Technology Transfer (UffT) as Identified by
                                              Interviewees in Our Field Study

                                                  iye of Interviewee

                                     (1)              (2)
  Relationships!                                                          (3)
                                  Managers!        TTO Directors!
  Nevork                         Entrepreneurs     Administrators
                                                                        University
                                                                        Scientists     Z12      Z13      Z23

 Personal Relationships             75.0               66.7               80.0        0.68    -0.42    -1,63
 TTO as a Facilitator
 Of Relationships Between
 Scientists And Firms               26.3               75.0               40.0       2.65* -0.91       1.92
 Knowledge Transfer
 From Industry to
 Faculty Members                    25.0               20.0              65.0        0.35    2.46* 297*
ConferencetExpos!
Town Hall Meetings
On TT issues                       35.0               80.0               15.0        2.34** 1.59       3.56*
Contractual Relationships          is.o                6.7                0.0        0.84     1.80     1.02
Number of Interviews                20                  15                20
Note: The values presented in columns (1) —(3) are the prcntages of respondents who
as an aspect of relationships/networks in UITT.                                          identified a particular item
for differences in mean percentages between eachThe values displayed in the last three columns are test statistics
                                                 class of interviewee.
**
     p < .05
 *
     p   <.01
                                                   Table 8
  Barriers to University/Industry Technology Transfer (UITI') as Identified by Interviees in Our Field Study
                                              Type of Interviewee
                                  (1)               (2)              (3)
                                Managers!        TTO Directors!    University
Barriers                        Entrepreneurs    Administrators    Scientists     Z12      Z13    Z23

Lack of Understanding
Regarding University,
Corporate, or Scientific
Norms and Environments             90.0             93.3               75.0      -0.25    1.19    1.30

Insufficient Rewards For
University Researchers             31.6             60.0               70.0      -1.29 2.46* -1.03
Bureaucracy and Inflexibility of
UniversityAdministrators           80.0              6.6               70.0       3.96* 0.74     3.51*

Insufficient Resources
Devoted to Technology
TransferByUniversities             31.6             53.3               20.0      -0.95    0.93    2.05**

Poor Marketing/Technical/
Negotiation Skills of TTOs         55.0             13.3               25.0       2.07** 1.91    -0.71

University Too Aggressive
In Exercising Intellectual
Property Rights                    80.0              13.3              25.0       3.30* 2.94* -0.91

Faculty Members!
Administrators Have
Unrealistic Expectations
Regarding the Value of
TheirTechnologies                  25.0             40.0               10.0      -0.94    1.13     1.90

"Public Domain"
Mentality of Universities          40.0               8.3               5.0       1.86    2.60* 0.38

Number of Interviews                 20                   15                20
Note: The values presented in columns (I) (3) are the percentages of respondents who identified a particular item
as a barrier to UITT. The values displayed in the last three columns are test statistics for differences in mean
percentages between each class of interviewee.
 ** < .05
    p
  * < .01
    p
                                                 Table 9
    Suggested Improvements to the University/Industry Technology Transfer (UITT) Prcess, as Identified by
                                      Interviewees in Our Field Study
                                            Type of Interviewee

                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)
                                  Managers!           TTO Directors!    University
Improvements                     Entrepreneurs        Administrators    Scientists     Z12     Z13    Z23


Universities and Industry
Should Devote More Effort to
Developing Better
                                   80.0                  93.3             75.0       -0.96    0.33   1.28
Mutual Understanding

Modify Reward Systems
To Reward Technology
Transfer Activities                 85.0                80.0               80.0       0.35    0.36 -0.00

Universities Need to Provide
More Education to Overcome
Informational And Cultural
                                    85.0                 86.7              60.0      -0.09    1.70    1.74
Barriers

Universities Should Devote
Additional Resources to
                                    45.0                 46.7              60.0       0.11    -1.00 -1.25
TechnologyTransfer
Universities Should be less
Aggressive in Exercising
                                    55.0                  10.0             15.0       2.52* 2.62* -0.36
Intellectual Property Rights

Increase Formal and Informal
Networking Between Scientists
and Practitioners                   35.0                  26.7             40.0       0.65    -0.34 -1.09

 Universities Need Greater
 Technical Expertise and
                                    50.0                  20.0             25.0        1.76    1.54 -0.37
 MarketingSkillsintheTTO
 Number of Interviews                20                    15               20

 Note: The values presented in columns (1) —(3) are the percentages of respondents who identified a particular item
 as a suggested improvement to UITT. The values displayed in the last three columns are test statistics for
 differences in mean percentages between each class of interviewee.
  ** < .05
     p
   *
     p < .01
