                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              QUALITY CERTIFICATION AND THE
                            ECONOMICS OF CONTRACT SOFTWARE
                              DEVELOPMENT: A STUDY OF THE
                                INDIAN SOFTWARE INDUSTRY

                                              Ashish Arora
                                               Jai Asundi

                                         Working Paper 7260
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7260


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1999




We are grateful to V.S. Arunachalam for advice and encouragement, and to S. Raghavan, V.A. Sastry,
Bankim Shah, and Sunil Wadhwani for sharing their insights about the software industry with us. Ronnie
Fernandes, Robert Cole, David Levine, and participants at the NBER workshop on Organizational
Performance, April 1999 provided helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft. Zhaoli Rong,
Hairong He and Kushal Choksi provided competent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge support
from a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Ashish Arora and Jai Asundi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Quality Certification and the Economics of Contract Software
Development: A Study of the Indian Software Industry
Ashish Arora and Jai Asundi
NBER Working Paper No. 7260
July 1999


                                         ABSTRACT

        A significant amount of software development is being outsourced to countries such
as India. Many Indian software firms have applied for and received quality certifications like
the ISO9001, and the number of quality certified software firms has steadily increased.
Despite its growing popularity among Indian software developers, there is very little
systematic evidence on the relationship of ISO certification to organizational performance.
Using data on 95 Indian software firms and their US clients, we develop a stylized model of
a firm that develops software for others to articulate the different ways in which ISO
certification can affect firm profits. We conclude that ISO certification enhances firm growth.
The results provide partial support for the proposition that ISO certification also enhances
revenue for a given size, suggesting that firms are receiving a higher price per unit of output.
In turn, this is consistent with the notion that ISO certification also enhances the quality of
output. Our field studies confirm that although most firms see ISO certification as a marketing
ploy, some of them do proceed to institute more systematic and better-defined processes for
software development.


Ashish Arora                               Jai Asundi
Heinz School                    Engineering and Public Policy
Carnegie Mellon University       Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213               Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ashish@andrew.cmu.edu                      asundi@andrew.cmu.edu
 1. Introduction:
         The rapid growth of the computer software industry in India in recent years has
 attracted a great deal of attention. Revenues and employment in the industry have been
growing at 50 % per year for the past four or five years, and exports account for over two
thirds of the revenues. Despite the rapid growth, the industry is small by international
standards, with sales of $3.8 billion in 1998-99 compared with the estimated world
software market of $300-500 billion. Most of the services provided consist of developing
and maintaining software for others -- staff augmentation services (supplying
programmers), software services such as data conversion, porting, year 2000 remediation
and maintenance, and development of software applications and tools.
         Abundant supplies of educated labor and low wages, along with excess demand
for IT professionals in developed countries, have been largely responsible for the
sustained increase in exports. However, a steady 15%-25% growth in the wages of
Indian software professionals threatens to undercut the cost advantage. The software
industry association has responded by stressing the need to improve the software
development processes used by Indian software firms and is actively encouraging firms
to get quality certified. The government also provides incentives to firms with such
certifications.
         The most popular quality certification in India is the 1S09001 of the International
Standards Organization (Radice, 1995). A few firms have also opted for a quality
certification process developed specifically for software called CMM — Capability
Maturity Model (Paulk et. al., 1993). Although the benefits of quality certification are
sometimes taken as axiomatic, there is very limited evidence on this issue. In this paper
we develop and estimate a simple model of the software service industry to explore
systematically the different ways in which ISO 9001 (ISO henceforth) certification
affects firm performance. We distinguish between the quality-increasing role of ISO
certification from the signaling role, and estimate the relative significance of each using.
In so doing, we recognize that firms choose to get ISO certified, and that principle, ISO


  Case studies at Hughes (Humphrey et at., 1991) and Raytheon (Dion, 1993) appear to show that adopting
methodologies for process improvements yields economic benefits. Herbsleb et. at. (1997) have argued,
based on responses from users, that CMM based process improvements lead to better project management
at organizations. However, there does not exist any systematic study of this issue (Slaughter et. at., 1998).
certification itself is "endogenous".
         The econometric analysis, based on a sample of 95 Indian software firms, is
complemented with site visits and interviews with more than 20 Indian software firms
and 12 of their US based clients. As well, we have had informal discussions with
management and quality consultants in India and the US. The field research, described in
more detail in the appendix, informs our analysis in two ways. First, we use it to develop
a stylized model of a software service firm in India and to help ground some of the
critical assumptions of the model. Second, we use them as an informal check of the
empirical results. Therefore, although this paper is about the effect of quality
certification in software, our hope is this research will also inform future studies of the
economics of the software services industry. As well, this research links to the literature
on how firms from developing countries acquire technological capability and to the
literature on the international division of labor in the so called "high tech" industries.
         We begin by describing the major types of quality certification for software
developers, and some issues in the measurement of software productivity, and quality
certification in section 2. The next section introduces the Indian software industry, which
motivates our formal model in section 4. We discuss our empirical methodology and the
issues regarding measurement and data sources in section 5. Section 6 discusses the
empirical results and their implications. Section 7 summarizes our main findings and
concludes.


2. Software Quality: Measurement, Metrics and Certifications
         In software, defining quality standards is itself particularly difficult, because most
software development projects involve design activity by human beings. The difficulty
of measuring output quality for complex software systems has led to a strong emphasis
on process. The implicit assumption, certainly in software quality programs but also in
most other quality programs, is that better-defined and documented processes lead to a
better product. In 1987, the International Standards Organization (ISO) developed a
framework for production standards, the 1S09000 series, which has since been adapted to
software development.2 Around the same time, the Software Engineering Institute (SET)

2A British guide for applying ISO 9001 to software, TickIT, provides stricter guidelines and imposesstrong

                                                    2
developed a framework called the Capability Maturity Model (CMIM), aimed initially at
firms developing large software systems for the US Department of Defense. This model,
which has since diffused more broadly, has five levels of increasing "maturity" of the
software development processes and organization.
         The Waterfall Model (Fig. 1) is a popular software development framework that
underpins both CMM and 1S09001 for software3. The software development process is
divided into the following sequential parts: requirements analysis, high level design, low
level design, coding, testing and post-production support. Within each, there are
established sets of software engineering practices. The establishment of these processes
and a method measuring them for process improvement is the essence of a quality
program.
         IS 09000 standards emerged out of EU guidelines for two party contractual
situations. The fundamental idea of ISO 9000 standards was to ensure buyers of goods
and services, by ensuring that the seller is using and adhering to consistent process
standards. Thus, ISO certification essentially requires that the firm have well defined
processes that it follows, and that this is well enough documented that an external auditor
can verify both that the processes are documented and that the company adheres to the
processes.4 Indeed, the ISO methodology has been described as "document what you do,
do what you document, and verify that you are doing it" (unnamed manager quoted in
Cole 1999: 156).
         ISO standards have since become widely adopted as a quality standard, almost to
the exclusion of other, arguably more comprehensive and rigorous, quality standards such
as the Baidridge Award in the US (Cole 1999). This popularity of ISO is despite that (or
as Cole argues, perhaps because) ISO standards do not prescribe processes that must be
followed. The intent of ISO standards is to minimize variations in quality, rather than
necessarily to increase quality. Similar sentiments were expressed by a manager at a
large Delhi based Indian software firm, who pointed out that ISO standards meant that
one could consistently produce low quality products.

training and auditor requirements than 1S09001 alone.
  An alternate model of software development is the Spiral Model (Boehm, 1981).
  In practice, sub-units of the firm (such as a software development center in one city) can be certified.
Typically however, the other sub-units get certified soon after. Our data do not permit a disaggregation


                                                      3
          By contrast, the CMM model is both specific to software and prescribes standards
in different stages of software development that firms at a given level of maturity must
have.5 Industry experts we interviewed believe that ISO certification roughly
corresponds to maturity level two in the CMM model. Maturity level two requires that
necessary process discipline be in place to repeat earlier successes on projects with
similar applications. Companies assessed at this maturity level are supposed to have
established basic project management processes to track cost, schedule, and functionality.
The 1S09001 standard does require some elements of CMIM level three, which requires
that the organization have well-defined and documented processes for software
development, that allow it to manage software development.6 Consistent with this, we
find that although many Indian software companies have 1S09001 alone, and some have
added TicldT or CMIM level three or higher, very few have the latter but not ISO. The
relatively small number of CMM certifications up until 1997-9 8 means that we shall
focus only on ISO certification in this study. Future research may fruitfully compare the
difference between CMM and ISO certification in terms of economic impact.


2.1 Measurement and Metrics
         Software output has traditionally been measured through source lines of code
(SLOC). However, the development of high-level languages and progress in software
technologies have reduced the usefulness of this measure (Boehm, 1987). This measure
capture differences in the complexity of software code and the proliferation of newer
languages and coding paradigms where several languages are used within the same
project complicates matters further.7


finer than the level of the firm.
  The initial ISO certificate is valid for two years, after which another external audit must be passed to keep
the certification. There is no reassessment provision in CMM certification. There are other differences
between 1S09001 and CMM certification procedures and requirements that are discussed in Paulk (194)
and Radice (1995).
6 A manager at a large Bombay based firm believed that for continuous improvement, the SEI's CMM is a
better program. Managers at other firms that had an ongoing quality program shared these views.
  Other measures address these concerns but are very difficult and expensive to collect. For instance,
Albrecht and Gaffney (1983) have proposed the use of Function Points (FPs). This is designed to size a
system in terms of its delivered functionality, measured in terms of objects such as the numbers of inputs,
outputs and files. Each of these objects is assigned a weight depending on the object complexity and
importance. Measures for complexity include McCabe's cyclomatic complexity (McCabe, 1976) and
Halstead's complexity measure (Haistead, 1977). The FP measure is independent of programming language

                                                       4
        Directly measuring software output requires very detailed project level data that
Indian firms rarely collect and even such measures can be very subjective. We take a
different approach here. In a competitive industry, all productivity improvements must
eventually be reflected in economic outcomes. Objective data and our field interviews
strongly suggest that the Indian software industry is competitive and that firms are
reasonably homogenous in terms of the output —contract software development and
supplying programmers on a temporary basis. Thus, in this study, we use firm level
outcome variables, specifically, revenues and employment. We develop a model that
helps us link these variables with the unobserved changes in firm profits.


3. The Indian Software Industry

        Most of the Indian firms are small and young, and are involved almost exclusively
in software development. The median firm size in 1997, measured as number of software
professionals, is 70 whereas the largest firm employed about 9000 professionals. The
median age of our sample of firms is approximately the same as that of firms in the
industry. However, the median size of the firms in our sample is 200, and the median
revenue of firms in our sample is twice as large as the industry median.
        Few firms develop packaged software products on any substantial scale; most
provide software services that are not very specialized or exclusive.8 Most firms have
evolved from doing maintenance of legacy systems to lower end software development
services, like low-level design and coding of software components. With some
exceptions, advertising, intellectual property rights, and standards related issues are less
important than for packaged software. Skilled labor is the main input and firms recruit
from national or regional labor pools. In other words, there is likely to be much greater
homogeneity in the type of work performed and the capabilities of firms (given size and
age) than one might find in other industries.




and can used at the requirements specification stage to size and cost the software (Jalote, 1991). However,
the measure of function points is subjective and estimating the total function points for large and complex
systems is very difficult. Most Indian firms do not collect such data.
  It appears that firms established in 1997 or 1998 are relatively more likely to enter niche markets for
specialized services, or to develop products. These firms are not in our sample.

                                                     5
       Exports account for about 2/3rd of industry revenues, with the US accounting for
more than 50% of the export revenue. Professional services, consultancy, and data
services account for about 85% of exports. In a typical export project, the clients provide
the vendor (the Indian software firm) with the functional specifications of the
applications to be developed. The Indian firm does not participate in the early stages of
conceptualization and high-level design. In addition to software code writing, Indian
firms also carry out testing, except for acceptance testing, which the client or the final
customer carries out. There are very few instances where an Indian software firm has
been entrusted with requirement specification. In recent years, year 2000 projects (Y2K),
typically for small applications, have formed a substantial part of exports, although these
projects often also involve porting and re-engineering - recoding the application so that it
can run on a Unix or Windows platform. Such work, although it can be complicated and
time consuming, does not require new functionality, and does not require repeated and
detailed interaction with the users.
       Sometimes what are called software exports involves "bodyshopping", in which
the Indian software firm largely provides software programmers and analysts on a
temporary basis to the client. The key distinction is that these professionals work at the
client's site (onsite) under the management and supervision of the client, and the Indian
firm does little more than act as a temporary staffing agency. Regular export projects
also involve a mix of onsite and offshore work, but are managed by the Indian firm rather
than by the client. Few firms want to publicly disclose the extent of their onsite
operations, and fewer still want to be known as a "bodyshopper". Yet industry estimates
suggest that over 70% of the revenues may be from onsite work, with an unknown
percentage from pure bodyshopping activity.
       The distinction between offshore and onsite work is important because billing
rates and profitability differ considerably between the two. Our interviews suggest that
one man-year of onsite work is billed at about $90,000-$ 100,000 while comparable
offshore work is billed at $30,000-$35,000. The bulk of the difference is accounted for
by the higher cost of living in the US, as well as greater overhead and communication
costs. Interestingly enough, offshore work is widely believed to be more profitable for
the vendor. However, there are some important limits to the extent of offshore work.


                                              6
One is the need for face to face communication. Another has to do with incentives: Since
many projects involve cost plus contracts ("time and materials" is the term widely used in
the industry), clients have to trust the supplier to not overcharge them (Gopal, 1996;
Bannerjee and Duflo, 1998). The problem need not simply involve shirking by the
vendor: The supplier's inability to manage the software development without close
supervision may be as important a problem. Although fixed price contracts would, in
principle, provide the supplier with the right incentives, many software development
projects have fluid requirements that change with time.9 Thus, even fixed price contracts
can have important elements of time and material contracts.'°


Adoption of ISO 9001 by Indian SW firms
         Table 1 shows that the number of ISO certified firms has grown steadily in recent
years. The popularity of ISO, however, is not confined to Indian software firms; ISO,
despite its shortcomings, appears to have become the de facto "check box" standard for
quality in a variety of industries worldwide. Cole (1999: 156) attributes this popularity in
part precisely to the features that make ISO standards insufficient, in the eyes of many, to
ensure sustained quality improvement: The simplicity of obtaining ISO certification,
which reduces the uncertainties and makes the costs and benefits more predictable and
uncertain (relative to other quality programs). Moreover, the popularity of ISO
certification has fed on itself, attracting a large number of consultants that help firms gain
certification, as well as the widespread acceptance by potential customers.
         Although conventionally quality certification has been thought of as improving
the quality of software produced, in the Indian context, its role in signaling to potential
customers may be equally or more important. Some of the managers we interviewed
believed (possibly incorrectly) that ISO certification was mandatory for doing business in
Europe. One of the firms had apparently been warned by a major European customer in
1993 that ISO certification would be required by 1995. More generally, Indian firms see
ISO certification as a marketing tool and a way of distinguishing themselves from the

 For instance, a Y2K project may later evolve into a porting project. A porting project may also involve
enhancements or new functionality. Many projects involve on-going maintenance and support.
  In a fixed-fee contract, the deliverables as well as the deadline for the project is decided. The contract
may include penalty clauses for late delivery and for poor quality. In a time-and-materials contract, the
pack. Cole (1999: 153-4) notes that such motives are typical of firms going in for ISO
9000 certification, and especially small or new companies. In many developing
countries, multinationals have put pressure on their suppliers and the local goiernments
have provided a variety of inducements to their firms to acquire certification (Cole,
1999). The Indian government has granted special subsidies and licenses to firms that
obtain ISO or similar quality certifications. The National Association for Software
Service Companies (NASSCOM), an Indian trade organization, has a self-proclaimed
aim of persuading all firms with more than 10 employees to get certified by the year
2000.
        The notion that ISO serves as a signal to attract potential customers was further
supported by a top NASSCOM official, who told us that many firms looking to outsource
to India ask for a list of the top 20-25 of the largest firms plus all other firms that are
quality certified. One of the managers we interviewed put the signaling argument in very
clear terms.
        Imagine a customer is approached by a few vendors. Some have certification and some
        have no certification. Who will miss the chance in the first place9     Also imagine a case
        where the vendor is a local company or it is an Indian or European company having (sic)
        an office in USA. In the first place, we will lose, as we do not have any office in USA.
        The customer wants some confidence of closeness to the vendor (with) whom they can
        speak to face to face. Over the net one can develop software and one can use the
        software, but selling confidence over the net can happen only for large companies who
        have established them for years with good work in the intemational market.
         (manager of a small firm, Bangalore, not certified but seeking certification.)

         However, another manager disagreed somewhat with this view.
         Clients in the US rarely ever ask for certification. ... In Europe, we see ISO certification
         as a tick mark in your favour but the absence of it doesn't shut you out.
                  (manager of small firm, Hyderabad, not certified, not seeking certification)

         A manager of a large, certified firm first talked about how the clients required
such certification, and only then talked about the other benefits.
         Most (of our) customers like airline and auto parts companies are nowadays asking for
         better quality of service/product for their systems. Many of our clients have sophisticated
         quality assurance programs and it becomes important for us to be able to deliver quality
         software products and service      Bonus clauses are typically incorporated in project
         contracts and these are won through higher quality and timely deliveries of software
         services.
                  (Manager, large Bombay based firm, ISO and CMM certified.).

client pays on a man-hour basis. The project team size is decided in consultation with the client.

                                                      8
        Bannerjee and Duflo (1998) find that a firm's reputation, as measured by its age,
improves the negotiating position of the Indian software firm vis a vis their overseas
clients. Many of the firms that we interviewed in India said that a key element of their
strategy for convincing clients to give them business was to emphasize their software
development processes and methodologies. This emphasis is also evident from the
content of their publicity material and websites: Virtually every firm emphasized the
quality of its software methodology and those that are quality certified prominently
advertise the fact.
        Even though the ISO standards are generic and non-prescriptive, as a manager
pointed out, it is likely that the mere fact of defining, standardizing and documenting
their software processes will help firms focus on variables that are important for
improving quality. According to a manager at a large Bombay based firm, most Indian
firms follow a typical procedure to attain a quality certification. They first develop a set
of processes, based on the ISO standards. These processes are documented and adhered
to by projects within the organization while delivering software services. Once processes
are stabilized, an independent auditing organization is called in to audit the company's
processes and certify adherence to ISO guidelines. Our sense is that quality certification
requires some effort by the firm in defining and formalizing its software development
processes and methodologies.1'
        Moreover, even though a firm could adopt any process, ISO certification provides
an opportunity to seek out and adopt software development processes that conform to
established "good practices". For some firms at least, ISO certification is the first step in
an ongoing commitment to quality. A very large fraction of Indian software firms that
have obtained TickIT or CMM certification, first obtained ISO 9001 certification. In
other words, regardless of the actual content of ISO certification, one might plausibly
suspect that such certification can have real benefits in the form of enhanced quality. In
the next section we develop a formal model that helps isolate the testable implications of
these different effects.



"This points to another reason why statistically measuring the impact of adoption of a quality program (as
opposed to certification) is likely to be difficult — simply put, the quality program may be in place for some
time before certification is observed.

                                                      9
4. Testable implications of the impact of quality certification on performance
        Typically, in the economics literature on industrial organization, accounting data
on profits and costs are not treated as accurately reflecting the underlying economic
variables. In our case, we do not have the choice since about half the firms in our sample
are small and privately held, and do not disclose even accounting costs and profits. The
industry association, NASSCOM, does collect data on software revenues and software
professionals employed by the member firms. Managers we interviewed believe that
NASSCOM figures are accurate and credible. Accordingly, our research strategy is to
develop a formal model from which testable implications of quality certification can be
developed using revenue and employment figures, rather than profits.
        Our task is simplified by the nature of the Indian software service industry — firms
largely provide software development services, where the major input is skilled labor.
Land, equipment, physical facilities and data-communication links are other inputs. A
questionnaire survey of over a 125 firms, carried out as a part of a related study,
confirmed what we heard in our interviews — these factors, although important, are
largely a matter of financial resources. Furthermore, we found that banks and financial
institutions are willing to lend to software service firms and that virtually none of the
software services firms we surveyed, nor those we interviewed, mentioned getting
finance as an important problem.'2


Model
        We assume that the firms produce an output — software services — using only
skilled labor.'3 The price of the output (and hence the cost of producing it) depends on a,
the fraction of the output that is produced offshore, and on the quality of the output.'4
The scale of production depends on the number of software professionals the firm
employs, which in turn depends upon the ability of firm to attract customers and on other
firm characteristics. The variable cost of output depends upon a, because the cost of

L2
  The story is very different for firms developing products, for which getting long term financing is an

'''
important problem. We excluded firms that are primarily product developers from our sample.
  Alternatively, one might imagine that labor and capital are employed in fixed proportions.
  Strictly speaking, the fraction of offshore development affects the unit cost of output. In a competitive
industry, price will follow cost quite closely, and our field study confirms this for the Indian software
industry.

                                                     10
living for software professionals sent to work on the client site is much higher than for
offshore work. Since firms operate in well-integrated labor markets, the salaries are
largely determined in the labor market. In addition, our field studies indicat that the
cost of recruiting, hiring and training new professionals is an important part of the firm's
costs. Thus, LI, the firm's profit function can be written as

         u={a{p(O)_wi+1-apy(e)—wy]N(z; O)-C(N; N0)

        where Px is the price per unit and w is the unit labor cost and Px - Wx               7tx

represents the net profit from one man-year of offshore software development;. Simiarly,
     Px -   w is the net unit profit from onsite software development, where p and w are
the unit price and labor cost for onsite software development. We assume that m> m>
0, i.e., that offshore work is more profitable than onsite work. We also assume, also
based on our field research, that p,, > Px, (and w,, > w) i.e., that onsite software develop
has higher rates than offshore development, but that the labor costs are also
correspondingly higher. Both prices are assumed to depend on the quality of service, and
therefore, on quality certification, 0. Similarly, the size of the firm, N, depends on
investments z by the firm in attracting customers, which in turn is assumed to depends on
quality certification, 0. The last term of equation (1) captures the cost of recruiting and
training new hires, and therefore depends on stock, N0, of experienced software
professionals.
        The first order condition for the optimal size of the firm is

    an= I
            [air
                     - ir) +
                                      ---
                                    - aClaN = 0                    ..




        Does quality certification increase profits? Most of the firms we spoke with
thought so but there were a couple of exceptions. One of the exceptions was a firm that
provided software services to Microsoft, but was also developing software products. The
founder and CEO of the firm had well established ties with Microsoft. The firm was not

  Discussion with software professionals suggests that the salary differentials between different companies
are small and salaries depend primarily on skills and years of experience. This is consistent with the
observed high labor mobility, with attrition rates of 20% or more being the industry norm.


                                                    II
certified and not seeking certification. A major reason was that it did not see any
benefits. As the CEO put it "Bill (Gates) laughs at CMM", indicating that he too thought
such formalized quality certification processes were of limited value for softwire product
development. One reason why the benefits of formal quality processes were thought to
be small was that product development requires a great deal of fluidity and does not lend
themselves easily to formal documentation of requirements, signoffs on requirements and
the like, which such certification often requires.
       Moreover, many of the firms that did believe in quality certification could not
clearly specify the ways in which quality certification increases profits, other than that it
would help them get more business. However, managers at some of the larger firms that
had been quality certified for some time were more articulate. In addition to signaling,
the ways in which quality certification had or could help their firm included (a) better
quality of software (fewer defects, less rework); (b) an enhanced ability to estimate time
and resources required for a project, and hence, an enhanced ability to bid for projects;
(c) help the firm grow more rapidly by enabling the firm to use less experienced
programmers, who are cheaper and more plentiful.


       Through a structured methodological approach, we are able to manage the requirements
       better and estimate the project better. ... With (quality) certification, managers could
       then be able to get better projects from existing clients. Better would mean larger, more
       complex, newer technologies, core business applications of the client, product ownership,
       etc. ... (M)an-hour rate may or may not figure for these improvements. The project may
       have a higher billing rate. ... The project bid could be higher due to the preventive and
       appraisal costs of quality. This would ultimately result in lower corrective costs after the
       software is delivered to the client.
               (Quality Assurance Manager, large, certified firm, Bombay.)

       Clients are getting extremely quality conscious and the continuation of existing projects
       depends upon the quality of services delivered. ... Due to quality certification, one can
       command better projects from existing clients      The trend is towards building in bonus
       and penalty clauses into contracts based on quality & productivity metrics. The
       percentage of projects which have such 'service level agreements' is low right now but
       more and more customers are moving in that direction. In fact in some cases we ourselves
       are proposing such agreements to customers. ... Through a structured methodological
       approach, we are able to estimate their requirements better. ... In today's scenario, where
       we have such a high growth rate, (and a) high recruitment rate, having good processes for
       software development becomes very important. It would be unimaginable to manage
       even simple projects without good established processes.
               (Head of Quality Assurance Department, large certified firm, Bangalore.)

                                               12
         In terms of our model, if quality certification increases profits, it can do so in two
principal ways. First, certification can increase the quality of the software developed. If
so, this should increase the price that the firm can charge per unit of effort. We call this                $

the quality effect. This type of effect should be most visible in time and material

contracts. However, even in fixed fee contracts, insofar as the quality of the product is
higher, the client should be willing to pay more for a given quantum of effort. When
asked about the benefits of quality, most of the Indian firms indicated that they thought
that quality was very important. However, they also conceded that only rarely did clients
agree to higher rates. A couple of the firms did indicate that they were beginning to earn
bonuses for better and more timely work. Clients too, when pressed on this point,
confirmed that they often did not give higher rates.'6 Instead, most agreed that a major
benefit of higher quality was the ability to get additional contracts.
         In other words, a second possible way in which profits might increase is through
increases in the scale of operations. We call the increase in the probability of getting
export contracts, by acting as a signal of the firm's ability, the signaling effect.'7 Note that
a firm's scale of operations may also be enhanced by factors which lower the cost of
growth (such as by facilitating the induction of new software professionals). However,
only a small fraction of the managers we interviewed pointed to this benefit of quality
certification. Our sense is that only firms which are committed to an ongoing quality
program and have opted to go in for further quality certification such as CMIM level 3 or
higher have benefited in this fashion.
         As noted earlier, we do not observe profits. Instead, we observe revenue and
employment. As equation 3 shows, revenue in our simple model is simply the average


'6The effective rate is not a simple contractual matter, particularly under time and material contracts.
Better established firms are able to charge for things such as exploratory visits, or visits to negotiate
specification changes, that other firms cannot. Similarly, there is considerable scope for discretion in how
new and inexperienced members of the software development team are treated. Further, the price per unit
of effort depends on how successful the firm is in eliminating rework to fix bugs or estimating project
requirements resulting in a smaller fraction of programmers on the "bench" — waiting to be assigned to
contracts.
   The signaling interpretation also suggests another testable implication that we do not pursue here for lack
of data. A substantial fraction of Indian software firms have been ISO certified by mid 1999, and
consequently, its value as a signal has eroded considerably (as some managers we interviewed in 1999
noted). Thus, with systematic data over time, one could have tested whether the benefits of certification
decline as the percentage of firms that are certified increases. For this study, only firms certified by 1996
are treated as certified.


                                                      13
price per unit of output multiplied by the number of software professionals employed.
Thus whereas the quality effect implies a higher price per unit of output (see 4a), the
signaling effect implies higher employment, given the price per unit of output(see 4b).
Put differently, whereas the quality effect implies higher revenue per employee, the
signaling effect implies a larger number of employees for given price.
        log(Revenue)        Log(P) + Log(N)
             alog(Revenue) = alog(P)       + alog(N)                              (3
                                     ao        ao
                        "quality effect" + "signalling effect"

        alog(P) > 0
                                                                           (4a)
          ae
        alog(N) = dlog(N)                   aZ
                                  + alog(N)
        where
                                      a     ao
                                                                           (4b)



        az az =fla(lr
                Ii                        ad a2                  i2c —0
                                                                     aN
                              X   — )+r I—-—1
                                                            -
        ao      a2n    V-                 aNi aae                aNao az
                cJz



       A third way that quality certification can increase profits combines elements of
both stories. This involves an increase in the fraction of software developed offshore.
Recall that offshore development is more profitable than onsite development but that it
requires the Indian firm to manage software development to a greater extent, and puts a
larger share of the responsibility on the Indian firm. Insofar as quality certification does
result in greater offshore development, it implies a lower price per unit of output. We
lack acceptable measures of a, the extent to which software development is offshore.
Self reported measures have tended to be highly exaggerated and the extent of bias varies
across firms. Accordingly, we will treat a as an unobservable. This implies that the
offshore effect will be confounded to some extent with the quality effect in the empirical
analysis. As a practical matter, we believe that this does not matter very much because
with one exception, none of the firms we interviewed noted that quality certification
helps increase the offshore component.



                                                 14
4.2      Empirical specification
         The first order condition given by equation 2 implicitly defines a relationship that
determines the size (as measured by employment) of the firm as a function of firm
characteristics. In the empirical specification, the log of the number of software
professionals depends on firm characteristics, the expected price per unit of output, and
quality certification. This gives the first estimating equation. The second equation is
simply a variant of equation 3 which specifies the log of revenues as a function of size
(log of employment), firm characteristics and quality certification. Thus, equations 5a
and 5b represent the estimating equations, where X and Y represent firm characteristics,
Q represents ISO certification, and N and R represent software employment and
revenues. In the revenue equation 5b, P represents the average price (see equation 2
also).
         Log(N) =             +        + 2,P +                                                    (5a)

         Log(R)=flY+yQ+2rN+e                                                               (5b)


         Note that the signs of y and Yr correspond to the impact of quality certification on
the ability of the firm to grow and on the price per unit of output. In turn, these
correspond, albeit only imperfectly, to the signaling and quality effects discussed
earlier.'8 We estimate these equations, first by assuming that quality certification is
exogenous, and then by treating it as endogenous and instrumenting for it. It is plausible
that actual quality of service may depend not only on whether the firm is certified but
also for how long it has been certified. Accordingly, we estimate two specifications, one
where ISO certification is dichotomous variable and another where we use the number of
years for which the firm has been ISO certified, ISOAGE. Although it seems reasonable
to posit that on average the elasticity of revenue with respect to size is one, our field
studies point to the possibility that larger firms may be able to win and execute more
complex (and higher paying) projects. In turn, this would imply an elasticity greater than
one. Thus we allow the coefficient on size in the revenue equation to differ from unity.



  In going from the impact on unit price to the quality effect of ISO certification, we are neglecting the
offshore effect. This point is also discussed further below.

                                                      15
5. Data: Sources and Limitations:
        Our data come from two primary sources. The data on revenue, employment,
age, public status and quality certification are from the NASSCOM directory f Indian             $

software companies. NASSCOM member companies generate 95% of the industry
revenues, and the NASSCOM coverage of its members is fairly systematic. All the firms
in our sample develop software, mainly for other firms. Nearly 80% of the firms in our
sample have software exports accounting for more than 75% of their revenues. We
excluded firms that are purely domestic focused or those that provide web-hosting
services, or that are value added resellers for large packaged software companies in the
US. In addition, we removed very small firms (fewer than 10 employees) and firms that
were younger than 2 years.      This procedure left us with 95 firms on which we had
reasonably complete data. These firms accounted for over 60% of the total industry
revenue in 1997.
        We used revenue and employment data for 1996-97. Wherever possible, the
revenue and employment figures were also obtained for 1992-93 and interim years as
well. We converted all rupee revenues for a particular year into dollars by using the
average exchange rate for that year. We use the average revenue per employee for 1994-
95, 1995-96, 1996-97 a proxy for the "expected price per unit of output" in the
employment equation. The size of the firm is measured by the log of employment. 20 In
some cases, where NASSCOM data on employment or revenues was missing, we used
data published in Dataquest, an Indian trade journal. We have information on whether a
firm is quality certified and the year in which certification was first obtained. For this
study, only firms that obtained ISO certification in or before 1996 are considered to be
quality certified.
        In addition, using NASSCOM, our questionnaire survey and other sources, we
created a series of control variables to control for whether the firm is privately or publicly

19
   The direct cost of ISO certification is approximately Rs. 40,000 ($1000) per day and would take 4 days
for a company with 200 employees (Gopal, 1996). A firm that size would typically earn revenue of $5-6
million per year. We lack measures for the indirect opportunity cost of preparing for certification and
implementing the processes and documentation required to maintain certification status. Although a firm
of any size can get certified, industry consultants we interviewed consider 10 employees to be a minimum
sensible threshold. NASSCOM has proposed that all firms above a size of 10 employees should get
certified by the year 2000.
20
   For firms with non-software businesses as well, we include only employment in the software business.


                                                16
owned and whether it is a subsidiary or division of a foreign company, providing
software developing exclusively for the parent. The latter includes well-known cases
such as the software operations of Motorola, Texas Instruments, Cadence, Hughes
Networks and Baan Infosystems. The variables used are defined in Table 2a.
      Table 2b gives the descriptive statistics for the sample. The average revenue per
employee for the sample is about $24,000. This fits the industry perception where onsite
work is billed at about $90,000 per employee per year, compared to about $30,000 for
offshore work and about $10,000-$15,000 for domestic work. The distributions of both
size and revenues are skewed as shown in figures 2a and 2b. For instance, the average
size is 482 employees but the median size is only 200 employees. Similarly, while
average revenue is $11.72 million, the median revenue is only $3.1 million. We verified
that these distributions are approximately log normal. About half of the firms are quality
certified, and slightly less than half are privately held.
        The key identifying instruments for the size equation are lagged size, measured as
the log of the number of software professionals employed by the firm in 1992 (EMP92),
and whether the firm focuses on non OECD markets, such as the Middle East or Africa
(LDC_EXP). Since the cost of growth depends on the stock of experienced professionals
employed by the firm, lagged size is a natural instrument. In addition, the growth in the
US and European markets for software development has been much greater than from
developing country markets. To identify the revenue equation we use a variable that
measures whether the firm is part of a group of firms that have overlapping ownership
and management, often associated with a single family (GROUP). Another instrument
for revenue is whether the firm also develops and distributes software products
 (PRODCT).
      When we treat ISO certification itself as endogenous we use as instruments a
 dummy for whether the firm is publicly traded (PUBSTAT) and whether the firm came
 into existence after 1992 (YOUNG). Publicly traded firms might better resources and
 may also have greater incentives (such as signaling to capital markets) to get ISO
 certification. In addition, ISO standards themselves first come to prominence around
 1991 or 1992. Thus, firms entering the industry after 1992 are likely to acquire quality




                                                17
certification sooner after being founded than firms established earlier. Hence, controlling
for age, YOUNG is a candidate instrument, especially for ISOAGE,
       Other characteristics of the firm used as explanatory variables in both iLegressions
are whether the firm is operated as a cost center of an overseas firm (CAPTIVE), whether
it has a substantial fraction (30% or more) of its staff devoted to research and product
development (HI_R&D), the age of the firm (L0gAGE) and the percentage of revenues
due to exports (EXPORT).21 We also experimented with other controls such as location
but with little change to the qualitative results. In view of the relatively small sample
size, we settled for a more parsimonious specification.


6. Analysis and Results
        We begin with the ordinary least squares estimates of the estimating equations 5a
and 5b. Panel A of Table 3 displays the results using ISOAGE and panel B displays the
results where ISO certification is as a dichotomous variable (ISO). The results are
similar across the two specifications. ISO certification has a positive and significant
impact on employment and the impact on revenue is positive, albeit not statistically
significant. The point estimate of the elasticity of revenue with respect to employment is
slightly greater unity, although not significantly different from unity. As well, we see
that firms with substantial R&D (HI_R&D) tend to have higher revenues (given size) but
are somewhat smaller on average. In the employment equation, the five year lagged
employment is positive but the elasticity is small and imprecisely estimated. Although
initially surprising to us, this is consistent with the fairly rapid growth in the industry,
implying that lagged size is not a very powerful determinant of current size. Since most
of the growth has come from exports to the US and other rich countries, firms that
focused on the domestic market or on markets of other developing countries (LDC_EXP)
are, all else constant, much smaller. Finally, membership of a business group (GROUP)
is associated with higher revenues, given employment. This suggests that software firms
belonging to business groups have an advantage in negotiating with clients and can
leverage the reputation of the group to get better rates.

21 In order to obtain some of the control variables such as PRODCT, HI_R&D, and LDC_EXP, we
classified firms by reading through the firm's profile in the NASSCOM directory, supplemented by
information available from the company's website and from our interviews and questionnaire survey.

                                                  18
        Table 4 shows the results of OLS estimates of how ISO and ISOAGE are related
to the various exogenous variables used in the analysis. Although there are some
differences in the statistical significance of coefficients across the equations, the pattern
are broadly similar — older, larger firms, publicly traded firms and firms with very strong
export orientation are more likely to be quality certified and for longer. As with the
results reported above in Table 3, these results are interesting but cannot be given a
causal interpretation.
         We begin by endogenizing revenue and employment, but still keeping ISO
certification exogenous. Table 5 reports results of GMM estimates of equations 5a and
5b estimated as a system. We estimate two specifications, using ISOAGE and ISO
respectively. As noted earlier, we use membership in a business group (GROUP) and
involvement in developing and distributing software products (PRODCT) to identify the
revenue equation. The employment equation is identified by lagged size, Log(EMP92),
and by LDC_EXP. As in the OLS estimates, the estimates are similar between the ISO
and the ISOAGE specification. Focusing on the ISOAGE specification, we see that the
elasticity of revenue with respect to ISOAGE is about 0.29, a little less than the OLS
estimate of 0.34. The GMM estimates are qualitatively similar to those from the OLS for
the employment equation, although the GMM estimate of HI_R&D somewhat larger in
magnitude compared to the corresponding OLS estimate. The similarity between the
OLS and GMM estimates holds for the revenue equation as well, although the GMM
estimate of ISOAGE is almost zero, compared with 0.08 in the OLS (although not
statistically significant either). Also, the elasticity of revenue with respect to size is now
 1.34, although still not statistically different from unity. Finally, the coefficient on
expected price implies that a $1000 increase in the expected price per unit of effort
(compared to a median value of nearly $21,000) increases employment by about 4-5%.
 Since median size is about 200, this amounts an increase of 8-10, a small but statistically
 significant effect.
         Table 6 presents the results where we instrument for ISO certification. As noted
 earlier, we use PIJBSTAT and YOUNG as instruments.22 Focusing on the estimates in
 panel A, we find that the qualitative results are similar to Table 5 although the magnitude

 22 We tested for and could not reject the overidentifying restrictions implied by our specification.

                                                       19
of the point estimates differ somewhat. In the size equation, the most noticeable change
is that elasticity of size with respect to ISOAGE almost doubles to 0.59. In the revenue
equation, the pattern of results is generally the same although once again the thagnitude
of the point estimates does vary between Table 5 and Table 6. The other major
difference is in the estimate of elasticity of revenue with respect to size, which increases
from 1.34 to 1.55, albeit still not significantly different from unity. Taken at face value,
this suggests that larger firms may be able to earn a higher price per unit of effort,
possibly because they are able to undertake larger and more complex projects.
       Turning to other coefficients, we find that firms with a focus on research and
development tend be smaller, but have higher revenues conditional on size. Somewhat to
our surprise, conditional on other controls, the age of the firm does not matter much,
either for employment or size. This might be because many of the other variables are
strongly correlated with age, especially lagged size and YOUNG. The small coefficient
on age may also be linked to the rather large elasticity of revenue with respect to size.
Also surprising to us was the consistently negative coefficient of EXPORT in the revenue
equation. It is possible that this variable is picking up unobserved variations in the
percentage of offshore development, because it is plausible that firms with a larger
fraction of offshore development also tend to export more.
        The results are similar when one uses ISO instead of ISOAGE (panel B). In the
employment equation, instrumenting for ISO tends to reduce the absolute magnitudes of
most of the point estimates, except for the coefficient of ISO itself, which more than
doubles in value. The revenue equation estimates are remarkably stable even after
instrumenting for ISO. In general, the estimates using ISOAGE are more robust to the
inclusion or exclusion of various controls.
        Considering the results in tables 5 and 6, along with the OLS estimates, we
conclude that the impact of ISO certification on size is large and significant, and appears
to be larger, the longer the firm has been ISO certified. By contrast, the impact of ISO
certification on price per unit (revenue conditional on employment) is much smaller, and
appears somewhat sensitive to the specification.
        To understand the quantitative significance of the results, it is helpful to consider
the impact of being quality certified for one year. Note that quality certification will


                                              20
affect revenue in a number of ways - by increasing employment and by increasing the
average rate indirectly through the change in employment. As well, there will be second
round impacts because an increase in the average rate will further affect employment anq
so on. Taken together, the estimates in Table 6, panel A imply that the combined direct
and indirect impact of one additional year of quality certification is to increase expected
revenue by about 1 10%.23 In other words, for the median sized firm with revenues of
$3.1 M and 200 software professionals, one year of quality certification means an
increase of nearly $3.4 M in revenue and 117 in employment. If instead one uses the
estimates in Table 5 (treat ISOAGE as exogenous), then the total effect of one year of
ISO certification would be to increase revenue by about $1.4 M and employment by 62
for the median firm. The direct impact on rates is almost zero. However, the indirect
impact, through the increase in size is substantial, and varies between $3,000 and $1,400,
or 15% and 7% respectively of the median rate of $21,000.
         In general, the estimated impacts are larger than what we expected, especially
those obtained from treating ISO certification as endogenous. But even the lowest
estimates imply a fairly substantial impact of ISO certification. Consistent with the field
studies, the bulk of the impact is through increasing the size of the firm, which directly
increases revenue (and profits), and by increasing the price per unit of effort, has a further
increases revenues and profits.


Discussion
         We find that ISO certification enhances the ability of firms to grow, but with only
a modest impact at best on the rates it can get. Our results are consistent with the two
main themes that emerge from the field study: ISO certification is an important means of
signaling to potential customers (and hence, of enabling the firm to grow more rapidly),
and that ISO certification does help in enabling a firm with the ability to provide more
sophisticated and higher value added services to get such contracts, and hence earn higher
price per unit of effort. The results with respect to growth are much stronger and
consistent across different types of specification than the impact on rates. Virtually all the


23
  The inherent non-linearity of the specification of the estimating equation implies that these estimated
impacts cannot be exactly calculated.


                                                     21
managers we spoke with noted that quality certification was a way for them to market
their firm to overseas clients. A senior consultant who audits firms for quality
certification explicitly said that the one of the major benefit of quality certification was tc
enable the certified firm to get a "foot in the door".
         The signaling story is also consistent with the results in on the contracts entered
into by Indian software firms reported by Bannerjee and Duflo (1998). They find that
younger firms are more likely to try to signal their ability by accepting fixed price
contracts and being responsible for a larger fraction of the cost over-runs in time and
material contracts. They too find that the average impact of quality certification on the
fraction of cost overrun that the Indian software firm pays is small. Interestingly enough,
they also find that young firms that are 1S09001 certified appear to be closer in this
respect to older firm, and that the impact of quality certification on the contractual
variables is much greater for younger firms than for older firms.24
         Although we interpret our findings in terms of signaling and quality of service
respectively, these are not the only possible interpretation. For instance, the small direct
impact on rates may reflect an offsetting increase in a, the offshore percentage. Such an
increase, while increasing profit, would decrease the average rate. Similarly, it is
conceivable that superior quality of service be reflected not in the price but through the
client providing repeat business and larger and more sophisticated contracts. The impact
on size may not reflect only signaling either. Quality certification can enhance growth by
reducing the cost of growth. Managers at a large Delhi based firm noted that defining
and documenting their software development methodology had helped when new and
less experienced members were added to the business division, and when experienced
team members quit. Although not as frequently mentioned as signaling, this point was
also raised by managers from firms that had been quality certified for some time.
         The relatively greater importance of ISO certification as a signaling device is
certainly consistent with its use in other industries such as electronics, and with its
various deficiencies as a program for sustained quality improvement (Cole, 1999). But
ISO certification does require that the software development processes be defined and
documented. Surely this alone should help reduce errors and bugs in the software

24 They do not provide results by firm size.


                                               22
developed. Better signoff and acceptance procedures should reduce the extent to which
requirements change, more systematic testing procedures should detect bugs early, and
better documentation should make it easier to fix bugs once detected. In othei words,
even if not the intent, obtaining certification should improve quality. Although correct in
principle, our field research suggests that the direct economic impact of any quality
increase will be small, at least in the short run. In terms of the waterfall model of
software development, most of the export projects by Indian firms involve low level
design, coding and some extent of testing. Requirements analysis or high level design are
typically not entrusted to them. A design flaw is much costlier to rectify and very difficult
to detect until much later in the development cycle. Bugs introduced at later stages such
as in coding are relatively easy to detect and fix, compared with those introduced at an
early stage. Indeed, most clients carry out independent acceptance testing where such
bugs can be detected.
        Our field research reveals that the bulk of the software development projects
outsourced to Indian firms are relatively small, not very demanding in terms of technical
sophistication. Our interviews with US firms confirm that they do not outsource projects
that are either on the technological frontier or are mission critical to their business. The
upshot of all this is as that lower quality — more bugs in the code, and more ad hoc

development practices — is not as costly as it might otherwise be, and neither are the
rewards for higher quality as high.
       In other words, the relatively small impact implied on rates in most specifications
of the revenue equation is consistent with the picture of a rapidly growing industry, but
with many small firms, each quite small in relation to its clients in size and experience.
In the initial growth period, clients outsource fairly simple projects where the value to the
client of systematic and well-defined software development processes, of quality
certification itself, is low. However, many, if not most, Indian firms are capable of doing
more complex and sophisticated projects. In such situations, most of them would prefer a
strategy where short term profits are sacrificed for more rapid growth, and getting quality
certified and providing higher quality, not for higher rates but for more business, is a
viable way to grow.




                                             23
7. Conclusions
       Proponents of quality certification typically believe that the adoption of quality
measurement and improvement processes improves the quality of the output, and thereby
provides economic benefits to the firm. Our analysis suggests that the benefits of ISO
certification arise largely because such certification allows firms Indian firms to signal to
potential customers. Although quality certification can also increase the rates per unit of
effort, these effects are modest, at least initially. Firms that have been certified for some
time may able to command higher rates. However, both the econometric results and the
interviews suggest that relatively few firms are in this happy position. For these firms,
which are almost all committed to an ongoing software quality program, ISO certification
does act as the first step. For them, the field research indicates that ISO certification does
appear to have benefits, in terms of helping them manage growth and deal with the high
rates of employee turnover that are endemic to the industry.
       Our findings are consistent with the current state of evolution of the industry.
Many of the firms are young and immature but growing rapidly. Despite this, most of
their potential clients in the US and Europe are not confident of the ability of Indian
firms. As a consequence, the Indian software firms are getting ISO certified in order to
signal that their software development processes are defined and documented, not so
much in order to get higher rates per unit of effort, but to get larger contracts, and
eventually, to get better and more profitable contracts as well. It also follows that a larger
fraction of firms get certified, ISO certification loses its potency as a signal to potential
customers. In other words, our results may not generalize directly to other industries or
to other countries. However, there are some insights that apply broadly.
        Hitherto, quality programs and quality certification have been conceived of as
essentially firm or business unit level phenomena. The implicit assumption has been that
quality programs directly affect the internal processes of the firm and only through those
do they affect economic performance. However, under some conditions, quality
certification can affect economic performance in other ways as well, for instance as a
signal to potential customers. The more important conclusion is that in order to
understand quality programs and their impact, one must also understand the competitive
environment in which the firm operates.


                                              24
                             Appendix: Field Research Methodology

          Our site visits were done in three trips. On the first trip in December 1997, we
visited seventeen software developers in Bangalore, Bombay and Hyderabad. 'The visits
lasted from three hours to half a day per firm. The interviews were typically with the
CEO or member of the top management of the firm. They were loosely structured around
a set of broad set of questions relating to how the firm was started and how its choice of
location was decided, the firm's evolution over time, including any significant changes in
strategy and structure. The questions also included questions on the type of projects the
firm had undertaken both domestically and overseas, how it got business from overseas
clients and the major challenges the firm faced, and its strategy for dealing with those
changes. In this context many firms discussed initiatives they had undertaken for
improving the quality of their processes. The field interviews were followed up by
telephone interviews of 30 minutes to an hour with twelve US based client of the firm
visited. 25 These interviews took plate in the first part of 1998. As a part of these
telephone interviews we specifically asked about the importance of quality certification
in how software suppliers are selected and in the billing and other contractual
arrangements.
          In a second trip to India in June 1998, we spent considerable time at two large
firms (including one that does not readily allow access to outsiders), that are now
assessed at CMM level 4. On this trip, one of us who has worked in the software services
industry in India also had a chance to compare software development practices between
firms with and without quality certification. On the second trip we also interviewed a
firm that provides guidelines to software firms seeking a quality certificate. These
interviews were sometimes followed up by sustained email exchanges. Finally, we have
had informal discussion with the CEO a US firm with a substantial India based software
development operation. This firm competes with Indian software firms in providing
software development services. We also spoke with the CEO of an old, privately held
Indian software service firm. These informal conversations gave us valuable background
material on the nature of competition, pricing and contractual arrangements in the
industry.
          The third trip was shorter but included a day long visit to a large Delhi based
software firm, with interviews with managers at different levels, including the chief
operating officer. The software consulting division of this firm is headed by an industry
veteran who was also responsible for quality initiatives at one of the firms that pioneered
ISO certification and SET certification in the industry.




25
   The interviews were arranged by the Indian firm, and thus are not a random sample of the clients.
Nonetheless, our interviewees were remarkably candid in their assessment of the strengths and weaknesses
of their Indian suppliers.

                                                   25
Albrecht, A., J., and Gaffney, J.,E., 1983, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
        SE-9, 6, 639-648.
Arora, A., Arunachalam, V.S., Asundi, J. and Fernandes, R., 1998, The Indian Software
        Industry, working paper, Heinz School.
Boehm, B.W., 1981, Software Engineering Economics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
       NJ.
Boehm, B.W., 1987, Improving Software Productivity, Computer, pp. 43-57, September
Cole, Robert, 1999, Managing quality Fads, Oxford University Press, New York.
Dion, Raymond, 1993, Process Improvement and the Corporate Balance Sheet, IEEE
        Software, pp. 28-35, July.
Gopal, Anandasivam, 1996, An Empirical Analysis of Offshore Software Development:
        A First Look At Some Explanatory Factors", forthcoming in Communications of
        the ACM.
Halstead, M., 1977, Elements of Software Science, Elsevier North-Holland, New York.
Heeks, R., 1996, India's Software Industry: State policy, liberalization and industrial
        development, Sage Publications.
Herbsleb, J., Zubrow, D., Goldenson, D., Hayes, W. and Paulk, M., Software Quality and
        the Capability Maturity Model, 1997, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 40, No.
        6., July.
Humphrey, W. S., Snyder, T. R. and Willis, R. R., 1991, Software Process Improvement
        at Hughes Aircraft, IEEE Software, pp1 1-23, July.
Infac, 1998, Indian Software Market Status, Bombay, January, pp. 15
Jones, Capers, 1998, Sizing Up Software, Scientific American, pp. 104-109, December.
Kehoe, R. and Jarvis, A., 1996, ISO 9000-3: A Tool for Software Product and Process
        Improvement, Springer-Verlag, New York.
McCabe, T.J., 1976, A Complexity Measure, IEEE Transactions, SE-2,
Meadows, C. J., 1996, Globework: Creating technology with international teams, Ph.D.
        Thesis, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University.
National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM), 1994-95, 1996-
        97 1997-98, A Directory of Indian software service companies
P. Jalote, 1991, An Integrated Approach to Software Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New
        York.
Paulk, M. C., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M. B. and Weber, C. V., 1993, Capability Maturity
        Model for Software, Version 1.1 (CMU/SEI-93-TR-24, ADA 263403),
        Pittsburgh, PA, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.
Paulk, Mark C., 1994, A comparison of ISO 9001 and the Capability Maturity Model for
        Software, Technical Report from SET, CMU/SEI-94-TR-12, July.
Radice, Ronald, 1995, 1S09001 Interpreted for Software Organizations, Paradoxicon
        Publishing.
Slaughter, S. A., Harter, D. E. and Krishnan, M. S., Evaluating the Cost of Software
        Quality, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 41, No. 8., August 1998
Software Engineering Standards, IEEE Press, 1987




                                       26
</ref_section>
                                                     e




Fig 1: The waterfall model of software development




                        27
              Distribution of Revenue

    60
    50

40
C
    30
    20
z10
     0
         0    50000        100000           150000          200000      250000

                      Revenue (in $ 1000's)

                Fig 2a: distribution of sample firms




              Distribution by number of software professionals

    60
    50

40
C
    30

    20
Z
     0
         0   1000       2000         3000            4000        5000      6000

                           Number of Software Professionals

             Fig 2b: Size distribution of sample firms




                                    28
  Table 1: Growth of quality certification among Indian software firms, 1994-98

Year        Firms quality certified   Plans to acquire with 2 years
1994-95                16                          137
1995-96                30                          142
1996-97                58                          119
1997-98                89                          136

Source: NASSCOM, 1998


                        Table 2a: Description of variables used

Variable     Description
LOG(Revenue) Natural log of software revenue in 1997
LOG(Employ) Natural log of software professionals in 1997
AV_RATE      This is the average revenue per employee earned by the firm over 1995,
              1996 and 1997, (in '000s of $)
AGE          Age of the company (or the software division as appropriate), in years
LOG(EMP92) Natural log of number of software professional employed by the firm in
                 1992
Log(AGE)         Natural logarithm of the AGE
ISO=1            Firm is ISO certified
iSO_AGE          Age since the firm first acquired ISO certification.
EXPORT           Software export as percentage of the firm's software revenues
GROTJP= 1        Firm is part of a group of firms that have overlapping ownership and
                 management, often associated with a single family
HI_R&D= 1        R&D personnel are 30% or more of the firm's employment
LDC_EXP=1        Firm focusing on non-OECD markets, such as the Middle East, Africa
                 or India.
PUBSTAT=1        Firm is publicly traded
CAPTIVE=1        Firm is operated as a cost center of an overseas firm
PRODCT=1         Firm also develops and distributes software products
YOUNG=1          Firm came into existence after 1992




                                             29
                      Table 2b: Sample Descriptive Statistics (N= 95)

Variable                              Mean       Std Dev Minimum Maximum
REVENUE in 1997($'OOO)                  11723.76 25462.34     14.12 203652.54
EMPLOYEES in 1997                         481.98    1045.62      15     9000
LOG(Revenue)                                8.07      1.745    2.65     12.22
LOG(EMP)                                    5.22       1.35    2.70      9.10
AV_RATE ($'OOO per worker)                 23.36      15.73    0.81     83.76
AGE (years)                                10.64       5.30    2.00     31.00
Log(AGE)                                    2.25       0.48    0.69      3.43
ISO                                         0.49       0.50       0          1
ISO_AGE'                                    3.17       1.11       2          6
LOG(EMP92)                                  3.08         2.5      0       8.77
EXPORT                                      0.69       0.35       0          1
GROUP                                       0.19       0.39       0          1

HI_R&D                                      0.12       0.32       0          1

LDC_EXP                                     0.28       0.45       0          1

PUBSTAT                                     0.46       0.50       0          1

CAPTIVE                                     0.07       0.26       0          1

PRODCT                                      0.14       0.35       0          1

YOUNG                                       0.17       0.38       0          1



1. Sample of 47 quality certified firms only. Firms certified before 1996 only are counted as ISO
    certified.




                                                    30
                  Table 3a: OLS Estimates of Estimating Equations

                           PANEL A                           PANEL B
_________________        With ISO Age                 With ISO as dichotomous
                  log(Revenue) log(Employ)         log(Revenue) log(Emplo y)

 Constant                2.17           3.54           2.02            3.19
                        (0.51)          (0.65)         (0.49)         (0.64)
 ISO                                       -           0.23           1.16**
                                                       (0.21)         (0.23)
ISO_AGE                  0.08          0.33**            -               -
                        (0.06)          (0.07)

Log(Age)                -0.08           0.17           -0.03           0.27
                        (0.18)          (0.26)         (0.18)         (0.26)

Log(EMP92)
                          -             0.09              -          0.11
                                        (0.05)                        (0.05)
 GROUP                   0.42             -            0.41*             -
                        (0.21)                         (0.21)
HI_R&D                  0.53*          -0.55           0.54           -0.49
                        (0.29)          (0.38)         (0.29)         (0.37)
                          -            -0.18              -           -0.18
LDC_EXP
                                        (0.34)                        (0.34)
 CAPTIVE                 0.16           0.05           0.14           -0.08
                        (0.36)          (0.45)         (0.36)         (0.45)
EXPORT                  -0.11           0.45           -0.10           0.46
                        (0.26)          (0.44)         (0.26)         (0.43)
 AV_RATE                  -            0.01*              -           0.01*
                                       (0.007)                        (0.006)
                        1.12**            -           1.13**             -
 Log(Employ)
                        (0.08)                         (0.08)


 Adj. R Squared          0.80           0.82           0.80            0.48
 N                        95             95             95              95




                                        31
                  Table 3b: Reduced Form OLS Estimates

Dependent        log(Re venue)   log(Employment)         a
Variable
Constant               5.88              3.27
                       (1.17)           (0.88)

Log(EMP92)            0.24**            0.20**
                       (0.08)           (0.06)

Log(Age)               0.41              0.39
                       (0.44)           (0.33)
GROUP                  0.68              0.30
                       (0.41)           (0.31)
HI_R&D                 -0.23            0.71*
                       (0.55)           (0.41)
LDC_EXP                -0.70            -0.35
                       (0.51)           (0.38)
CAPTIVE                0.61              0.40
                       (0.69)           (0.52)
EXPORT                 0.44              0.64
                       (0.65)           (0.49)
PRODCT                 -0.55            0.65*
                       (0.46)           (0.34)
PUBSTAT                0.50              0.30
                       (0.33)           (0.25)
YOUNG                  0.63              0.46
                       (0.56)           (0.42)


Adj. R Squared         0.29              0.34
N                       95                95




                                   32
                 Table 4: OLS Estimates of ISO and ISO_AGE
                                                             p
                       ISO_AGE                  ISO
Constant                  -0.90                 0.13
                          (1.15)                (0.36)
Log(AGE)                  0.39                   0.00
                          (0.43)                (0.13)
Log(EMP92)               0.28**                0.06**
                          (0.08)                (0.02)
GROUP                     -0.29                 -0.02
                          (0.41)                (0.13)
HLR&D                     -0.56                 -0.23
                          (0.54)                (0.17)
LDC_EXP                   -0.29                 -0.10
                          (0.50)                (0.15)
CAPTIVE                   0.31                  0.20
                          (0.68)                (0.21)
PRODCT                    -1.08                0,26*
                          (0.45)                (0.14)
PUB STAT                 0.68**                 0.14
                          (0.33)                (0.10)
EXPORT                    0.98                  0.25
                          (0.64)                (0.20)
YOUNG                      0.50                 0.08
                          (0.55)                (0.17

Adj. R Squared            0.33                  0.20
N                          95                    95




                                    33
               Table 5: GMM Estimates, Treating ISO as Exogenous

                                PANEL A                       PANEL B'
_________________             With ISO_AGE          With ISO as dichotomous
                    log(Revenue) Log(Employ)     log(Revenue) Log(Emplo y)
Constant               1.38             2.95         1.44                2.77
                       (1.36)           (1.01)       (0.93)          (0.92)

 ISO                     -                           -0.12           1.04**
                                                     (0.41)          (0.26)

                       -0.02           O.29**          -                   -
 ISO_AGE
                       (0.16)           (0.08)

 Log(AGE)              -0.10            0.16         -0.11               0.24
                       (0.24)           (0.30)       (0.25)          (0.29)
                                           -         0.28                  -
 GROUP                 0.28
                       (0.27)                        (0.23)

 EXPORT                -0.26            0.42         -0.27               0.42
                       (0.32)           (0.42)       (0.31)              (0.42)

 HI_R&D                0.67*           0.88*         0.68*           -0.81
                       (0.37)           (0.51)       (0.36)              (0.53)
                          -             -0.18          -                 -0.22
 LDC_EXP
                                        (0.37)                           (0.34)

 CAPTIVE               -0.07            -0.13        0.09                -0.23
                       (0.26)           (0.41)       (0.24)              (0.41)
                          -              0.06           -                0.09
 Log(EMP92)
                                        (0.06)                           (0.06)
                                                     0.14                   -
 PRODCT                 0.16
                       (0.20)                        (0.20)
                       1.34**                -       1.34**                 -
 Log(Employ)
                        (0.38)                       (0.29)

 AV_RATE                  -             0.05*                            0.04
                                        (0.03)                           (0.03)


 R Squared              0.79             0.30         0.79               0.36
 N                       95               95           95                  95




                                          34
              Table 6: GMM Estimates, Treating ISO as Endogenous

                           PANEL A                        PANEL B
_________________        With ISO_AGE              With ISO as dichotomous
                  log(Revenue) Log(Emplo y)     log(Revenue) Log(Emplo y)
 Constant              0.49           3.10           1.5            2.53
                       (2.55)         (1.2)         (2.44)         (1.27)
 ISO                     -                          0.08           2.55**
                                                    (2.39)         (1.11)
ISO_AGE                -0.17         0.59**
                       (0.43)        (0.24)

Log(Age)               -0.13          0.07          -0.11          0.28
                       (0.23)        (0.33)         (0.31)         (0.33)
Log(EMIP92)              -           -0.02                         0.003
                                     (0.08)                        (0.09)
GROUP                  0.21            -            0.31             -
                       (0.3 7)                      (0.36)
EXPORT                 -0.25          0.21          -0.22           0.14
                       (0.55)        (0.38)         (0.32)         (0.65)
HI_R&D                0.81*          -0.77         0.70**          -0.45
                       (0.37)        (0.60)         (0.28)         (0.65)
LDC_EXP                  -            0.03                         0.10
                                     (0.46)                        (0.52)
CAPTIVE               -0.02          -0.17          0.02           -0.43
                       (0.24)        (0.54)         (0.30)         (0.61)
PRODCT                 0.26            -            0.28             -
                       (0.23)                       (0.29)
AV_RATE                  -            0.04                         0.03
                                     (0.03)                        (0.03)
Log(Employ)           1.56**           -            1.30             -
                       (0.68)                       (0.79)


Other instruments   PUBSTAT, YOUNG              PUBSTAT, YOUNG
R Squared              0.73          0.22           0.79           0.18
N                       95            95             95             95




                                      35
