NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS HOSPITAL COMPETITION
SOCIALLY WASTEFUL?
Daniel P. Kessler
Mark B. McClellan
Working Paper 7266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7266

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1999

We would like to thank David Becker, Kristin Madison, and Abigail Tay for exceptional research assistance.
Participants in the University of Chicago, Econometric Society, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Northwestern University, U.S. Department of Justice/Federal Trade Commission, and Harvard/MIT industrial
organization seminars provided numerous helpful comments, as did Edward Glaeser, Lawrence Katz, and
anonymous referees. Also, we would like to thank to Richard Hamer and InterStudy for providing information
on HMO enrollment. Funding from the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes on Aging
through the NBER is gratefully appreciated. However, all errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Daniel P. Kessler and Mark B. McClellan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful?
Daniel P. Kessler and Mark B. McClellan
NBER Working Paper No. 7266
July 1999
ABSTRACT
We study the consequences of hospital competition for Medicare beneficiaries’ heart attack
care from 1985 to 1994. We examine how relatively exogenous determinants of hospital choice such
as travel distances influence the competitiveness of hospital markets, and how hospital competition
interacts with the influence of managed care organizations to affect the key determinants of social
welfare – expenditures on treatment and patient health outcomes. In the 1980s, the welfare effects
of competition were ambiguous; but in the 1990s, competition unambiguously improves social
welfare. Increasing HMO enrollment over the sample period partially explains the dramatic change
in the impact of hospital competition.
Daniel P. Kessler
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fkessler@pound.stanford.edu

Mark B. McClellan
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
markmc@texas.stanford.edu

Introduction
The welfare implications of competition in health care, particularly competition among
hospitals, have been the subject of considerable theoretical and empirical debate. On one side has
been work that finds that competition reduces costs, improves quality, and increases efficiency of
production in markets for hospital services (e.g., Pauly [1988]; Melnick et al. [1992]; Dranove et
al. [1993]; Vistnes [1995]; and Town and Vistnes [1997]). On the other side has been research
that argues that differences between hospital markets and stylized markets of simple economic
models lead competition to reduce social welfare. Health insurance, which dampens patients’
sensitivity to cost and price differences among hospitals, is the most important source of these
differences: insensitivity to price may lead hospitals to engage in a “medical arms race” and
compete through the provision of medically unnecessary services [Feldstein 1971; Held and Pauly
1983; Robinson and Luft 1985]. Other work focuses on informational imperfections in hospital
markets, which may cause increases in the number of providers to lead to higher costs (e.g.,
Satterthwaite [1979], Frech [1996]), and on the monopolistically-competitive nature of hospital
markets, which may cause competition to lead to excess capacity and therefore higher costs (e.g.,
Joskow [1980], Fisher et al. [1999]) and potentially to increased adverse patient health outcomes
[Shortell and Hughes 1988, Volpp and Waldfogel 1998].
These opposing views have been manifested in two distinct policy perspectives. If
competition among hospitals improves social welfare, then strict limits on the extent to which
hospitals coordinate their activities may lead to greater efficiency in health care production. But if
competition among hospitals is socially wasteful, then lenient antitrust treatment of coordination
and mergers may be optimal.
1

Despite the theoretical and policy implications of evidence on the welfare consequences of
competition in health care, virtually no previous research has identified these effects on both
health care costs and patient health outcomes; and without information on both costs and
outcomes, conclusions about patient welfare are necessarily speculative. In addition, previous
research has used measures of market competitiveness that may result in biased assessments of the
impact of competition. In this paper, we develop models of the effects of hospital competition on
costs and health outcomes for all nonrural elderly Medicare recipients hospitalized for a treatment
of a new heart attack (AMI) in 1985-1994. We identify the effects of hospital market
competition with a relatively exogenous source of variation -- travel distances between patients
and hospitals -- that depends neither on unobserved characteristics of patients nor on unobserved
determinants of hospital quality. Based on this identifying assumption, we construct geographic
hospital markets that have variable size, and continuous rather than discrete boundaries. We also
explore how managed care mediates the effects of hospital competition on medical treatment
decisions, costs, and outcomes. Finally, because we observe information on hospital markets and
HMOs over a long time horizon, we estimate the impact of area competitiveness holding constant
other time-varying market characteristics and fixed effects for zip code areas. Thus, we control
for all time-invariant heterogeneity across small geographic areas, hospitals, and patient
populations.
Section I of the paper discusses the theoretical ambiguity of the impact of competition
among providers on efficiency in hospital markets. Section II reviews the previous empirical
literature on this topic. Although this literature has helped to shape understanding of markets for
medical care, Section II describes its three key limitations: it does not assess directly both the
2

financial implications and the patient health consequences of competition; it uses measures of
hospital competition that depend on unobserved hospital and patient heterogeneity, leading to
biased estimates of the impact of competition; and it has failed to control for a comprehensive set
of other hospital and area characteristics that may be correlated with competition, or that may
mediate its effects. Section III presents our econometric models of the exogenous determinants
of hospital choice and thus of differences in competition across small areas, and our models of the
effects of changes in competition on medical treatment decisions, health care costs, and health
outcomes. Section IV discusses our three data sources. Section V presents our empirical results,
and discusses potential implications of our findings for antitrust policy. Section VI concludes.

I. Theoretical Models of the Impact of Hospital Competition on Social Welfare
Basic microeconomic theory suggests that competition leads to efficient outcomes.
Markets for health care in general, and markets for hospital services in particular, deviate
substantially from the stylized conditions required by the basic theory, in which multiple buyers
and multiple sellers of a product or service are price takers with full information, and bear the full
costs of their actions at the margin. Not surprisingly, economic models of hospital competition
suggest that it may either improve or reduce social welfare.
Most of the models of how hospital competition may reduce social welfare focus on
distorted price signals and a more general absence of price competition. Insurance and tax
incentives may make consumers relatively insensitive to price, for example, so that hospitals in
more competitive markets engage in a medical arms race (MAR) and supply socially excessive

3

levels of medical care [Salkever 1978; Robinson and Luft 1985].1 Further, hospitals were
historically reimbursed on a “cost-plus” basis, so that they too did not bear the marginal costs of
intensive treatment decisions. In addition, “quality competition” may be socially excessive
because of price regulation in the health care industry (see, e.g., Joskow [1983], and McClellan
[1994a] for a discussion).2 If the additional intensity of medical care resulting from competition is
excessive, in terms of improvements in patient health outcomes whose value is less than the social
costs of production, then competition among hospitals would be socially wasteful.
However, even in MAR-type models, competition may improve welfare. Indeed, if
regulated prices are set appropriately and hospital markets are competitive, McClellan [1994a]
shows that a first-best outcome can be achieved even with full insurance. Moreover, many of the
MAR models are now viewed as theoretically outdated, because of improved price competition
among managed-care health plans. If plans have more capacity to negotiate and influence hospital
practices than do patients, and consumers pay for the marginal differences in premiums across
plans [Enthoven and Singer 1997], then the growth of managed care may have induced hospitals

1

The original MAR hypothesis was formulated around the idea that hospitals compete for
patients through competition for their physicians, by providing a wide range of equipment and
service capabilities. Greater availability of equipment may induces physicians to admit their
patients to a hospital for several reasons. If physicians are uncertain about the necessity of
various intensive treatments at the time the admission decision is made, then additional service
capabilities may allow them to provide higher-quality care. Also, to the extent that high-tech
equipment is a complement to compensated physician effort, additional equipment may allow
physicians to bill for more services; to the extent that equipment is a substitute for uncompensated
physician effort, additional equipment allows physician to work less for the same level of
compensation.
2

Models of the airline industry (e.g., Douglas and Miller [1974], Panzar [1975],
Schmalensee [1977]), for example, showed that regulated pricing induced airlines to engage in
nonprice competition, leading airline markets with greater numbers of competitors to have higher
service levels.
4

to compete on the basis of price (e.g., Town and Vistnes [1997]) and have lead to more costeffective use of medical technology (e.g, Pauly [1988]). Such price competition is likely to be
greatest in areas where managed-care health plans are most widespread.
Other aspects of hospital markets besides the effects of insurance and managed care on
price and quality competition also make it difficult to draw definitive theoretical conclusions about
the consequences of competition. Informational imperfections in hospital markets may cause
competition to reduce social welfare (e.g., Satterthwaite [1979], Frech [1996]). In addition, if
hospital markets are monopolistically competitive and not perfectly competitive, greater
competition may lead to less efficient levels of care (e.g., Frech [1996]). Although conventional
wisdom is that monopolistic competition in hospital markets yields too many providers and excess
capacity (with no hospital large enough to exhaust returns to scale), in fact monopolistic
competition can lead to either socially excessive or inadequate capacity [Tirole 1988, Sec. 7.2].
Finally, a substantial fraction of hospitals are nonprofit institutions, which may have different
objectives and behave differently than their for-profit counterparts (e.g., Hansmann [1980]; Kopit
and McCann [1988]; Lynk [1995]). Models of competition based on for-profit objectives may
not accurately characterize the welfare implications of interactions in hospital markets.

II. Previous Empirical Literature
A vast empirical literature has examined the consequences of competition in markets for
hospital services (see Gaynor and Haas-Wilson [1997] and Dranove and White [1994] for
comprehensive reviews). In summary, research based on data from prior to the mid-1980s finds
that competition among hospitals leads to increases in excess capacity, costs, and prices [Joskow
5

1980; Robinson and Luft 1985, 1987; Noether 1988; Robinson 1988; Robinson et al. 1988;
Hughes and Luft 1991]; and research based on more recent data generally finds that competition
among hospitals leads to reductions in excess capacity, costs, and prices [Zwanziger and Melnick
1988; Wooley 1989; Dranove, Shanley, and Simon 1992; Melnick et al. 1992; Dranove, Shanley,
and White 1993; Gruber 1994], with some important exceptions [Robinson and Luft 1988;
Mannheim et al. 1994].
The empirical literature has three well-known limitations. First and foremost, virtually
none of the literature assesses directly the impact of competition either on resource use or on
patient health outcomes; without significant additional assumptions, it is not possible to draw any
conclusions about social welfare (see Hoxby [1994] for discussion of this point in the context of
competition among public schools). Most research does not measure the impact of competition
on the total resources used to treat a given occurrence of illness -- that is, the financial social costs
or benefits of competition. Some work uses “list” charges rather than transaction prices (e.g.,
Noether [1988]), although fewer and fewer patients pay undiscounted prices [Dranove, Shanley,
and White 1993]. Even those studies that use transaction prices (e.g., Melnick et al. [1992]) or
transaction-price/cost margins (e.g., Dranove, Shanley, and White [1993]) analyze the prices for a
fixed basket of services, despite the fact that the welfare losses from the absence of hospital
competition are likely to be due to the provision of additional services of minimal medical benefit,
rather than to increases in prices for a given basket of services. Other studies measure the effects
of competition on the profitability of for-profit hospitals [Wooley 1989], on accounting costs per
case-mix adjusted admission [Robinson and Luft 1985, 1987, 1988; Zwanziger and Melnick 1988;
Mannheim et al. 1994], on employment of specialized personnel [Robinson 1988], on lengths of
6

stay [Robinson et al. 1988], and on patterns of provision of specific hospital services [Hughes and
Luft 1991; Dranove, Shanley, and Simon 1992]. We identified two previous economic studies
that sought to assess the consequences of competition for patient health outcomes [Shortell and
Hughes 1988, Volpp and Waldfogel 1998]. Shortell and Hughes [1988] does not examine the
impact of competition on treatment decisions; and both studies investigate the effect of
competition on in-hospital mortality only. This is an incomplete measure of health: if longer
hospital stays improve patient health but provide more time for deaths to occur, better outcomes
might be associated with higher in-hospital mortality. No studies have examined comprehensive
or longer-term health effects.
The second well-known problem in the empirical literature is that the commonly-used
measures of market competitiveness may result in biased estimates of the impact of competition
on prices, costs, and outcomes. For example, the “variable radius” method specifies each
hospital’s relevant geographic market as a circular area around the hospital with radius equal to
the minimum necessary to include a fixed percentage of that hospital’s patients, often 60 or 75
percent [Elzinga and Hogarty 1978; Garnick et al. 1987]. Hospitals inside the circular area are
considered to be relevant competitors; hospitals outside the area are considered to be irrelevant.
Based on its universe of relevant competitors, each hospital receives an index of competitiveness
like the Hirschman-Herfindahl index (HHI), equal to the sum of squared shares of beds or number
of patient discharges. For purposes of assessing the effect of competition on individual patients,
each patient is assumed to be subject to the competitiveness of the relevant market of her hospital
of admission.
Every stage in the process of constructing conventional measures can lead to bias in the
7

estimated effects of competition. First, the specification of geographic market size as a function
of actual patient choices leads to market sizes and measures of competitiveness that are increasing
in unobservable (to the researcher) hospital quality, if patients are willing to travel further for
higher-quality care (e.g., Luft et al. [1990]). In this case, estimates of the effect of market
competitiveness on costs or outcomes are a combination of the true effect and of the effects of
unobservable hospital quality (e.g., Werden [1989]). Second, the discrete nature of market
boundaries assume that hospitals are either completely in or completely out of any relevant
geographic market. This leads to measurement error in geographic markets, which in turn biases
the estimated effect of competition toward zero. Third, the measures of output conventionally
used to construct indices of competitiveness like the HHI – such as hospital bed capacities and
actual patient flows – may themselves be outcomes of the competitive process. Fourth, assigning
hospital market competitiveness to patients based on which hospital they actually attended –
rather than their area of residence – can induce a correlation between competitiveness and
unobservable determinants of patients’ costs and outcomes, because a patient’s hospital of
admission may depend on unobserved determinants of patients’ health status.
The third problem is that most previous work has failed to control for a comprehensive set
of other hospital and area characteristics that may be correlated with competition, or that may
mediate its effects. These additional factors include hospital bed capacity and the influence of
managed care. Substantial research, starting with Roemer [1961], has suggested that high levels
of bed capacity per patient lead to longer lengths of stay and higher costs; more recent research
indicates that hospitals which treat relatively few cases of any particular type may deliver lowerquality care. On the other hand, high levels of capacity per patient may reduce the travel distance
8

and time necessary to obtain treatment, which may lead to improved health outcomes.
Similarly, recent studies have generally shown that higher levels and growth of managed
care are associated with lower growth in medical expenditures (e.g., Baker [1999]). However,
few studies have examined the consequences of managed care growth for health outcomes,
leaving important unresolved questions about the impact of managed care on patient welfare.
Moreover, the studies provide little insights about how managed care achieves its effects. Can it
substitute for hospital competition in limiting medical spending, or does competition among
hospitals enhance its effects? And do the consequences of managed care for health outcomes
differ in areas with more or less competition among providers? Surprisingly, even though
negotiations with providers are the principal mechanism through which managed care is thought
to influence medical practices, essentially no studies have examined how managed care interacts
with provider competition.
Thus, although the previous literature has provided a range of insights about variation in
hospital competition and the relation of competitiveness to measures of hospitals’ behavior, it has
not provided direct empirical evidence on how competition affects social welfare. Furthermore,
because the literature has analyzed measures of market size and competitiveness that are not
based on exogenous determinants of the demand for hospital services, and because these measures
may be correlated with other determinants of costs and outcomes like hospital capacity, the
resulting estimates of the effects of competition may be biased. Finally, very few studies have
assessed the effects of competition in recent health care environments, in which managed care
figures prominently.

9

III. Models
As we describe in more detail in the next section, we analyze patient-level data on the
intensity of treatment, all-cause mortality, and cardiac complications rates for all nonrural elderly
Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized with cardiac illness over the 1985-1994 period. To avoid the
problems of prior studies in obtaining accurate estimates of the effects of market competitiveness
on hospital performance, we use a three-stage method. The core idea of our method is to model
hospital choice based on exogenous factors, and to use the results as a basis for constructing our
competition indices. This approach avoids the major empirical obstacles in previous studies of
competition described in Section II, and our data permit a thorough evaluation of the
consequences of competition for treatment decisions, expenditures, and health outcomes.
First, we specify and estimate patient-level hospital choice models as a function of
exogenous determinants of the hospital admission decision. We do not constrain hospital
geographic markets based on a priori assumptions. We allow each individual’s potentiallyrelevant geographic hospital market for cardiac-care services to include all nonfederal, general
medical /surgical hospital within 35 miles of the patient’s residence with at least five admissions
for AMI, and any large, nonfederal, general medical/surgical teaching hospital within 100 miles of
the patient’s residence with at least five AMI admissions. (We explain the reason for these a
priori constraints on potentially-relevant geographic markets below; because markets for cardiac
care are generally much smaller than the constraints, they are not restrictive.) We model the
extent to which hospitals of various types at various distances from each patient’s residence affect
each patient’s hospital choice, and we also allow each patient’s demographic characteristics to
affect her likelihood of choosing hospitals of one type over another. The results of these models
10

of hospital demand provide predicted probabilities of admission for every patient to every hospital
in his or her potentially-relevant geographic market. We then estimate the predicted number of
patients admitted to each hospital in the U.S., based only on observable, exogenous
characteristics of patients and hospitals.
Second, we calculate measures of hospital market competitiveness that are a function of
these predicted patient flows (rather than actual patient flows or capacity), and assign them to
patients based on their probabalistic hospital of admission (rather than their actual hospital of
admission). Thus, the measure of hospital market structure that we assign to each patient is
uncorrelated with unobserved heterogeneity across individual patients, individual hospitals, and
geographic hospital markets.
Third, we use these unbiased indices of competitiveness to estimate the impact of hospital
competition on treatment intensity and health outcomes. Because managed care organizations are
likely to be an important mechanism through which competition affects hospital markets, we
investigate the extent to which the rate of HMO enrollment in an area interacts with hospital
market competitiveness. We now describe each stage of our estimation process in more detail.
III.1. Modeling patients’ hospital choice
Consider an individual i with cardiac illness at time t=1, . . ., T who chooses among the J
hospitals in her area (J may vary across individuals; in the subsequent choice model, the time
subscript is suppressed for notational economy). The jth hospital (j = 1,. . ., J) has H binary
characteristics describing its size, ownership status, and teaching status, denoted by Zj1,. . ., ZjH.
Our model hypothesizes that individual i’s hospital choice depends on her utility from that choice,
and that her utility from choosing hospital j depends on her characteristics, the characteristics of j,
11

and the distance of i to j relative to the distance of i to the nearest hospital jN … j that is either a
good substitute or a poor substitute for j in some dimension.3 We hypothesize that the utility
from choosing one particular hospital over another depends on the relative distance between i’s
residence and each hospital because travel cost, as measured by distance, is an important
determinant of the hospital choice decision for individuals with acute illness.4 As we discuss
below, we seek to avoid the most restrictive assumptions typically associated with modeling of a
choice decision. Most importantly, our model does not assume that the choice decision between
any two hospitals is independent of so-called irrelevant alternatives. The relative utility for i of
choosing hospital j versus hospital j* depends not only on the characteristics of j and j*, but also
on the characteristics of other hospitals jN that may be good or poor substitutes for j and j*.
Because hospital j is characterized by H binary characteristics Zj1,. . ., ZjH, we parameterize
the utility of i from choosing j as a function of 2*H relative distances: H relative distances that
depend on the location of hospitals that are good substitutes for j (same-type relative distances),
and H relative distances that depend on the location of hospitals that are poor substitutes for j
(different-type relative distances). First, i’s utility from choosing j depends on H same-type
relative distances, Dij1+, . . ., DijH+, where Dijh+ is the distance from i’s residence to hospital j minus
the distance from i’s residence to the nearest hospital jN with ZjNh = Zjh. Dijh+ enters i’s utility
because the availability at low travel cost of good substitutes for j in one or more dimensions
(e.g., Dijh+ >> 0) may reduce i’s utility from choosing j. Second, i’s utility from choosing j
3

We calculate travel distances from patients to hospitals as the distance from the center of
the patient’s five-digit zip code to the center of the hospital’s five-digit zip code.
4

Particularly for acute illnesses such as heart disease, distances from patient residence to
different types of hospitals are a strong predictor of hospital of admission [McClellan 1994b].
12

depends on H different-type relative distances, Dij1-, . . ., DijH-, where Dijh- is the distance from i’s
residence to hospital j minus the distance from i’s residence to the nearest hospital jN with ZjNh …
Zjh. Dijh- enters i’s utility because the availability at low travel cost of poor substitutes for j in one
or more dimensions may also affect i’s utility from choosing j.
We model i’s indirect expected utility from choosing j, Yij*, as the sum of a function V of
the 2H relative distances and hospital characteristics Zj1,. . ., ZjH; a function W of i’s demographic
characteristics Xi and hospital characteristics Zj1,. . ., ZjH; and a factor åij that depends on
unobservable characteristics of individuals and hospitals, such as individuals’ choice of physician
(because the admission decision is made jointly with patients and physicians) and health status:
*

1+

H+

1−

H−

1

H

Yij = V(D ij , . . . , D ij , D ij , .. . , D ij ; Z j , .. . , Z j ) +
1

H

W(X i ; Z j , . .. , Z j ) + ∈ ij
We specify V as a nonparametric function of relative distances and hospital characteristics
to avoid assuming a particular functional relationship between travel costs, hospital
characteristics, and individuals’ hospital choice problem. In particular, we divide each differential
distance Dijh+ and Dijh- into four categories, with category boundaries at the 10th, 25th, and 50th
percentile of the distribution of the respective differential distance.

This implies four indicator

differential distance variables (DD1ijh+, . . ., DD4ijh+) = DDijh+ for each Dijh+, and four indicator
differential distance variables (DD1ijh-, . . ., DD4ijh-) = DDijh- for each Dijh-. Also, we allow the
impact on utility of Dijh+ and Dijh- to vary, depending on whether Zjh = 0 or Zjh = 1. For example,
same-type relative distance would be a more important determinant of the utility derived from
choosing one nonteaching hospital over another versus than of the utility derived from choosing
13

one teaching hospital over another, if nonteaching hospitals were on average closer substitutes for
one another than were teaching hospitals. Thus, for every i-j pair, V(.) can be written as a
function of relative distances, hospital characteristics, and 4*H vectors of parameters [(è 11, è 21,
è 31, è 41), . . ., (è 1H, è 2H, è 3H, è 4H)]:
H

h+

h

h

h

h

Vij = ∑ {DD ij [ θ 1 Z j + θ 2 (1 − Z j )] +
h =1

h−

h

h

h

h

DD ij [ θ 3 Z j + θ 4 (1 − Z j )]}
We specify W as a nonparametric function of the interaction between individual i’s
characteristics Xi and hospital characteristics Zj1,. . ., ZjH, and H vectors of parameters ë 1, . . ., ë H:5
H

h

Wij = ∑ X i Z j λ

h

h =1

Under the assumption that the individual chooses that hospital that maximizes her
expected utility, and that åij is independently and identically distributed with a type I extreme value
distribution, McFadden [1973] shows that the probability of individual i choosing hospital j is
equal to

Π ij = Pr( Yij = 1) =

e
J

( Vij + Wij )

∑ e

( Vil + Wil )

.

l =1

We solve for è and ë by maximizing the log-likelihood function

5

Because i’s individual characteristics can only affect her probability of choosing one type
of hospital relative to another, the impact of characteristics Xi necessarily varies by hospital type.
14

N

J

log l = ∑ ∑ log( Π ij )
i = 1 j= 1

.

We estimate this model separately for different years and for different regions of the country (e.g.,
allow è and ë and the relative-distance category boundaries to vary), to account for differences in
the effects of distances and other hospital and patient characteristics across regions and over
time.6
III.2. Calculating measures of hospital market structure
With estimates of è and ë from the choice models, we calculate predicted probabilities of
admission for every patient to every hospital in his or her potentially-relevant geographic market
ð^ij. Summing over patients, these ð^ij translate into a predicted number of patients admitted to each
hospital in the U.S., based only on observable, exogenous characteristics of patients and
hospitals. For every zip code of patient residence k=1, . . ., K, the predicted probabilities
translate into a predicted share of patients from zip k going to hospital j, denoted by á^jk:

6

We divided the country into the following 20 regions: CT, ME, NH, RI, and VT; MA;
Buffalo, NY, Amityville, NY and Pittsburgh, PA MSAs; the NJ portion of CMSA 77 (CMSA 77
is Ancora, NJ, Philadelphia, PA, Vineland, NJ; Wilmington, DE MSAs); the PA portion of CMSA
77; Passaic, NJ, Jersey City, NJ, and Edison, NJ MSAs; Toms River, NJ, Newark, NJ, and
Trenton, NJ MSAs; NY PMSA counties other than Queens and Kings; Queens and Kings
Counties, NY PMSA; All other NY, NJ and PA urban counties; DE, DC, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC,
VA, and WV; IN and OH; MI and WI; IL; AL, KY, MS, and TN; IA, KS, MN, MO, NE, ND,
and SD; AR, LA, OK, and TX; AZ, CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, and WY; AK, HI, OR, WA, and
all of CA except the Los Angeles PMSA; and the Los Angeles, CA PMSA. We subdivided
standard census regions as needed to enable us to estimate the choice models in regions with very
high densities of hospitals.
15

∑ π$ ij

α$ jk =

i living
in k
J

∑ ∑ π$ ij
j=1 i living
in k

For comparability with the previous literature, our measures of competitiveness are in the
form of predicted HHIs.7 If hospitals face separate demand functions for each zip code in their
service areas -- that is, are able to differentiate among patients based on their zip code of
residence – then the predicted HHI for patients in zip k is
J

HHI k = ∑ α$ jk .
pat

2

j= 1

HHIkpat differs from the measures used in the previous literature in several ways. First, it uses
expected patient shares based on exogenous determinants of patient flows, rather than potentially
endogenous measures such as bed capacity or actual patient flows. Second, it assigns patients to
hospital markets based on an exogenous variable (zip code of residence), rather than an
endogenous one (actual hospital of admission). Third, it defines geographic markets to include all
potentially-competitive hospitals, but only to the extent that they would be expected to serve a
geographic area, rather than defining geographic markets to include arbitrarily all hospitals located
within a fixed distance or within the minimum distance necessary to account for a fixed share of
admissions.

7

The key properties of competition indices like HHIs are that they decrease in the number
of competitors and increase in inequality in size among competitors. As noted in more detail
below, we use HHIs in only a categorical way; provided that an index has these properties, our
results are likely to be robust to the specific form of the index.
16

However, this measure assumes that hospitals differentiate among patients based on the
competitiveness of their particular residential area. More realistically, hospital decisions would
depend on the total demand for hospital services from all nearby areas. The competitiveness of a
hospital’s market is a function of the weighted average of the competitiveness of all the patient
residence areas that it serves. If â kj represents the share of hospital j’s predicted demand coming
from zip code k (this is a hospital-level share, not a zip-level share like á jk), then the HHI for
hospital j can be written:
hosp

HHI j

where

( )

K

J

K

j= 1

k =1

= ∑ β$ kj ⋅ ∑ α$ 2jk = ∑ β$ kj ⋅ HHI pat
k ,
k =1

∑ π$ ij

β$ kj =

i living
in k
N

.

∑ π$ ij

i =1

If we were to follow the approach of the previous literature, we would assign to patients
such a measure of the competition faced by the hospital according to each patient’s actual hospital
of admission. However, as Section II observed, this will lead to biased estimates of the impact of
market structure on patient welfare, if unobserved determinants of hospital choice are correlated
with patient health status. For this reason, the competitiveness index that we use in analysis,
HHIkpat*, assigns HHIjhosp to patients based on the vector of average expected probabilities of
hospital choice in the patient’s zip of residence:
pat *

HHI k

J

= ∑ α$ jk ⋅
j= 1

[

K

( )]
J

2
∑ β$ kj ⋅ ∑ α$ jk

k =1

j= 1

J

hosp

= ∑ α$ jk ⋅ HHI j

.

j= 1

In words, this index is the weighted average of the competition indices for hospitals expected to
17

treat patients in a given geographic area of residence, weighted by the hospital’s expected share of
area patients. Thus, variation in HHIkpat* over time and across areas comes from three sources:
changes over time across areas in hospital markets (e.g., openings, closures, and mergers of
hospitals), changes over time in the response of individuals’ hospital choice decision to differential
distances (which affects competition differently across areas), and changes over time in the
distribution across areas of the population of AMI patients.
Other important market factors – including the distance to the nearest hospital of any type
(which could affect treatment intensity and outcomes if patients who must travel a long distance
to the hospital do not get prompt emergency care), bed capacity, the characteristics of hospitals in
different residential markets (size, ownership status, and teaching status), and area managed care
enrollment rates – may also affect hospital decisions and be correlated with or mediate hospital
competition. In all models that include HHIkpat*, we include controls for the distance to the
nearest hospital, zip-code level hospital bed capacity per probabilistic AMI patient, and the zipcode density of hospital characteristics. The latter two of these are constructed analogously to
HHIkpat*. To calculate our measure of bed capacity CAPkpat*, for example, we begin with a
measure of capacity, CAPkpat, that assumes that hospitals face separate demand functions for each
zip code in their service areas:

pat

CAPk

J

= ∑ α$ jk ⋅
j=1

Bj
∑ π$ ij

,

i living
ink

where Bj represents the number of beds in hospital j. Then, we calculate the bed capacity per
probabilistic patient faced by each hospital, CAPjhosp, as a â kj-weighted average of CAPkpat. The
18

measure of capacity that we use in estimation, CAPkpat*, assigns CAPjhosp to patients based on the
vector of averaged expected probabilities of hospital choice in the patient’s zip of residence:

pat *

CAPk

J

= ∑ α$ jk ⋅
j= 1


 ∑ β$


K

k =1



⋅ ∑ α$


J

kj

j= 1

jk

Bj

⋅

∑ π$ ij

i living
ink



 ,
 

Zip-code level measures of the probabilistic-patient weighted density of hospital characteristics h
= 1, . . ., H are constructed in the same way:
pat *

hosp _ char _ h k

[

J

K

(

J

h
= ∑ α$ jk ⋅ ∑ β$ kj ⋅ ∑ α$ jk ⋅ Z j
j= 1

k =1

j= 1

)]

.

We describe the construction of area managed-care enrollment rates in section IV below.
III.3. Modeling the impact of hospital competition on patient welfare
We assess the impact of hospital competition on hospital expenditures and health
outcomes, using longitudinal data on cohorts of elderly Medicare beneficiaries with heart disease
in 1985, 1988, 1991, and 1994. We use zip-code fixed effects to control for all time-invariant
heterogeneity across small geographic areas, hospitals, and patient populations; our estimates of
the effect of competition are identified using changes in hospital markets. We investigate the
extent to which managed-care enrollment in an area interacts with hospital market
competitiveness to affect treatment intensity and patient health outcomes, and we jointly analyze
the effects of competition, hospital bed capacity, and other characteristics. In addition, we include
separate time-fixed-effects for individuals from differently-sized geographic areas (i.e., smaller and
larger metropolitan areas), and include controls for time-varying characteristics of geographic
19

areas (such as the travel distance between individuals’ residence and their closest hospital), to
address the possibility that our estimated effects of competition are due to still other omitted
factors that were correlated with health care costs, health outcomes, and hospital markets. We
describe these variables in more detail in the next section.
In zip code k during year t = 1,. . ., T, observational units in our analysis of the welfare
consequences of competition consist of individuals i=1,. . ., Nkt who are hospitalized with new
occurrences of particular illnesses such as a heart attack. Each patient has observable
characteristics Uikt: four age indicator variables (70-74 years, 75-79 years, 80-89 years, and 90-99
years; omitted group is 65-69 years), gender, and black/nonblack race; plus a full set of interaction
effects between age, gender, and race; and interactions between year and each of the age, gender,
and race indicators. The individual receives treatment of aggregate intensity Rikt, where R is total
hospital expenditures in the year after the health event. The patient has a health outcome Oikt,
possibly affected by the intensity of treatment received, where a higher value denotes a more
adverse outcome (O is binary in all of our outcome models).
Our basic models are of the form
pat *

pat *

ln( R ikt ) = δ k + σ t M k + Uikt φ + HHI kt * I (1985 ∨ 1988) η 1980 s + HHI kt * I (1991 ∨ 1994 ) η 1990 s
+ OMC kt * I (1985 ∨ 1988) ψ 1980 s + OMC kt * I (1991 ∨ 1994 ) ψ 1990 s + ξ ikt

(1)

,

where ä k is a zip-code fixed-effect; ó t is a time fixed-effect; Mk is a six-dimensional vector of
indicator variables denoting the size of individual i’s MSA; I(.) is an indicator function; OMCkt is a
vector of other market characteristics in zip code k at time t, including CAPktpat*, controls for the
area densities of hospitals of different sizes, ownership statuses, and teaching statuses
20

(hosp_char_1ktpat*, . . ., hosp_char_Hktpat*), and the travel distance to the hospital nearest to zip
code k; and î ikt is a mean-zero independently-distributed error term with E(î ikt |. . .) = 0. Based
on findings from the previous empirical literature, we allow ç and ø to vary in the 1980s and
1990s.
We estimate three variants of (1). First, for purposes of comparison with previous work,
we estimate (1) substituting for HHIktpat* conventionally-calculated HHIs (as a function of shares
of actual patient flows, based on a 75-percent-actual-patient-flow variable-radius geographic
market, matched to patients based on their hospital of admission), and substituting for OMCkt the
characteristics of hospital of admission Zj1,. . ., ZjH. Second, in order to investigate how the
responsiveness of behavior to competition varies across differently-competitive markets, we
estimate a nonparametric model as well as a simple linear model of the effect of HHIktpat* on Rikt
and Oikt. The nonparametric model includes three indicator variables that divide HHIktpat* into
quartiles (omitted category is the lowest quartile), with quartile cutoffs in all years based on the
1985-94 pooled distribution of HHIktpat* at the zip code level. Third, we allow ç and ø to vary in
areas with above-median versus below-median managed care enrollment, because theoretical
work suggests that insurance market characteristics may alter the impact of hospital competition.
In equation (1), changes in the estimated effect of competition ç between the 1980s and
1990s may be due to two factors: changes over time in the response of the level of expenditures
or outcomes to changes in competition, or changes over time in the growth rate of expenditures
or outcomes in areas with high versus low levels of competition. We investigate the importance
of the first effect with three period-by-period “difference-in-difference” models (1985-88, 198891, 1991-94) of the effect of changes in competition:
21

pat *

pat *

ln( R ikt ) = δ k + σ t M k + U ikt φ + IQ ( HHI kt − HHI kt −1 ) γ + OMC kt ψ + ξ ikt . (2)
In this equation, IQ(.) is a function that returns a three-element vector of indicator variables
describing the extent of interquartile changes in competition in zip code k from t-1 to t. Thus,
estimates of ã from equation (2) represent the change in resource use or health outcomes for
patients in residential areas experiencing interquartile changes in competition, relative to patients
in areas without interquartile changes, holding constant patient background, other market
characteristics, and zip-code fixed effects. Specifically, the elements of the vector returned by
IQ(.) are as follows: into_topkt = 1 in period t if zip code k moved from the second to the first
quartile of HHIktpat* between t-1 and t, = -1 in period t if zip code k moved from the first to the
second quartile between t-1 and t, and = 0 for other changes, no change, and for all observations
from period t-1; out_of_btmkt = 1 in period t if k moved from the fourth to the third quartile
between t-1 and t, = -1 in period t if k moved from the third to the fourth quartile, and 0
otherwise; and qtl_3_to_2 =1 in period t if k moved from the third to the second quartile between
t-1 and t, = -1 in period t if k moved from the second to the third quartile, and 0 otherwise. This
specification imposes the constraint that changes in competitiveness of opposing direction but
between the same quartiles have effects of equal magnitude but opposite sign.

IV. Data
We use data from three principal sources. First, we use comprehensive longitudinal
Medicare claims data for the vast majority of elderly nonrural beneficiaries who were admitted to
a hospital with a new primary diagnosis of AMI in 1985, 1988, 1991, and 1994. The sample is
22

analogous to that used in Kessler and McClellan [1996, 1998]. Patients with admissions for the
same illness in the prior year were excluded. We focus on hospital choice for the initial
hospitalization. Decisions by a hospital to transfer a patient, and the extent to which they provide
followup care and readmissions (or refer patients to other hospitals that provide these services
well), are important aspects of quality of care. In addition, many treatments administered within
hours of admission for heart disease have important implications for patient outcomes.
Measures of total one-year hospital expenditures were obtained by adding up all inpatient
reimbursements (including copayments and deductibles not paid by Medicare) from insurance
claims for all hospitalizations in the year following each patient’s initial admission for AMI.8
8

Because Medicare’s diagnosis-related group (DRG) payment system for hospitals appears
to compensate hospitals on a fixed-price basis per admission for treatment, and Medicare does not
bargain with individual hospitals, competition might appear to be irrelevant to Medicare patients’
hospital expenditures. However, competition may affect Medicare patients both through “direct”
and “spillover” effects.
Competition may have direct effects on Medicare patients because the intensity of
treatment of all health problems may vary enormously, and because the DRG system actually
contains important elements of cost sharing (e.g., McClellan [1994a, 1997]). For example, many
DRGs are related to intensive treatments such as cardiac catheterization and bypass surgery,
rather than to diagnoses such as heart attack. Thus, for most health problems, hospitals that
provide more intensive treatment and incur higher costs can receive considerable additional
payments. To the extent that Medicare provides hospitals with low-powered, cost-plus
incentives, it may support MAR-type quality competition and thereby create social losses due to
the provision of excessive care.
Even if reimbursement rules and other factors limit the direct impact of competition on
publicly-insured patients in programs like Medicare, competition for privately-insured patients
may have important spillover effects. To the extent that competition improves the efficiency of
treatment of privately-insured patients and physicians do not develop distinctive practice patterns
for the private and public patients they treat, Medicare patients will also benefit [Baker 1999].
For example, a hospital’s decision not to adopt a low-value technology benefits all patients, even
if that choice primarily resulted from pressure by private managed-care insurers. Similarly,
increased provision of information by providers for private purchasers may have external benefits
for all patients. Conversely, spillovers might harm Medicare patients. For example, to the extent
that hospitals do develop separate practice patterns for Medicare and privately-insured patients,
hospitals may have a greater incentive to provide intensive treatments for Medicare beneficiaries,
23

Measures of the occurrence of cardiac complications were obtained by abstracting data on the
principal diagnosis for all subsequent admissions (not counting transfers and readmissions within
30 days of the index admission) in the year following the patient’s initial admission. Cardiac
complications included rehospitalizations within one year of the initial event with a primary
diagnosis (principal cause of hospitalization) of either subsequent AMI or heart failure (HF).
Treatment of AMI patients is intended to prevent subsequent AMIs if possible, and the
occurrence of HF requiring hospitalization is evidence that the damage to the patient’s heart from
ischemic disease has serious functional consequences. Data on patient demographic
characteristics were obtained from the Health Care Financing Administration’s HISKEW
enrollment files, with death dates based on death reports validated by the Social Security
Administration.
Our second principal data source is comprehensive information on U.S. hospital
characteristics collected by the American Hospital Association (AHA). The response rate of
hospitals to the AHA survey is greater than 90 percent, with response rates above 95 percent for
large hospitals (>300 beds). Because our analysis involves nonrural Medicare beneficiaries with
AMI, we examine only nonrural, nonfederal hospitals that ever reported providing general medical
or surgical services (for example, we exclude psychiatric and rehabilitation hospitals from
analysis). To assess hospital size and for purposes of computation of bed capacity per
probabilistic patient, we use total general medical/surgical beds, including intensive care, cardiac
care, and emergency beds. We divide hospitals into three broad size categories (small (<100

to recover the fixed costs of equipment that private insurers will not defray.
24

beds), medium (100-300 beds), and large (>300 beds)) and two ownership categories (public and
private). We classify hospitals as teaching hospitals if they report at least 20 full-time residents.
Finally, we match patient data with information on annual HMO enrollment rates by state from
InterStudy Publications, a division of Decision Resources, Inc. Enrollment rates were calculated
by dividing the number of enrollees (exclusive of Medicare enrollees) by the nonelderly
population. In order to investigate the extent to which the rate of HMO enrollment in an area
interacts with hospital market structure, we separate states into those with above- and belowmedian HMO enrollment rates in each of our study years. The classification of states is shown in
Appendix Table I.
Table I outlines the exclusion restrictions we imposed, and their consequences for our
samples. First, we exclude hospitals (and the patients admitted to them) because of missing
Medicare ID information and missing data for hospitals. Although around 6 percent of hospitals
have such missing data, less than 2 percent of patients are affected. Second, we exclude hospitals
that admit fewer than 5 AMI patients per year, and also exclude patients who went to hospitals
that admit fewer than 5 AMI patients per year. Hospitals that admit fewer than 5 AMI patients
per year are unlikely to be relevant competitors, and patients choosing such low-volume hospitals
are unlikely to be representative of AMI patients generally. Again, Table I shows that the number
of hospitals excluded on these grounds is small, and the number of patients excluded is especially
small. Third, we exclude AMI patients who were actually admitted to a hospital that was more
than 35 miles from their residence, or if they were admitted to a large, teaching hospital, more
than 100 miles from their residence. Because AMI is an acute illness, very few AMI patients
travel for initial treatment to a hospital outside of our 35/100 mile radius. Those patients whose
25

index admission is outside of this 35/100 mile radius are likely to be traveling, and so their
hospital choice decision is likely to differ from the choice decision of patients who become ill
while at home. In any event, the share of patients we exclude on this basis is small as well, at
under 5 percent. In addition, Table I documents the shrinking number of hospitals in the U.S.
Table II describes the elderly population and the hospitals treating them for the years
1985-1994. Table II demonstrates some of the well-known trends in the treatment, expenditures,
and outcomes of elderly heart disease patients. The first row of the Table shows how
dramatically real Medicare inpatient expenditures have grown over the 1985-1994 period -- by
34.5 percent. Because reimbursement given treatment choice for Medicare patients did not
increase over this period [McClellan 1997], these expenditure trends are attributable to increases
in intensity of treatment. The more rapid growth since 1991 was largely attributable to increasing
use of nonacute inpatient services, reflecting general trends in Medicare expenditures.
Concomitant with this increase in average intensity, average one-year mortality for AMI has
declined by 7.3 percentage points (18.1 percent). However, trends in cardiac complications have
been mixed: AMI survivors have a slightly higher risk of subsequent HF. The demographics of
our patient and hospital populations also reflect broad trends. The share of elderly living in the
largest MSAs is falling. Among hospitals, the share of large and public hospitals is falling, and the
share of teaching hospitals is rising.
Table III shows how hospital markets have changed over the 1980s and 1990s. Travel
distances between patients and hospitals rose dramatically, particularly at the bottom of the
distribution, likely due to the contraction in the number of hospitals and the migration of elderly to
areas with lower densities of hospitals. The median distance to a patient’s closest hospital rose by
26

42 percent, from 1.74 miles to 2.47 miles; the mean and 95th percentile distance rose somewhat
less. Although patients often are not initially admitted to their closest hospital, the median
distance to a patient’s initial hospital of admission rose as well, by 18.7 percent, from 3.47 to 4.12
miles. These same forces led to a decrease in hospital bed capacity and market competitiveness.
Our index HHIpat* rose by 13.2 percent between 1985 and 1994, as compared to an increase of 9.3
percent in the conventional 75-percent variable-radius HHI. By either measure, the trend over
time in hospital market competitiveness has had major effects on the markets serving a substantial
fraction of elderly AMI patients. The measures of competition are strongly positively correlated
in both levels and changes. And according to Appendix Table II, approximately a quarter of
patients experienced an interquartile change in market competitiveness in any two adjacent sample
years, with approximately a third of patients experiencing a change between 1985 and 1994.

V. Results
V.1. Effects of Competition
Table IV begins our analysis of the impact of competition on expenditures and patient
health outcomes, and how this has changed over time, with estimates of ç from equation (1),
controlling for zip-code fixed effects, patient demographics, and allowing for differential time
trends in differently-sized MSAs. The left panel of Table IV presents results using HHIpat*,
controlling for area market characteristics OMCkt; for comparison purposes, the right panel of the
table presents results using conventional 75-percent variable-radius HHIs, controlling for the
characteristics of hospital of admission. Our dataset includes essentially all elderly patients
hospitalized with the heart diseases of interest for the years of our study, so that our results
27

describe the actual average changes in expenditures associated with changes in competition. We
report standard errors for inferences about average differences that might arise in potential
populations (e.g., elderly patients with these health problems in other years).
Before 1991, treatment of AMI patients in the least-competitive areas (very high HHIpat*)
was less costly than treatment of patients in the most-competitive areas. Patients from less
competitive areas also experienced higher rates of mortality and some cardiac complications than
did patients from the most competitive areas, although these effects were statistically significant at
conventional levels only for mortality outcomes for patients in the third quartile of the HHIpat*
distribution. Thus, the welfare implications of hospital competition in the 1980s were ambiguous:
competition increased expenditures, but may have led to better outcomes. Whether competition
increased welfare depends on an assessment of whether the additional health associated with
competition was worth the higher associated cost of care.
As of 1991, however, competition among hospitals was unambiguously welfareimproving. Treatment of AMI patients in the least competitive areas became significantly more
costly than treatment of AMI in competitive areas. The magnitude of the expenditure effect of
moving between the first and fourth quartiles of HHIpat*, 8.04 percent, was substantial.
Furthermore, differences in patient health outcomes between differently-competitive areas grew
substantially. Compared to patients in the most competitive areas, patients from the least
competitive areas experienced 1.46 percentage points higher mortality from AMI, which was
statistically significant. Expressed as a share of 1994 average AMI mortality, competition had the

28

potential to improve AMI mortality by 4.4 percent.9 In addition, patients from the least
competitive markets also experienced statistically significantly higher rates of readmission for
AMI (and not significantly lower rates of HF), suggesting that the additional survivors were not in
especially marginal health.
Table IV also shows that patients from areas with greater bed capacity experience both
more costly treatment for their AMI and have higher mortality rates, though they have generally
lower rates of cardiac complications. The intensity-increasing effects of hospital capacity were
much more pronounced before 1991, while the adverse mortality effects of capacity were
relatively constant throughout the sample period. For example, after 1990, a one-standarddeviation increase in bed capacity per probabilistic AMI patient (approximately equal to a unit
increase) led to approximately a 0.4 percentage point, statistically significant increase in mortality.
Expressed as a share of 1994 average AMI mortality, this translates into approximately a 1.3
percent increase. These effects are robust to the exclusion of controls for market
competitiveness.
The post-1990 welfare benefits of competition are nonlinear in the extent of competition.
For competitiveness changes between the second and third quartiles of the HHIpat* distribution,
the response of expenditures to a unit change in competitiveness is much smaller than the
response for changes into or out of the top or bottom quartiles.10 The benefits of competition are

9

As Appendix Table III indicates, these and the subsequent expenditure and mortality
results are replicated in linear models of the effect of the HHI measures as well.
10

Patient-weighted mean values of HHIpat* for the four quartiles are .635, .431, .308, and
.177. Thus, for changes in competitiveness between the second and third quartiles, the response
of expenditures to a unit change in competitiveness is 9.594 (= [4.43 - 3.25] / [.431 - .308]),
versus 24.809 for changes into or out of the bottom quartile (= 3.25 / [.308 - .177]) and 17.696
29

more similar at the top and bottom ends of the distribution. The social benefits in cost savings
and improved mortality that would result from moving a geographic area from the leastcompetitive quartile to the second or third quartile are not statistically distinguishable from the
social benefits that would result from moving an area from the second or third to the mostcompetitive quartile.
The right panel of Table IV confirms that conventionally-calculated estimates lead to
different inferences about the impact of competition on social welfare than do estimates based on
our HHIpat* index. Both before and after 1990, estimates based on conventional 75-percent
patient-flow HHI measures suggest that hospital competition leads to more costly treatment,
although also to lower mortality and complications rates. The fact that conventional estimates of
the effect of competition on resource use are positive and greater than our estimates throughout
the sample period is consistent with the biases discussed in Section II: bias due to assigning
hospital market competitiveness to patients based on hospital of admission (hospitals facing more
competition produce higher-quality care and so draw unobservably high-cost patients) and bias
due to the specification of geographic markets as a function of actual patient choices and
unobservable hospital quality (hospitals that are high-cost and high-quality for whatever reason
draw patients from a broader area and so appear to be more competitive).
Changes in the estimated effect of competition ç between the 1980s and 1990s may be due
to changes over time in the response of the level of expenditures or outcomes to changes in
competition, or due to changes over time in the growth rate of expenditures or outcomes in areas
with high versus low levels of competition. Table V presents estimates of ã from equation (2), the

(= [8.04 - 4.43] / [.635 - .431]) for changes into or out of the top quartile.
30

effect of period-by-period changes in competition on changes in the level of expenditures and
health outcomes. The fact that the magnitude and the time path of ã from outcomes models are
similar to those of ç suggests that the change over time in the effect of competition on health
outcomes is largely due to changes in the response of the level of outcomes to changes in
competition. On the other hand, the fact that estimates of ã from expenditure models are
relatively stable over time and smaller in magnitude than the estimates of ç suggests that the
change over time in the effect of competition on resource use is more affected by changes over
time in the growth rate of expenditures in areas with high versus low levels of competition.
V.2. Impact of Managed Care on the Effects of Competition
Tables VI and VII investigate the extent to which managed care organizations substitute
for or mediate the effects of hospital competition.11 Table VI presents estimates of equation (1),
controlling for HMO enrollment rates by state and year, but allowing the impact of hospital
competition to vary only for patients from above- and below-median enrollment state/year cells,
and not over time. Consistent with previous studies of managed care spillover effects (e.g., Baker
[1999]), the first column of the first row of Table VI shows that the cost of treating Medicare
patients varies inversely with the HMO enrollment rate in the area. In addition, Table VI presents
the new finding that this reduction in intensity attributable to managed care penetration appears to
have no measurable adverse health consequences for elderly heart patients. This result suggests
that HMO spillovers not only reduce resource use for Medicare beneficiaries not enrolled in
managed care plans, but that the spillover effects occur with no statistically significant or

11

Residents of the District of Columbia are excluded from the analyses of the impact of
managed care because of concerns about the validity of measured HMO enrollment rates for DC.
31

economically important impact on health outcomes.
Table VI suggests that the rise of managed care over the sample period partially explains
the changing relationship between hospital competition, treatment intensity, and patient health
outcomes. For patients from states with low HMO enrollment rates as of their date of admission,
competition increased expenditures and generally led to (statistically insignificantly) better
outcomes. But for patients from states with high HMO enrollment rates as of their date of
admission, competition was unambigously welfare improving: competition led to lower levels of
resource use and lower rates of mortality and subsequent complications.
Table VII further explores the hypothesis that managed care serves as a catalyst through
which hospital competition improves welfare, by presenting estimates that allow the interaction
between HMO enrollment in an area and hospital market competitiveness to change over time.
The top panel of Table VII presents estimates of the impact of area HMO enrollment and
interactions of HMO enrollment with area competitiveness for patients admitted to the hospital in
1985 and 1988; the bottom panel of Table VII presents estimates of the impact of area HMO
enrollment and HMO enrollment/competitiveness interactions for patients admitted to the hospital
in 1991 and 1994. Table VII confirms that managed care and hospital competition are
complements in the process of producing cardiac care services. Both before and after 1990,
hospital competition leads to greater decreases in resource use and rates of adverse health
outcomes in areas with high versus low HMO enrollment (although differences across managed
care environments in the effect of competition on mortality are not statistically significant).
However, although HMOs have socially beneficial spillover effects throughout the sample period,
the incremental social benefits attributable to hospital-competition/HMO-spillover interactions
32

have become less dramatic over time. Before 1990, competition in low-enrollment areas was
socially wasteful -- competition led to higher levels of resource use without significant effects on
health outcomes -- while competition in high-enrollment areas had more ambiguous or positive
effects, at least for patients in the most competitive areas versus those from areas in the third
quartile of the HHI distribution. But after 1990, competition was welfare improving in all areas -competition led to significant decreases in resource use without significant increases (and in some
cases significant decreases) in the rates of adverse health outcomes. This finding may reflect the
diffusion of cost-control measures implemented by more-developed HMOs in high-enrollment
areas in the 1980s to relatively low -HMO-enrollment areas by the 1990s. (Indeed, by the 1990s,
most low-enrollment areas had HMO enrollment rates that exceeded those of high-enrollment
areas in the 1980s.)
V.3. Evaluating the Welfare Implications of Hospital Mergers
Table VIII illustrates how our methods can be used to assess prospectively the impact of
specific hospital mergers, using as examples two mergers challenged by the FTC in 1994 that
were not completed [Leibenluft et al. 1997]. Moving between adjacent columns in the table
answers the hypothetical question: based on patients’ preferences for hospitals (and therefore the
matrix of probabilistic patient flows) in 1994, would the proposed mergers lead to substantial
changes in hospital competition in surrounding areas? Specifically, would HHIpat* change
substantially for patients residing in the ten zip codes nearest to each merging hospital? This
analysis is necessarily incomplete, in that it does not account completely for other potential
benefits of the mergers, such as their impact on nonelderly patients and those with other illnesses.
We leave such issues to future work. However, it does show how the results presented above can
33

be used on a case-specific basis to evaluate the welfare consequences of mergers (see Kessler and
McClellan [1999] for a more detailed discussion).
The top panel of the Table assesses the impact of the proposed merger between Mercy
and Port Huron Hospitals, the only two general acute-care hospitals in Port Huron, Michigan
(FTC vs. Local Health System, Inc., C-3618 (consent order), 61 Fed. Reg. 31,119 (June 19,
1996); No. 94 CV 74798 (E.D. Mich.) (Preliminary injunction suit filed November 30, 1994)).
According to Table VIII, this merger would have altered the structure of hospital markets in the
surrounding area in a way that reduced social welfare. Patients from every one of the surrounding
ten zip codes would have experienced an increase in HHIpat* from the second to the leastcompetitive quartile. For Medicare patients with AMI, estimates from model (1) predict that this
increase in concentration would have translated into both higher expenditures and increased rates
of adverse health outcomes.
The bottom panel of the table assesses the impact of the proposed merger between Cape
Coral and Lee Memorial Hospitals in Lee County, Florida (FTC vs. Hospital Board of Directors
of Lee County, FTC Docket No. 9265; 1994-1 Trade Cas. 70,593 (M.D. Fla.); aff’d 38 F.3d
1184 (11th Cir. 1994). According to our results, the welfare implications of this merger are less
clear. Although the merger would have increased the concentration in each of the ten zip codes
nearest to either hospital, that increase in concentration from the third to the second quartile of
the HHI distribution would not have statistically or economically significant welfare implications
for elderly AMI patients.
Our analysis examines the welfare implications in one service market only, the market for
heart disease care in the elderly. This result does not preclude the possibility that this merger
34

would have adversely affected competition and reduced social welfare in other markets.
However, heart disease treatment is the largest single component of hospital production, and
given the size of the elderly population, it seems unlikely that effects of competition on heart
disease care would differ substantially for nonelderly patients. Competition may also have
somewhat different effects for chronic illnesses. All of these issues can be addressed in future
work, using the techniques that we have developed and applied here.

VI. Conclusion
Assessing the welfare consequences of competition in health care is a particularly difficult
case of an important general problem in industrial organization. The features of markets for
hospital services depart substantially from the conditions of perfectly-competitive markets, so that
theory plausibly suggests that competition may either increase or reduce social welfare.
Consequently, empirical assessment of the welfare implications of competition in hospital markets
is crucial for testing the validity of alternative theories about the effects of competition in health
care. Empirical evidence is also necessary to guide hospital antitrust policy. If competition
among hospitals improves social welfare, then strictly regulating coordinated activity may offer
social benefits. But if competition among hospitals is socially wasteful, then lenient antitrust
treatment of coordination and mergers may be optimal.
In spite of this importance, virtually no previous research has determined the effects of
competition on both health care costs and patient health outcomes. Important reasons for this
omission are the difficulty of developing suitable data on spending and quality -- a particularly
challenging problem in the hospital industry -- as well as the general problem in applied work in
35

industrial organization of identifying the effects of competition. We address both types of
problems here, using methods for identifying the effects of competition that could be applied in
other industries which have suitable data on consumer choices and in which broad product
characteristics (e.g., hospital size category and teaching status) are very difficult to change.
Our analysis includes all nonrural elderly Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized for treatment
of heart disease in a 10-year period that includes the recent growth in managed-care insurance.
Our methods develop indices of competition that are based on exogenous determinants of hospital
demand, rather than assumptions about the extent of markets and their competitiveness that are
either arbitrary or subject to the usual endogeneity problems. We also measure explicitly the key
outcomes of market performance, including effects on both patient health and medical
expenditures. Finally, because managed care organizations are likely to be an important
mechanism through which competition affects hospital markets, we investigate the extent to
which HMO enrollment rates in an area create spillovers that affect medical productivity and the
impact of competition on productivity.
We find that, before 1991, competition led to higher costs and, in some cases, lower rates
of adverse health outcomes for elderly Americans with heart disease; but after 1990, competition
led both to substantially lower costs and significantly lower rates of adverse outcomes. Thus,
after 1990, hospital competition unambiguously improves social welfare. Increasing HMO
enrollment over the sample period partially explains the dramatic change in the impact of hospital
competition; hospital competition is unambiguously welfare improving throughout the sample
period in geographic areas with above-median HMO enrollment rates. Furthermore, point
estimates of the magnitude of the welfare benefits of competition are uniformly larger for patients
36

from states with high HMO enrollment as of their admission date, as compared to patients from
states with low HMO enrollment.
The socially beneficial impact of post-1990 competition is nonlinear: the effect of an
interquartile change in competitiveness on expenditures and outcomes is much greater for areas
moving to or from the most and least competitive quartiles. Our finding that competition
improves welfare post-1990 is not affected by controlling for other factors that may affect hospital
market structure, such as distance to the nearest hospital, hospital bed capacity utilization, and
other hospital market characteristics. We also find that changes in capacity utilization are
themselves important determinants of health care costs and outcomes. Patients from hospital
markets with high levels of capacity per unit AMI patient volume experience generally higher
costs and higher mortality rates. We illustrate how our methods can be used to assess the impact
of proposed hospital mergers on a hospital-specific basis, with two examples of hospital mergers
challenged by the FTC in 1994.
Are our results generalizable to other components of hospital production? Heart disease
is the largest single component of hospital production, accounting for around one-sixth of hospital
expenditures, so it seems unlikely that the overall effects of competition would differ dramatically,
at least for other serious acute health problems. However, less acute conditions provide greater
opportunities for patients to choose among hospitals, and also provide hospitals with the
opportunity to seek out relatively low-cost patients, both through choices of service offerings and
through the choice of health plans with which the hospitals contract. Particularly for nonacute
illnesses, it is possible that the growth of higher-powered payment incentives that has
accompanied the growth of managed care in the 1990s would encourage hospitals to avoid such
37

patients in the presence of greater competition. Along these lines, it is possible that privatelyinsured patients would be affected differently by competition than publicly-insured patients.
Finally, we do not explicitly model the mechanisms by which competition leads to its
welfare consequences. Most importantly, we do not model why the welfare effects of
competition changed around 1990, in conjunction with the rise of managed care. Our results
suggest that spillover effects from increasingly efficient treatment of privately-insured patients
affect the treatment regimen of publicly-insured patients, by mediating the consequences of
hospital competition in a way that enhances medical productivity. In particular, managed care
appears to increase efficiency by reducing the tendency of hospital competition to result in a
“medical arms race” of expenditure growth. Understanding how the productivity-increasing
effects of competition occur in health care, and how managed care enhances these effects, is an
important topic for further analysis.

38

Table I: Populations of Hospitals and Patients Used in Analysis
(Table Entries are Number of Observations Meeting Selection Conditions)

Hospitals
Year

nonrural, nonfederal, ever
general medical

....with valid Medicare ID
and AHA data

....and with at least 5 AMI
patients

1985

2,975

2,812

2,698

1988

2,889

2,732

2,608

1991

2,793

2,611

2,502

1994

2,706

2,485

2,382

Elderly AMI Patients
Year

admitted to
nonrural,
nonfederal, general
medical hospital

...with a valid
Medicare ID and
AHA data

....and with at least
5 AMI patients

....and who lived
within 35 miles of
index hospital (100
miles if large
teaching hospital)

1985

157,343

152,700

152,359

146,569

1988

145,344

143,229

142,946

137,879

1991

154,224

152,657

152,410

145,555

1994

153,757

150,303

150,058

143,308

39

Table II: Descriptive Statistics for Elderly AMI Patients and
Hospitals Admitting Five or More Patients Per Year

1985
mean

1988
mean

1991
mean

1994
mean

% Change
1985 - 1994

$14,352
(13,483)
0.403
0.062
0.085
23.2%
24.8%
22.2%
25.9%
3.9%
5.8%
49.9%
1.8%
13.2%
12.7%
19.5%
28.7%
24.1%

$15,589
(15,578)
0.391
0.057
0.093
21.9%
23.6%
22.1%
27.7%
4.7%
6.1%
50.9%
1.9%
14.1%
13.2%
20.4%
28.0%
22.3%

$16,984
(17,099)
0.346
0.056
0.099
21.9%
23.4%
21.9%
28.0%
4.8%
6.3%
50.3%
1.9%
14.9%
14.1%
20.7%
27.2%
21.2%

$19,307
(19,411)
0.330
0.055
0.097
20.5%
23.6%
21.4%
29.3%
5.2%
6.7%
49.7%
1.8%
15.5%
14.5%
21.2%
26.5%
20.5%

34.5%
-18.1%
-11.3%
14.1%
-11.6%
-4.8%
-3.6%
13.2%
33.3%
15.5%
-0.4%
0.0%
17.4%
14.2%
8.7%
-7.0%
-14.9%

20.0%
54.4%
25.6%
16.4%
14.5%

17.4%
54.7%
27.9%
17.6%
13.8%

15.6%
55.4%
29.0%
17.0%
12.8%

13.5%
53.9%
32.6%
19.2%
13.0%

-32.5%
-0.9%
27.3%
17.1%
-10.3%

Elderly AMI Patients
1-year expenditures (1993 $)
(Standard deviation)
1-year mortality rate
1-year AMI readmission rate
1-year HF readmission rate
Age 65-69
Age 70-74
Age 75-79
Age 80-89
Age 90-99
Black
Female
MSA size <100,000
MSA size 100,000 - 250,000
MSA size 250,000 - 500,000
MSA size 500,000 - 1,000,000
MSA size 1,000,000 - 2,500,000
MSA size >2,500,000
Hospitals
Large size (>300 Beds)
Medium size (100-300 Beds)
Small size (<100 Beds)
Teaching %
Public %
Hospital expenditures deflated using the CPI.

40

Table III: Descriptive Statistics for Hospital Markets

Travel distances from patients to hospitals (miles)
Mean distance to closest hospital
(Standard deviation)
Median distance to closest hospital
95th %ile distance to closest hospital
Mean distance to hospital of admission
(Standard deviation)
Median distance to hospital of admission
95th %ile distance to hospital of admission
Characteristics of hospital markets
HHIpat*
(Standard deviation)
Conventional 75-percent variable-radius HHI
(Standard deviation)
Correlation between zip-code average levels of
HHIpat* and conventional 75-percent HHI
(P-value of h0: ñ = 0)
Correlation between zip-code average changes in
HHIpat* and conventional 75-percent HHI
(P-value of h0: ñ = 0)
Bed capacity/AMI patient, mean by patients
(Standard deviation)

1985

1988

1991

1994

% Change
1985 - 1994

2.83
(3.85)
1.74
10.56
5.03
(6.18)
3.47
16.09

3.04
(3.90)
1.98
10.74
5.24
(6.20)
3.65
16.68

3.28
(4.08)
2.24
11.26
5.48
(6.33)
3.93
17.14

3.47
(4.13)
2.47
11.49
5.73
(6.57)
4.12
17.78

22.6%

0.325
(0.183)
0.431
(0.307)
0.668
(0.000)

0.340
(0.177)
0.441
(0.301)
0.663
(0.000)

0.354
(0.181)
0.456
(0.304)
0.668
(0.000)

0.369
(0.175)
0.471
(0.312)
0.634
(0.000)

13.5%

0.204
(0.000)

0.139
(0.000)

0.164
(0.000)

-19.6%

3.623
(1.291)

3.155
(1.080)

2.893
(1.067)

-22.3%

3.725
(1.284)

Descriptive statistics about hospital markets are calculated using weights equal to the number of AMI patients.

41

42.0%
8.8%
13.9%
18.7%
10.5%

9.3%
-5.1%

Table IV: Effects of Hospital Competition on Expenditures and Outcomes for Elderly AMI Patients,
HHIpat* versus Conventional 75-Percent-Patient-Flow HHI, Pre- and Post-1990
Using HHIpat*
1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

Using conventional 75-percent patient-flow HHI
1-Year
Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

1-Year
Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

-2.18
0.84
0.56
-0.06
(1.04)
(0.67)
(0.34)
(0.45)
High HHI
0.44
0.15
0.36
-0.12
(0.88)
(0.57)
(0.29)
(0.38)
Low HHI
1.05
0.88
0.13
-0.18
(0.69)
(0.44)
(0.22)
(0.29)
Bed capacity / AMI
4.53
0.31
-0.11
0.04
patient
(0.22)
(0.14)
(0.07)
(0.09)
Post-1990 effects of competition and capacity (omitted category = very low HHI)

-13.14
(0.62)
-8.01
(0.53)
-6.07
(0.46)

2.25
(0.39)
1.37
(0.33)
1.31
(0.29)

-0.03
(0.20)
0.20
(0.17)
0.01
(0.15)

-0.27
(0.26)
-0.10
(0.22)
0.12
(0.20)

Very high HHI

-1.12
(0.62)
-0.97
(0.55)
-1.51
(0.48)

1.81
(0.38)
1.64
(0.34)
0.60
(0.29)

0.24
(0.19)
0.39
(0.17)
0.38
(0.15)

0.07
(0.27)
0.38
(0.24)
0.34
(0.21)

Pre-1990 effects of competition and capacity (omitted category = very low HHI)
Very high HHI

High HHI
Low HHI
Bed capacity / AMI
patient

8.04
(1.08)
4.43
(0.91)
3.25
(0.70)
1.73
(0.27)

1.46
(0.69)
0.46
(0.57)
0.65
(0.44)
0.42
(0.17)

0.57
(0.35)
0.22
(0.29)
0.17
(0.22)
-0.23
(0.08)

-0.44
(0.47)
-0.41
(0.39)
-0.29
(0.30)
-0.28
(0.11)

Models using HHIpat* control for bed capacity per probabilistic AMI patient and other market characteristics OMCkt as described in text; models using
conventional 75-percent patient-flow HHI control for size, ownership status, and teaching status of the patient’s actual hospital of admission. All models
include controls for patient characteristics, zip-code fixed effects, and time-fixed-effects that are allowed to vary by six MSA size categories. Heteroscedasticityconsistent standard errors are in parentheses. Very high HHI = 1st quartile of the distribution of HHIs; High HHI = 2nd quartile of the HHI distribution; Low HHI
= 3rd quartile of the HHI distribution; Very low HHI = 4th quartile of the HHI distribution. Hospital Expenditures in 1993 dollars. Coefficients from 1-year
hospital expenditures model *100 from regressions in logarithms; Coefficients from outcome models in percentage points. N=572,311.

42

Table V: Effects of Period-by-Period Interquartile Changes in Hospital Competition
on Expenditures and Outcomes for Elderly AMI Patients, based on HHIpat*
1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

1-Year Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

-1.75
(1.07)
4.75
(1.06)
1.64
(1.11)

0.42
(0.72)
-0.31
(0.69)
-0.82
(0.74)

0.32
(0.36)
0.43
(0.35)
0.55
(0.38)

-0.07
(0.45)
-0.55
(0.45)
0.33
(0.47)

1.57
(1.13)
1.86
(1.17)
-0.47
(1.08)

0.63
(0.75)
0.89
(0.76)
0.00
(0.71)

0.25
(0.36)
0.08
(0.39)
-0.42
(0.36)

-0.24
(0.51)
0.07
(0.53)
0.08
(0.49)

3.07
(1.13)
0.05
(1.21)
-0.62
(1.01)

1.19
(0.70)
1.55
(0.75)
0.23
(0.64)

0.19
(0.36)
-0.10
(0.37)
0.14
(0.32)

0.33
(0.50)
-0.04
(0.53)
0.07
(0.45)

1985-1988
Into Top HHI Quartile
Out of Bottom HHI Qtile
From Quartile 3 to Qtile 2
1988-1991
Into Top HHI Quartile
Out of Bottom HHI Qtile
From Quartile 3 to Qtile 2
1991-1994
Into Top HHI Quartile
Out of Bottom HHI Qtile
From Quartile 3 to Qtile 2

See notes to Table IV for controls used in models with HHIpat*. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses. Base group includes patients experiencing no interquartile change in their hospital market
competitiveness. Estimation imposes the constraint that changes in competitiveness of opposing direction but
between the same quartiles have effects of equal magnitude but opposite sign. Hospital Expenditures in 1993
dollars. Coefficients from 1-year hospital expenditures model*100 from regressions in logarithms; Coefficients
from outcome models in percentage points. N=284,448 (85-88); N=282,434 (88-91); N=288,863 (91-94).

43

Table VI: Effects of Hospital Competition on Expenditures and Outcomes,
Based on HHIpat*, by Extent of HMO Enrollment in Surrounding Area at Date of Admission
1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

1-Year Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

Effect of HMO enrollment (omitted category = less-than-median enrollment/population)
High HMO enrollment
-6.07
-0.94
-0.10
(1.21)
(0.79)
(0.40)

0.28
(0.53)

Effects of competition and capacity in low enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI)
-4.98
0.68
0.27
Very high HHI
(1.13)
(0.74)
(0.38)
-3.66
-0.31
-0.06
High HHI
(0.98)
(0.64)
(0.32)
-2.59
0.65
0.13
Low HHI
(0.81)
(0.53)
(0.27)
4.09
0.19
-0.10
Bed capacity/AMI patient
(0.24)
(0.16)
(0.08)

0.03
(0.49)
-0.21
(0.42)
0.00
(0.35)
-0.04
(0.10)

Effects of competition and capacity in high enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI)
4.98
1.44
0.80
Very high HHI
(1.08)
(0.68)
(0.35)
2.56
0.67
0.55
High HHI
(0.87)
(0.55)
(0.28)
2.44
0.79
0.24
Low HHI
(0.65)
(0.41)
(0.20)
2.17
0.50
-0.20
Bed capacity/AMI patient
(0.25)
(0.16)
(0.08)

-0.43
(0.46)
-0.31
(0.38)
-0.29
(0.28)
-0.05
(0.10)

See notes to Table IV for controls used in models with HHIpat*. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses. Very high HHI = 1st quartile of the distribution of HHIs; high HHI = 2nd quartile of the HHI
distribution; low HHI = 3rd quartile of the HHI distribution; very low HHI = 4th quartile of the HHI distribution.
Hospital Expenditures in 1993 dollars. Coefficients from 1-year hospital expenditures model *100 from regressions
in logarithms; Coefficients from outcome models in percentage points. Residents of the District of Columbia are
excluded from analyses reported in this table because of concerns about the validity of measured HMO enrollment
rates for DC. N=571,106.

44

Table VII: Effects of Hospital Competition on Expenditures and Outcomes, Based on
HHIpat*, by Extent of HMO Enrollment in Surrounding Area at Date of Admission,
Pre- and Post-1990
1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

1-Year Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

Pre-1990 effect of HMO enrollment (omitted category = less-than-median enrollment/population)
High HMO enrollment
-10.15
-0.77
-0.62
0.00
(1.51)
(0.99)
(0.51)
(0.66)
Pre-1990 effects of competition and capacity in low enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI)
Very high HHI
-6.45
0.54
0.33
0.46
(1.18)
(0.77)
(0.39)
(0.51)
High HHI
-3.36
-0.35
-0.03
-0.11
(1.02)
(0.67)
(0.34)
(0.44)
Low HHI
-1.88
0.65
0.17
0.09
(0.85)
(0.56)
(0.28)
(0.37)
Bed capacity/AMI patient
3.18
0.18
-0.09
0.00
(0.26)
(0.17)
(0.09)
(0.11)
Pre-1990 effects of competition and capacity in high enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI) Market
Very high HHI
-0.39
1.11
0.81
-0.41
(1.24)
(0.79)
(0.40)
(0.53)
High HHI
1.44
0.65
0.79
-0.01
(1.04)
(0.66)
(0.34)
(0.44)
Low HHI
2.55
1.06
0.16
-0.37
(0.80)
(0.50)
(0.25)
(0.34)
Bed capacity/AMI patient
3.50
0.51
-0.15
0.20
(0.29)
(0.18)
(0.10)
(0.12)
Post-1990 effect of HMO enrollment (omitted category = less-than-median enrollment/population)
High HMO enrollment
-7.41
-0.12
-0.33
-0.68
(2.28)
(1.50)
(0.76)
(1.03)
Post-1990 effects of competition and capacity in low enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI)
Very high HHI
3.20
1.33
-0.16
-0.81
(1.65)
(1.08)
(0.55)
(0.74)
High HHI
0.05
0.08
-0.37
-0.44
(1.56)
(1.02)
(0.51)
(0.69)
Low HHI
-0.12
1.01
-0.24
-0.33
(1.44)
(0.94)
(0.47)
(0.65)
Bed capacity/AMI patient
0.97
0.45
-0.27
-0.25
(0.44)
(0.30)
(0.15)
(0.20)
Post-1990 effects of competition and capacity in high enrollment areas (omitted category = very low HHI)
Very high HHI
8.46
1.60
0.77
-0.19
(1.18)
(0.75)
(0.38)
(0.51)
High HHI
4.05
0.67
0.37
-0.33
(0.96)
(0.61)
(0.31)
(0.42)
Low HHI
2.57
0.61
0.24
-0.21
(0.74)
(0.46)
(0.23)
(0.32)
Bed capacity/AMI patient
0.85
0.46
-0.24
-0.23
(0.29)
(0.18)
(0.09)
(0.12)
See notes to Table IV for controls used in models with HHIpat*. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses. Very high HHI = 1st quartile of the distribution of HHIs; high HHI = 2nd quartile of the HHI
distribution; low HHI = 3rd quartile of the HHI distribution; very low HHI = 4th quartile of the HHI distribution.
Hospital Expenditures in 1993 dollars. Coefficients from 1-year hospital expenditures model *100 from regressions
in logarithms; Coefficients from outcome models in percentage points. Residents of the District of Columbia are
excluded from analyses reported in this table because of concerns about the validity of measured HMO enrollment
rates for DC. N=571,106.

45

Table VIII: Predicted Impact on Quartiles of HHIpat* of Surrounding Areas
of Proposed Hospital Mergers That Were Subjected to FTC Action
Merger Between...
Mercy Hospital, Port Huron, MI 48061

Port Huron Hospital, Port Huron, MI 48061

zip code of
surrounding
area

zip code of
surrounding
area

HHI quartile
before merger

predicted HHI
quartile after
merger

HHI quartile
before merger

predicted HHI
quartile after
merger

48060

2

1

48060

2

1

48049

2

1

48049

2

1

48027

2

1

48027

2

1

48040

2

1

48040

2

1

48074

2

1

48074

2

1

48032

2

1

48032

2

1

48006

2

1

48006

2

1

48022

2

1

48022

2

1

48041

2

1

48041

2

1

48059

2

1

48059

2

1

Merger Between...
Cape Coral Hospital, Cape Coral, FL 33990

Lee Memorial Hospital, Fort Myers, FL 33901

zip code of
surrounding
area

zip code of
surrounding
area

HHI quartile
before merger

predicted HHI
quartile after
merger

HHI quartile
before merger

predicted HHI
quartile after
merger

33990

3

2

33901

3

2

33910

3

2

33902

3

2

33915

3

2

33916

3

2

33904

3

2

33910

3

2

33901

3

2

33915

3

2

33902

3

2

33990

3

2

33991

3

2

33907

3

2

33903

3

2

33903

3

2

33918

3

2

33918

3

2

3

2

33919
3
2
33919
Zip codes are listed in order of increasing distance from the merging hospital.

46

Appendix Table I: States with HMO Enrollment Above and Below
Four-Year Pooled Median
1985

1988

1991

1994

Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii,
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Minnesota, New
York, Oregon,
Rhode Island, Utah,
Washington,
Wisconsin

Arizona, California,
Colorado,
Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida,
Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Maryland,
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Minnesota,
Missouri, Nevada,
New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New
Mexico, New York,
North Dakota,
Ohio, Oregon,
Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island, Utah,
Washington,
Wisconsin

Arizona, California,
Colorado,
Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida,
Hawaii, Illinois,
Iowa, Maryland,
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Minnesota,
Missouri, Nevada,
New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New
Mexico, New York,
Ohio, Oregon,
Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island,
Texas, Utah,
Vermont,
Washington,
Wisconsin

Arizona, California,
Colorado,
Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida,
Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Kentucky,
Maryland,
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska,
Nevada, New
Hampshire, New
Jersey, New
Mexico, New York,
North Dakota,
Ohio, Oregon,
Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island,
Tennessee, Utah,
Washington,
Wisconsin

Alabama, Alaska,
Alabama, Alaska,
Arkansas,
Arkansas, Georgia,
Connecticut,
Idaho, Kentucky,
Delaware, Florida,
Louisiana, Maine,
Georgia, Idaho,
Mississippi,
Illinois, Indiana,
Montana, Nebraska,
Iowa, Kansas,
North Carolina,
Kentucky,
Oklahoma, South
Louisiana, Maine,
Carolina, South
Maryland,
Dakota, Tennessee,
Mississippi,
Texas, Vermont,
Missouri, Montana
Virginia, West
Nebraska, Nevada,
Virginia, Wyoming
New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New
Mexico, North
Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania,
South Carolina,
South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas,
Vermont, Virginia,
West Virginia,
Wyoming
Median HMO Enrollment rate for four-year period is 7.54%.

Alabama, Alaska,
Arkansas, Georgia,
Idaho, Indiana,
Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine,
Mississippi,
Montana, Nebraska,
North Carolina,
North Dakota,
Oklahoma, South
Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee,
Virginia, West
Virginia, Wyoming

Alabama, Alaska,
Arkansas, Georgia,
Idaho, Iowa,
Louisiana, Maine,
Mississippi,
Montana, North
Carolina,
Oklahoma, South
Carolina, South
Dakota, Texas,
Vermont, Virginia,
West Virginia,
Wyoming

Above Median
HMO Enrollment

Below Median
HMO Enrollment

47

Appendix Table II: Share of Elderly AMI Patients With Interquartile Changes
in Hospital Market Competitiveness

pat*

HHI
Conventional 75-percent variable-radius HHI

1985-88
24.0%
25.3%

1988-91
22.4%
26.7%

1991-94
22.0%
23.9%

1985-94
34.5%
32.9%

Quartile cut points for HHIpat* are as follows: .2527, .3688, and .5. Quartile cut points for conventional 75-percent
variable-radius HHI are as follows: .2831, .4432, and .6571. Quartiles are formed counting one residential zip code
(one market) as one observation.

48

Appendix Table III: Linear Model of the Effects of Hospital Competition and Bed Capacity on Expenditures and Outcomes
for Elderly AMI Patients, Based on Exogenous HHIpat* versus Conventional 75-Percent-Patient-Flow HHI
Using HHIpat*
1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

Using conventional 75-percent patient-flow HHI
1-Year
Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

1-Year Hospital
Expenditures

1-Year
Mortality

1-Year AMI
Readmit

1-Year HF
Readmit

-10.15
2.52
(2.78)
(1.78)
Bed capacity / AMI
4.58
0.35
patient
(0.22)
(0.14)
Post-1990 effects of competition and capacity

1.16
(0.91)
-0.11
(0.07)

-0.71
(1.17)
0.04
(0.09)

-15.51
(0.71)

2.57
(0.44)

0.10
(0.23)

-0.34
(0.29)

Linear HHI

0.89
(0.91)
-0.24
(0.08)

-2.27
(1.18)
-0.32
(0.11)

-1.67
(0.70)

2.20
(0.43)

0.16
(0.22)

0.02
(0.30)

Pre-1990 effects of competition and capacity
Linear HHI

Bed capacity / AMI
patient

7.16
(2.81)
1.70
(0.27)

3.37
(1.78)
0.42
(0.17)

See notes to Table IV for controls used in models with HHIpat* and the conventional 75-percent patient-flow HHI. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors
are in parentheses. Very high HHI = 1st quartile of the distribution of HHIs; high HHI = 2nd quartile of the HHI distribution; low HHI = 3rd quartile of the HHI
distribution; very low HHI = 4th quartile of the HHI distribution. Hospital Expenditures in 1993 dollars. Coefficients from 1-year hospital expenditures model
*100 from regressions in logarithms; Coefficients from outcome models in percentage points. N=572,311.

49

References
Baker, Laurence C., “Association of Managed Care Market Share and health Expenditures for
Fee-for-service Medicare Patients,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
CCLXXXI (1999), 432-437.
Douglas, G. W. and J. C. Miller, “Quality Competition, Industry Equilibrium, and Efficiency in
the Price-Constrained Airline Market,” American Economic Review, LXIV (1974), 657669.
Dranove, D. et al., “Is Hospital Competition Wasteful?” RAND Journal of Economics, XXIII
(1992), 247-262.
Dranove, D. and M. Satterthwaite, “Monopolistic Competition When Price and Quality Are Not
Perfectly Observable,” RAND Journal of Economics, XXIII (1992), 518-534.
Dranove, D., M.. Shanley, and C. Simon, “Is Hospital Competition Wasteful?” RAND Journal of
Economics, XXIII (1992), 247-262.
Dranove, D., M. Shanley, and W. White, “Price and Concentration in Local Hospital Markets:
The Switch from Patient-Driven to Payer-Driven Competition,” Journal of Law and
Economics, XXXVI (1993), 179-204.
Dranove, D. and W. D. White, “Recent Theory and Evidence on Competition in Hospital
Markets,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, III (1994), 169-209.
Elzinga, K. and T. Hogarty, “The Problem of Geographic Market Delineation Revisited,”
Antitrust Bulletin, XXIII (1978), 1-18.
Enthoven, A. E. and S. Singer, “Markets and Collective Action in Regulating Managed Care,”
Health Affairs, XVI (1997), 26-32.
Feldstein, Martin S., “Hospital Price Inflation: A Study of Nonprofit Price Dynamics,” American
Economic Review, LXI (1971), 853-72.
Fisher, E.S., et al., “Associations Among Hospital Capacity, Utilization, and Mortality of U.S.
Medicare Beneficiaries – Controlling for Sociodemographic Factors,” Health Services
Research, forthcoming, 1999.
Frech, H.E. III, Competition and Monopoly in Health Care (Washington, DC: AEI Press, 1996).
Fuchs, Victor R., The Health Economy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986).

50

Garnick, D. et al., “Appropriate Measures of Hospital Market Areas,” Health Services
Research, XXII (1987) 69-89.
Gaynor, Martin and Deborah Haas-Wilson, “Change, Consolidation, and Competition in Health
Care Markets,” draft, 1997.
Gruber, J., “The Effect of Price Shopping in Medical Markets: Hospital Responses to PPOs in
California,” Journal of Health Economics, XXXVIII (1994), 183-212.
Hansmann, Henry, “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise,” Yale Law Journal, LXXXIX (1980), 835901.
Held, Philip J. and Mark V. Pauly, “Competition and Efficiency in the End Stage Renal Disease
Program,” Journal of Health Economics, II (1983) 95-118.
Hoxby, Caroline Minter, “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
Taxpayers?” NBER Working Paper No. W4979. 1994.
Hughes, Robert G. and H. Luft, “Service Patterns in Local Hospital Markets: Complementarity or
Medical Arms Race?” Health Services Management Research, IV (1991), 131-9.
Joskow, Paul L., “The Effects of Competition and Regulation on Hospital Bed Supply and the
Reservation Quality of the Hospital,” Bell Journal of Economics, XI (1980) 421-47.
Joskow, Paul L., “Editorial: Reimbursement Policy, Cost Containment, and Non-Price
Competition,” Journal of Health Economics, II (1983) 167-74.
Kessler, D. P. and M. B. McClellan, “Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXI (1996), 353-390.
Kessler, D. P.and M. B. McClellan, “How Liability Law Affects Medical Productivity,” draft,
1998.
Kessler, D.P. and M.B. McClellan, “Designing Hospital Antitrust Policy to Promote Social
Welfare,” in A. Garber, ed., Frontiers in Health Policy Research: Volume 2
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
Kopit, W. and R. McCann, “Towards a Definitive Antitrust Standard for Nonprofit Hospital
Mergers,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law, XIII (1988), 635-662.
Leibenluft, Robert F. et al., “FTC Antitrust Actions in Health Care Services” (Washington, DC:
Federal Trade Commission, 1/24/97).

51

Luft, H., et al., “Does Quality Influence Choice of Hospital?” Journal of the American Medical
Association, CCLXIII (1990), 2899-2906.
Lynk, William J., “Nonprofit Hospital Mergers and the Exercise of Market Power,” Journal of
Law and Economics, XXX (1995), 437-61.
Mannheim L. M. et al., “Local Hospital Competition in Large Metropolitan Areas,” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy III (1994), 143-67.
McClellan, Mark, The Economics of Health Care Quality, Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, 1994a.
McClellan, Mark, “Does More Intensive Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly
Reduce Mortality?” Journal of the American Medical Association, CCLXXII (1994b),
859-866.
McClellan, Mark, “Hospital Reimbursement Incentives: An Empirical Approach,” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, VI (1997), 91-128.
McFadden, D., “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka, ed.,
Frontiers in Econometrics (New York: Academic, 1973).
Melnick, G. et al., “The Effects of Market Structure and Bargaining Position on Hospital
Prices,” Journal of Health Economics, XI (1992), 217-234.
Noether, M., “Competition Among Hospitals,” Journal of Health Economics, VII (1988), 259284.
Panzar, J.C., “Equilibrium and Welfare in Unregulated Airline Markets,” American Economic
Review, LXIX (1979), 92-95.
Pauly, Mark V., “A Primer on Competition in Health Care Markets,” in H.E. Frech, ed., Health
Care in America: The Political Economy of Hospitals and Health Insurance (San
Francisco, CA: Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy, 1988).
Phibbs, C. S. and J. Robinson, “A Variable Radius Measure of Local Hospital Market Structure,”
Health Services Research, XXVIII (1993), 313-324.
Robinson, J., “Hospital Quality Competition and the Economics of Imperfect Information,”
Milbank Memorial Quarterly, LXVI (1988), 465-81.
Robinson, J. and H. Luft, “The Impact of Hospital Market Structure on Patient Volume,
Average Length of Stay, and the Cost of Care,” Journal of Health Economics, IV
(1985), 333-56.
52

Robinson, J. and H. Luft, “Competition and the Cost of Hospital Care, 1972 to 1982,” Journal of
the American Medical Association, CCLVII (1987), 3241-5.
Robinson, J. and H. Luft, “Competition, Regulation, and Hospital Costs, 1982 to 1986,” Journal
of the American Medical Association, CCLX (1988), 2676-2681.
Robinson et al., “Hospital Competition and Surgical Length of Stay,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, CCLXIX (1988), 696-700.
Salkever, David S., “Competition Among Hospitals,” in Warren Greenberg, ed., Competition in
the Health Care Sector: Past, Present, and Future, (Germantown, MD: Aspen Press,
1978).
Satterthwaite, Mark A., “Consumer Information, Equilibrium Industry Price, and the Number of
Sellers,” Bell Journal of Economics, X (1979), 472-82.
Scheffman, D. and P. Spiller, “Geographic Market Definition Under the U.S. Department of
Justice Merger Guidelines,” Journal of Law and Economics, XXX (1987), 123-147.
Schamalensee, Richard, “Comparative Static Properties of Regulated Airline Oligopolies,” Bell
Journal of Economics, VIII (1977), 565-76.
Shortell, Steven and E. Hughes, “The Effects of Regulation, Competition, and Ownership on
Mortality Rates Among Hospital Inpatients,” New England Journal of Medicine,
CCCXVIII (1988), 1100-1107.
Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988).
Town, Robert and Gregory Vistnes, “Hospital Competition in HMO Networks: An Empirical
Analysis of Pricing Behavior,” draft, 1997.
U.S. Department of Justice, Department of Justice/FTC Merger Guidelines, 1992.
Vistnes, Gregory, “Hospital Mergers and Antitrust Enforcement,” Journal of Health Politics,
Policy and Law, XX (1995), 175-190.
Volpp, K. and J. Waldfogel, “Competition and the Quality of Hospital Care: Heart Attack
Mortality After the Onset of Price Competition in New Jersey,” draft, 1998.
Werden, Gregory J., “The Limited Relevance of Patient Migration Data,” Journal of Health
Economics, VIII (1989), 363-76.

53

Wooley, J. M. and H. E. Frech III, “How Hospitals Compete: A Review of the Literature,”
University of Florida Journal of Law and Public Policy, II (1988), 57-99.
Wooley, J. M., “The Competitive Effects of Horizontal Mergers in the Hospital Industry,”
Journal of Health Economics, VIII (1989), 271-91.
Zwanziger, J. and G. Melnick, “The Effects of Hospital Competition and the Medicare PPS
Program on Hospital Cost Behavior in California,” Journal of Health Economics, VIII
(1988), 457-464.
<ref_section>

54

