                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  ABC AT INSTEEL INDUSTRIES

                                             V.G. Narayanan
                                             Ratna G. Sarkar

                                          Working Paper 7270
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7270


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




We would like to thank the Insteel Industries management for generously providing us with their time and
complete access, and Dave Conrad for the data. We also thank Stan Abraham, Sarah Eriksen, and Gregg
Friedman of the Harvard Business School for their research assistance, the seminar participants at the April
1999 NBER conference on Organizational Change and Performance Improvement, Santa Rosa, California,
and Ed Lazear, the discussant at the conference, for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by V.G. Narayanan and Ratna G. Sarkar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
ABC at Insteel Industries
V.G. Narayanan and Ratna G. Sarkar
NBER Working Paper No. 7270
July 1999

                                           ABSTRACT

        In this paper, we seek to provide empirical documentation of the effect of Activity-Based
Costing (ABC) information on product and customer-related decisions made by managers in a
company.
        Proponents of ABC argue that when an entity implements ABC, it reaps at least two
important benefits: process improvements that promote more efficient use of resources and hence
reduce costs, and a set of overhead cost numbers that, relative to traditional volume-based methods
of costing, better represent the consumption of shared resources by the firm’s products, and enable
the firm to target a more profitable mix of products and customers.
        While there is much anecdotal evidence about the efficacy of ABC and ABM (Activity Based
Management), there has been no systematic, statistical investigation of whether ABC really influences
managerial decisions. An ABC analysis may not have any impact on a firm for two reasons. (1) It may
not reveal any new information to the managers who intuitively know already what an ABC system
formally captures. (2) Key managers may reject the ABC numbers and be unwilling to weather the
organizational change and upheaval often required for effective ABM.
        In this study, we conduct a statistical analysis of firm-level data in order to shed light on
whether ABC provides new information to managers and whether ABM significantly impacts product
and customer-related decisions. We supplement this analysis with interviews with top managers in
the company on whether and to what extent the ABC analysis influenced managerial decision making.
        We do not find much support for the hypothesis that product prices reflect all costs even when
a company does not have ABC information. We find that after the ABC analysis, Insteel displayed
a higher propensity to discontinue or increase prices of products that were found unprofitable in the
ABC study and to discontinue customers that were found unprofitable in the ABC. The changes to
the portfolio of customers served were similar but not as striking as the product mix and pricing
decisions. This finding is consistent with senior managers’ intuition that product level decisions can
be made faster than customer level decisions.

V.G. Narayanan                                 Ratna G. Sarkar
Harvard Business School                        Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163                               Boston, MA 02163
vnarayanan@hbs.edu                             rsarkar@hbs.edu
 1. Introduction

    In this paper, we seek to provide empirical documentation of the effect o(Activity-Based

 Costing (ABC) information on product and customer-related decisions made by managers in a
 company.
     Proponents of ABC argue that when an entity implements ABC, it reaps at least two
important benefits. First, its entire operation is scrutinized in great detail and its performance and
efficiency analyzed and benchmarked against best practices. Employees are encouraged to be
critical of the status quo and to suggest improvements. This can result in process improvements
that promote more efficient use of resources and hence reduce costs. Second, ABC generally
yields a set of overhead cost numbers that, relative to traditional volume-based methods of
costing, better represent the consumption of shared resources by the firm's products, customers
and service offerings. Evaluated in light of these new activity-based costs, particular products
and customers may show up as 'loss-making.' This information may enable a firm to change the
mix of products produced and customers served allowing it to focus on making profitable
products and serving profitable customers.
    While there are a number of teaching cases and other such anecdotal evidence about
implementation of ABC and decisions impacted by ABC numbers, there has been no systematic,
statistical investigation of whether ABC really influences managerial decisions. An ABC
analysis may not have any impact on a firm for two reasons. (1) It may not reveal any new
information to the managers who intuitively know already what an ABC system formally
captures. (2) It is conceivable that outside consultants are hired to do an ABC analysis but
decision makers in the firm do not accept the ABC numbers, which often differ significantly
from traditional cost numbers. Effective follow-up to the ABC analysis may require managerial
decisions and actions significantly different from the status quo, resulting in organizational
change and upheaval, to which managers may display resistance.
   In this study, we conduct a statistical analysis of firm-level data in order to shed light on
whether ABC provides new information to managers and whether Activity Based Management
(ABM) significantly impacts product and customer-related decisions. We supplement this
analysis with interviews with top managers in the company on whether and to what extent the
ABC analysis influenced managerial decision making.



                                                                                                  1
       We find evidence that product prices reflect the cost of raw materials and freight costs,
but do not fully impound conversion costs (labor and production overhead costs). Hence there is
not much support for the hypothesis that product prices reflect all costs even when a com,pany
does not have ABC information. We find that after the ABC analysis, Insteel displayed a higher
propensity to:
1. Discontinue products that were found unprofitable in the ABC study compared to products
   found profitable in the ABC study.
2. Increase price of products that were found unprofitable in the ABC study compared to
   products found profitable in the ABC study.
3. Discontinue customers that were found unprofitable in the ABC study compared to
   customers found profitable in the ABC study.
The changes to the portfolio of customers served were similar but not as striking as the product
mix and pricing decisions. This finding is consistent with senior managers' intuition that product
level decisions can be made faster than customer level decisions.
       The next section reviews the extant literature. Section 3 provides the company
background and cost structure. Section 4 discusses the company's decision to use ABC analysis.
Section 5 describes ABM (Activity-Based Management) at Insteel and analyzes whether the
ABC analysis had an impact on their operations and marketing strategy. Section 6 analyzes the
impact of ABM on Insteel's financial performance. Organizational issues are highlighted in
Section 7, with the aid of management surveys and interviews that are presented in the
Appendix. Section 8 discusses future work and concludes the paper.

2. Literature Review

The term Activity Based Costing was first used in John Deere Component Works (see March
and Kaplan, 1987). It was a new system of allocating costs to products and parts using activity
drivers such as setup hours and number of loads for allocating overhead related setups and
materials handling costs, respectively. Traditionally in the United States, all overhead was
allocated to products based on volume drivers such as labor hours, machine hours, or number of
units produced. The new system recognized that it was cheaper to produce products in larger
batches than smaller batches. Under ABC, managers must track separately expenses that are
required to produce individual units, to process batches, to design or maintain a product, and to



                                                                                               2
keep a manufacturing facility up and running. Robin Cooper and Robert Kaplan wrote several
cases about ABC system design and implementation. They also wrote a number of articles on
how to design and implement ABC systems and the potential benefits of ABC systems.,(See
Cooper and Kaplan (1988, 1991)) The theory of a hierarchy of costs - unit, batch, product, and
facility level costs was proposed in Cooper (1990). The theory of ABC (that overhead costs were
related to non-volume drivers, such as batch and product level drivers) was first empirically
tested by Foster and Gupta (1990). They analyzed cross-sectional data from thirty-seven
facilities of an electronics company and did not find evidence that overhead costs were related to
non-volume drivers. Since then, however, a number of papers have found evidence of overhead
costs being positively correlated with non-volume drivers. See Anderson (1995), Datar et al.
(1993), Banker and Johnston (1993), and Banker, Potter and Schroder (1995). It is our
assessment that the theory of ABC is now accepted by most accounting academics.
       Taking as given the theoretical basis of ABC and its popularity with companies,
accounting academics have turned to the question, "Do ABC implementations succeed in
providing better information to managers and affecting their decisions in a positive way?"
Shields (1995), Roberts and Silvester (1996), Anderson, Hesford, and Young (1997), Anderson
and Young (1997), and Foster and Swenson (1997) have used surveys of companies
implementing ABC to understand what factors explain success or failure of ABC implementation
efforts. These studies have identified the level of team commitment, management support, and
quality of other information systems as some of the factors that affect the success of ABC
efforts. Our interviews and surveys of company management support the findings of these
studies and also suggest that other factors such as market forces and compensation structures also
play a significant role in the ability and willingness of the organization to implement ABM.
These issues present themselves as leads for future work in the empirical investigation of ABC
implementations.
       In this paper, we complement the earlier surveys on ABC implementations by focusing
on decisions made within one company before and after an ABC study. Using statistical analysis,
we document whether product prices already impounded ABC information, even before an ABC
system was introduced and, once the ABC system has been introduced, whether it affects product
and customer related decisions.




                                                                                                3
3. Research Site: Company Background and Production Economics1

In the 1950s, Insteel operated as a manufacturer of precast concrete products for tbe construction
industry. The company entered the wire business in the early seventies when it began
manufacturing welded wire mesh in response to a shortage of this concrete reinforcing product.
Over the years, it has broadened its product offering and extended its manufacturing capabilities
beyond the mesh business, expanding into a range of higher value-added products. Currently
Insteel Wire Products (IWP), a subsidiary of Insteel Industries, Inc., manufactures and markets
concrete reinforcing products, industrial wire, bulk nails, collated fasteners, PC strand and tire
bead wire. The company's primary markets are the construction, home furnishings, appliance
and tire manufacturing industries. Insteel Industries is headquartered in Mt. Airy, North Carolina.
The company currently operates 8 manufacturing facilities serving markets nationwide. Annual
sales revenues are about $300 million.
    This paper studies the managerial and organizational issues related to ABC at the Andrews,
SC plant of Insteel Industries. Four product lines are produced at the Andrews plant: steel wire
of different gauges (called 'bright wire or industrial wire' in the trade), galvanized wire of
different gauges, wire mesh and nails. In 1996, about 477 individual products were spread
across these four product lines. However, 20% of the products accounted for 85% of Andrews'
annual revenues of about $60 million. Likewise, 20% of Andrews' customers accounted for
95% of all sales.
    The steel and galvanized wire product lines are produced to order, the other two product
lines, nails and mesh products, are produced to stock (about 20 days' inventory). While other
Insteel plants also produce wire products, all of Insteel's nail products are manufactured at the
Andrews plant, in Nail Mill A (commodity nails and sinkers, a large-volume, non-differentiated
product line) and Nail Mill B (pallet nails, manufactured to tight tolerances on diameter, heading
and threading specifications).
    The primary raw material is hot-rolled steel rod purchased in large rolls of about 4,000
pounds from both domestic and foreign suppliers. There is continuing concern about the quality
of foreign rod as it can significantly impact the throughput of the wire-drawing process, which is



 This section of the paper is drawn from Narayanan and Sarkar (1998), Harvard Business School Case, Insteel Wire
Products: ABM at Andrews.


                                                                                                              4
the first production stage, conm-ion to all of Andrews' products and which generally operates at
capacity. See Exhibit 1 for a graphical representation of Insteel's production process.

4. The Decision to use ABC/ABM

Before the introduction of ABC, Insteel did not have a sophisticated cost system. The price per
ton of steel rod, the basic raw material, was closely monitored. This price was used to estimate
the material costs of all of Insteel's products          by multiplying the weight of the product by the
price of steel rod. Although freight was tracked as a separate cost on each invoice, identifiable by
customer, as each truck or boxcar was shipped, customers were charged an 'average' freight
charge on each shipment. Price quotations were based only on the weight of the product and
estimated freight costs.
        Dependent on this simple cost system, Insteel had, since its very inception, adopted a
sales strategy of maximizing pounds of product sold. Bill Sronce, the plant manager at Andrews,
described the 'old days': "Before the ABM study we did not have any specific product or
customer costing information. ... Our sales people were instructed to chase tons without any
information about costs, available capabilities or profit."
    Insteel had, until recently, survived and grown in this industry with limited success. While
other more sophisticated cost allocation methods (including ABC) had been in the practitioner
literature for over a decade, there had been little impetus to adopt them. The adoption of a new
allocation method and the concomitant organizational change is costly. Particular firms within an
industry, and indeed, entire industries may not adopt new cost accounting methodologies if their
adoption is viewed as potentially disruptive and their benefits are perceived to be limited. This
situation could arise in any of the following circumstances:
• Overhead costs are small proportion of total manufacturing costs and do not justify the
    potential organizational upheaval. Kaplan and Cooper (1997) suggest the application of two
    simple rules in identifying high-potential ABC applications: (i) the Willie Sutton Rule2: focus
    on areas with large and growing expenses in indirect and support resources. (ii) the high
    diversity rule: focus on a situation where there is a large variety in products, customers and
    processes. A company or industry may, based on an explicit analysis or an implicit

2
  Willie Sutton, a successful bank robber in the US in the 1950s, was asked, "Why do you rob banks?" Willie
replied, "That's where the money is!"


                                                                                                              5
   understanding of its cost structure, find that one or both of these conditions are not met and
   choose not to adopt ABC.
• Market prices may implicitly impound activity-based costs. Assuming that all the suppliers
   in a particular market face similar production functions and factor prices, a rational
   expectations equilibrium argument would suggest that market prices for their products will
   efficiently incorporate the true overhead costs related to product variety and variation in
   services demanded by customers. In such equilibrium, product market prices could serve as
   a substitute for the information in the internal cost systems of a firm.
• Managers may intuitively understand the true resource consumption patterns despite the use
   of an unsophisticated formal cost system. Simple and stable industry economics combined
   with long-term managerial experience could result in a good grasp of the underlying cost
   structure. Such a situation would constitute a mechanism for market efficiency and the
   rational expectations equilibrium described above.
We examine each of the above possibilities in an effort to understand the adoption of Activity-
Based Costing at Insteel Industries.


High Overhead and/or Product and Customer Variety
Raw material costs can represent as much as 70% of the manufacturing costs for certain products
at Andrews. Although the spread between raw material costs and selling prices, in nominal
terms, had remained relatively stable over the long-term, indirect labor and other production
overhead had been growing at the inflation rate. Thus there was a tremendous pressure to control
overhead and labor costs by boosting productivity and spreading those costs over a larger volume
of products. The company had started out with a very limited product and customer range, but
over time, both had proliferated, and now there was significant product and customer variety.
Product and customer range proliferation boosts not only volume but also overhead costs. While
there was some understanding of these changing economics on the part of the management, our
interviews suggest that they lacked quantification of the effect and a shared understanding of the
resource consumption drivers in the business. It appears that the Insteel management proactively
chose to adopt an ABC system, anticipating the importance of managing overhead costs.
Moreover, raw materials costs were mostly uncontrollable, making labor and overhead the only
controllable costs.


                                                                                                6
Did prices implicitly reflect ABC costs? Did intuitively managers understand true costs?
At Insteel, the ABC team took their first 'ABC snapshot' of operations at the Andrews p4nt in
the summer of 1996 with the assistance of a big-six accounting firm. The ABC team analyzed
Andrews' operations and identified 12 business processes. Within each business process, a
number of activities were identified -     a   total of 146 activities. Next, 426 employees were
surveyed to estimate how they allocated their time to different activities. All overhead resources
were then collected in 80 cost pools and a resource-consuming activity (cost driver) was
associated with each cost pool to assign the overhead costs to cost objects such as products and
customers (some cost pools included multiple activities that had the same cost driver). This
resulted in their first activity-based cost analysis and their first ABC database (essentially a setof
linked Excel spreadsheets and Access databases), maintained by a small team led by Dave
Conrad, the director of cost management, at the Mt. Airy corporate headquarters. Cost of goods
sold was tabulated by products and customers and broken down into five major cost categories as
described below. A second 'ABC snapshot' was developed in the summer of 1997, by which
time Insteel had its own staff group collecting the data.
• Material costs: Cost of steel rod and other materials used in production. Directly traceable to
    products and customers, based on pounds produced.
 • Conversion costs: Overhead resources consumed in converting steel rod to finished wire or
    nail products. This category includes unit-level costs (such as plant labor) and batch-level
    costs (such as wire-drawing set-up resources), plant-level costs (such as plant manager's
    salary) and product-level costs (such as the costs of special wire-drawing dies for particular
    products). Each component of conversion costs was allocated to products using an
    appropriate cost driver.
 • Customer costs: Overhead resources consumed in serving special customer needs such as
    the carrying cost of receivables, packing and loading costs, order processing costs and post-
    sales services. Traced to each customer and allocated to products based on quantity of each
     product purchased by that customer.
 • Freight costs: The actual freight charge incurred by Insteel to make each delivery. This
     freight cost is in contrast to the 'average' freight cost number that was used in the actual
     pricing and billing.


                                                                                                     7
• Corporate Overhead costs: This includes overhead resources consumed at the corporate
   office level (managerial salaries, information systems, financial services, etc.). These costs
   are allocated down to the Andrews plant based on its share of total company assets, pr its
   share of total company revenues. Allocation to products is based on quantity of product
   manufactured and to customers based on percentage of sales revenue.


   On analyzing the 1996 data recast in the ABC framework, Insteel determined that fully 30%
of Andrews' products and customers were generating losses when full-ABC costs were taken
into account and compared to the revenues generated by each product and each customer3. The
surprise emergence of 'bottom-feeding' customers and 'painful' products, indicates that
managers did not somehow intuitively understand ABC costs before the initiative was
undertaken at Insteel.
   We use the composition of each of the cost categories above to formulate Hypothesis 1
regarding intuitive managerial understanding of ABC costs even when the company did not
maintain a formal ABC system. Recognizing that the categorization of overhead costs between
the conversion cost pool and the customer costs pool has shifted somewhat between 1996 and
1997, we consider those costs separately and also bundled together as a more robust measure of
'overhead costs' in the hypotheses below:


Hypothesis 1: The 1996 product prices will implicitly impound the activity-based costs of
producing and delivering the products. Formally, in the equations below, with prices and costs
                                                                                            =        and /3=1.
measured per pound of product, we expect a>O, 13m=', O</3,,<1, f3i=O,                I3oH       1,




Price1 = a + f31Material Cost1 + /30ConversionCost + /3,CustomerCosti
                + ,8fFreightCoSt +                                                                               (1)
Price = a + /3,,, Mate rialCost1 + 130H (Conversion Cost1 + CustomerCost)
               + /31FreightCost + E1                                                                             (2)




 A common outcome of ABC analyses, surprisingly profitable and surprisingly unprofitable products and customers
are referred to as "hidden profit products/customers" and "hidden loss products/customers".


                                                                                                                  8
         Both relationships above are tested since overhead costs may have been incorrectly
categorized as conversion or customer costs and also may have been categorized differently in
1996 and 1997 (we examine the relationship between 1997 prices and costs below).

         Since the costs in Hypothesis 1 are all expressed on a per-pound basis (e.g., MaterialCost1
is total material cost for the th product divided by pounds of product i sold), we expect that the
fixed markup per pound of product that salespeople mention in their pricing strategy will
manifest itself in the intercept a. The cost of materials varies with production volume and we
expect that it will be reflected in a 1:1 proportion in prices. Any significant deviations from 1
would indicate (if t3m<1) that Insteel is systematically not marking up its material costs or (if
13m>1)   is charging a margin on material costs, over and above the markup represented by a. For

the same reason, we expect 13j=1. FreightCost per pound, which was levied by the trucking and
railroad companies by the weight of each shipment, was available and directly traceable to each
product on an invoice or shipment from Insteel. Salespeople quoted prices to customers using
both material costs and estimates of freight costs.

         Accepting, for the moment, their categorization of overhead costs into conversion and
customer costs, if product market prices do not reflect differences in overhead consumption
across products we would expect            0. On the other hand if product market prices in 1996
completely captured differences in conversion resource consumption across products, we would
expect ,= 1. We would expect 0< i3cc',R' <            1   if managers have some, but not a full,
understanding of overhead consumption by different products or if the variable Conversion Cost
is significantly prone to measurement error.              <   1   is also consistent with managers not
recovering some fixed costs such as facility level costs in the short run. Since the conversion cost
category includes both fixed and variable costs we expect that prices will respond significantly to
these costs, but their response could be less than 1:1 in the short run. Hence, we expect that
O<I3,<1. If 13u>nv<1 and a = 0, it is suggestive of managers ignoring fixed costs in short-term
pricing decisions. However, 3rn<1 and a > 0, is suggestive of market prices not reflecting the
diversity across products in the consumption of overhead resources. We expect f3OH to behave
similar to the




                                                                                                    9
         We will test the relationship described in Hypothesis 1 at the product level i.e., the
subscript i refers to the th product. We expect no relationship between product prices and
customer-level costs because they have been arbitrarily allocated down to the product level l?ased
on pounds of various products purchased by each customer, and hence expect that 13 0. If,
however, some products are custom made and those customers have high customer-level costs,
we would expect prices and customer costs to be correlated even at the product level and we
would expect 0<             <   1. We estimated both Equations (1) and (2) using 1996 data ('before
ABC') for each of the two major product types, wire products (bright and galvanized wire) and
nail products4.

         Descriptive statistics for the data used in our hypothesis tests are in Table 1. Correlations
among the variables is in Table 2. The estimates for Equations (1) and (2) using 1996 data are
shown in Table 3. The intercept a is significantly different from 0 for both product categories,
and either treatment of conversion and customer overhead costs. This suggests that Insteel was
charging an across-the-board markup of about 7 to 8.5 cents per pound of product sold. The
estimated coefficients provide limited support for the hypothesis of managers knowing ABC
costs even in the absence on a formal ABC system: f3,, is not significantly different from 1.0 in
all the columns of Table 3, but 13011 is insignificant for wire products and J3 is insignificant for
nail products in 1996. We note that for both product groups, 13011 is similar in size and
significance to          . Further,   13 is always insignificant. This indicates that conversion costs,
as measured in 1996, captured most of the cross-sectional variation in overhead costs correlated
with product prices. As argued in the hypothesis development section, 0 < 13<1 and cx> 0, as
is the case for nails, is suggestive of market prices not fully reflecting the diversity across
products in the consumption of overhead resources.

         It is interesting to compare the evidence that the market prices were somewhat rational
even without a formal ABC system in place, with the fact that Insteel, on analyzing the 1996
ABC data, found fully 30% of all its products and customers to be loss-making. These findings
suggest that the mark-up being charged by Insteel was insufficient to cover customer and

"Grouping the products into the three groups, bright wire, galvanized wire and nails yielded similar results.
Significantly different error variances for the wire and nail product groups suggest that pooling all the data into one
product group is inappropriate.


                                                                                                                     10
business-sustaining costs in cases of products and customers that made unusual demands on their
resources. Further, the coefficient on conversion costs is significantly less than 1 indicating that
Insteel did not reflect differences in conversion costs fully through changes in prices. Oberve
that I3conv is nearly 0 for the wire group, but is about 0.7 for nails. Insteel appears to be
recovering more of the conversion costs for nails which, as Exhibit 1 shows, are produced from
wire after further processing. This finding fits with Insteel management's own discovery from
the initial ABC study that many nail products were surprisingly profitable.
         In 1997, a full year after the first ABC 'snapshot' at the Andrews plant, another ABC
'snapshot' was developed, resulting in a 1997 set of product and customer-based profit and loss
analyses, similar to the 1996 data. Since Insteel had better cost information and organizational
awareness in the period between the 1996 and 1997 data collection effort, we also hypothesize
that if anything, product prices in 1997 should reflect costs better than it did in 1996.
Specifically,


Hypothesis 2: In the price/ABC cost relationship for 1997, we expect strong evidence that prices
incorporate ABC costs. Formally, in Equation (1) and (2) estimated using 1997 data, we expect
a = O,I3m = 1, f3conv=1,I3cust= O,130H=1, f3j=1.


         We test Hypothesis 2 by estimating the relationship between product prices and ABC
costs using 1997 data ('after ABC'). The results are outlined in the Table 4. We find a stronger
relationship between costs and prices in 1997. The standard markup (a) is now insignificant, and
there is a significant margin of about 40 cents on each dollar of material costs. While                     is now

marginally significant, 13o, continues to mimic f3,,, in size and significance. The coefficient on
freight costs is not significantly different from 1 for both product groups, but is a very noisy
estimate (131 for nails is neither significantly different from 0 nor from 1). It is possible that many
of the decisions based on 1996 data were not reflected in 1997 data till very late in the year.
         Assuming that the ABC study is technically correct5, the regression results provide only
mild support for the notion that Insteel's managers understood the underlying activity-based


 Insteel used experienced consultants and the results seemed to make sense to company management. The new cost
system is being extended to all the other Insteel plants. All these factors indirectly vouch for management's belief
about the technical correctness of ABC data.


                                                                                                                 11
economics of their business even when the old cost system was in place. We must conclude that
with increasing pressure on prices for its products and capacity constraints at various locations,
Insteel's management recognized the need for a cost system which would guide manaenal
decisions about various choices and tradeoffs facing the firm. They decided to adopt an activity-
based cost system that would potentially provide a better understanding of resource consumption
by products and by customers than a traditional volume-based cost system. However, we find
only limited support for the hypothesis that in the post ABC period, prices fully reflect ABC
costs. We expect the relationship between costs and prices to increase in the future as the ABC
culture becomes institutionalized.
   Wishing to limit the upheaval caused by a change in the status quo, and also to maximize the
possibility of enthusiastic adoption, Insteel's management selected the Andrews plant as its first
ABC site. The plant had had a history of good communications between plant management and
workers and supervisors, it was independent, with little operational overlap with other plants and
was run by Bill Sronce, a willing and enthusiastic champion of the process. He communicated
the objective and the process of the ABC study to all employees of the plant. Dave Conrad, the
director of cost management, was also assigned full-time to the project. He worked in close
coordination with the consultants to implement the technology and do the analysis.
Simultaneously, they trained Insteel staff on the ABC methodology.



5. Activity-Based Management at Insteel

   In this section we analyze the impact of the new ABC system on decision making at Insteel.
Process improvements appear to be the first benefit of the new ABC system at Insteel. The
company estimates that within a year of the first ABC study, $1.8 million had been saved in
Quality costs, mainly through a reduction of scrap and problem reactive maintenance costs. Non-
value added activities such as rework, movement of materials, and locating lost inventory were
reduced from 22% of activity costs to 17%. Freight costs, which was one of the first process
improvement opportunities pursued, have been reduced $555,000 in a year in the Andrews plant
alone. The Andrews plant was able to ship heavier loads on each truck by changing the layout of
boxes within each truck. Subsequently, all of Insteel's other manufacturing facilities have also
converted to heavier loads emulating the results achieved at Andrews. These savings were


                                                                                              12
significant given Insteel's after-tax income of $4.2 million in 1996. It is hard to estimate how
much of these savings would have been realized had Insteel not conducted an ABC analysis.
From interviews with Insteel managers and sitting-in on senior management meetings, it appears
that the activity analysis gave them an appreciation of the scope and quantified the magnitude of
the improvement potential, thereby allowing them to prioritize among various process
improvement possibilities.
       ABC data is typically used for making product line decisions such as discontinuation of
unprofitable products, changing prices, and introduction of new products similar to existing
profitable products. We conduct simple univariate statistical analysis to test these hypotheses on
product line decisions. We supplement these tests with interviews with Insteel managers.
       Products are discontinued for various reasons such as changes in customer requirements,
general changes in particular market segments, such a down turn in the home building industry,
changes in availability of raw materials, and shifting of production to other plants. We can
observe order patterns for various products before ABC and after ABC. We cannot tell for sure
why a product that was sold before ABC was not sold after ABC. It may be that the customer
who used to order that product no longer sources with the company, or the customer did not wish
to place an order in the one year period following the ABC study, but may do so at a later point
in time. The company may take longer than a year's time to decide whether to discontinue a
product. The company may have raised prices on unprofitable products rather than discontinue
them. For these reasons, we formulate our hypothesis as follows:


   Hypothesis 3: Products found to be unprofitable in the 1996 ABC analysis are more likely to
have been discontinued in the following year of ABM, than products found to be profitable.


       We conduct a simple chi-squared test to examine whether unprofitable products are more
likely to be discontinued (defined as zero sales in 1997, the year following the first ABC
analysis) than profitable products. Table 5 reports the results of these comparisons.


   We see that 78% of products profitable in '96 were also sold in 1997, versus 58% for those
that were unprofitable in '96. The x2     test   statistic is 24.11 (p=O.Ol%) indicating that the
likelihood of continuing a profitable product is significantly higher and lending considerable


                                                                                              13
support to Hypothesis 3. Analysis by product lines, namely nails and wire products, leads to
similar results.
     Although a higher proportion of unprofitable products seem to have been dscontinue, the
company can expect to improve overall profitability only if the resources and capacity freed from
not producing these unprofitable products are re-deployed in selling more of existing products or
in offering new products. Alternately, these resources can be eliminated, thus removing the costs
associated with these resources. The company has chosen the former strategy and just in the '96-
'97 time period, after its first ABC analysis, it had introduced about 40 new nail products, and
over a 100 wire products6. In the nail product group they focused largely on high-value added
specialized products such as pallet nails, which require precision machining and cutting-edge
packaging technology. Since nails are manufactured only at the Andrews facility, the company
could move quickly on these findings, and by early 1997 had installed new manufacturing
capacity for some of these products (see Narayanan and Sarkar (1998) for a description of one of
these initiatives). Decisions and actions related to wire products are intertwined with capacity
and utilization issues at other plants, and are therefore harder to characterize. An interesting
question is whether the new products introduced are more likely to be profitable for Insteel than
the set of old products, and whether their degree of profitability is higher. Many of the new
products are in the ramp-up stage; this issue will be better analyzed when some sort of 'steady
state' has been reached, both operationally and in the marketplace.
    We next analyze whether Insteel's pricing decisions were affected by the 1996 ABC study.
Products found to be unprofitable in the 1996 ABC study are likely to be more costly to
manufacture on average than previously thought by Insteel. Likewise, products found to be
profitable in the 1996 ABC study are likely to be less costly on average than previously thought
by Insteel. Based on this assumption, we formulate the following hypothesis.


Hypothesis 4: Prices of products found to be unprofitable in the 1996 ABC analysis are more
likely to have increased than prices of products found to be profitable.



6
  Working with the available data, we define 'new' as any product that was in the 1997 ('after') database, but not in
the 1996 (before) data set. Therefore, some of these new products may have been 'recycled' from prior years, and
some could be minor variations of old products. However, interviews with company managers suggest that several
products have been introduced or re-introduced as a result of the ABC analysis.


                                                                                                                  14
       From Table 5 we know that products found unprofitable in the 1996 ABC study are more
likely to be discontinued than profitable products. It's conceivable that Insteel discontinued
products by raising their prices to a level that would take them off the market. Unfortunatel', we
are unable to observe the price quoted, if any, for products not sold in 1997. If it is true that
products were discontinued by raising prices it will bias our tests against finding support for
Hypothesis 4. We conduct a simple chi-squared test to examine whether prices of unprofitable
products are more likely to have decreased than prices of profitable products. The results are in
Table 6.
   We see that 44% of products profitable in 1996 and sold in 1997, were sold at a higher price
in 1997 compared to the price in 1996. However, 58% of the products unprofitable in 1996 and
sold in 1997, were sold at a higher price in 1997 compared to the price in 1996. The x2 test
statistic is 5.44 (p=.O2%) indicating that the likelihood of decreasing prices for a profitable
product is significantly higher and lending considerable support for Hypothesis 4.
   We next analyze customer level data. Similar to the hypothesis on products, we formulate the
following hypothesis on customers. Defining customers who appear in the 1996 and the 1997
data as 'continuing' customers, and 1996 customers that dropped out of Insteel's 1997 customer
list as 'discontinued' customers.


   Hypothesis 5: Customers found to be unprofitable in the ABC study are more likely to be
discontinued than customers found to be profitable.


   The data we have on wire customers needs additional decomposition before it can be used for
a test of this hypothesis, hence we restrict attention to customers for nail products. The results are
summarized in Table 7.
    We see that 66% of customers who were profitable in '96 were continuing customers in
1997, versus 53% for those that were unprofitable in '96. The x2 test statistic of 2.1 is significant
only at the 15% level, indicating that the company has been reluctant to 'fire' customers.
Interviews with Insteel managers also suggest that consolidations and vertical integration within
the industry during the period of interest limited Insteel's ability to jettison unprofitable
customers. Some of the best customers were bought by competitors, excess capacity was



                                                                                                   15
available in the short to medium term and contribution margin from some unprofitable customers
helped cover the cost of that capacity.

6. Impact of ABM on Insteel's Financial Performance

       It is hard to isolate the financial impact of ABC on Insteel's performance:
1. Insteel is still very early in its ABC implementation. While we have provided evidence
   consistent with Insteel taking several product and customer related decisions based on ABC
   information, the effect of these decisions on the bottom line may not be felt for a few years.
2. The ABC project was piloted in the Andrews plant at Insteel in 1996 and 1997 and was
   subsequently rolled out to the other plants at Insteel in 1998. Our data analysis in the
   preceding sections is confined to the Andrew's plant. Financial data for Insteel as a whole in
    1996 and 1997 would not reflect the performance of just the Andrews plant.
3. Several industry level factors would have affected Insteel's financial performance. It is hard
   to attribute any change in Insteel's performance to ABC while several other factors are
   changing at the industry and company level.
   For these reasons the evidence that we will provide on ABM's impact on Insteel's financial
performance will only be suggestive. However, we take comfort from the fact that evidence,
sketchy as it is, is entirely consistent with the opinion of the senior management of Insteel.
   First we compare the performance of the Andrews plant with those of other Insteel Plants.
Table 8 provides the gross profit as a percentage of sales. Gross profit is sales, less all costs,
including materials, conversion, customer, and facility level costs, but excluding allocated
corporate overheads. The financial performance of Andrews plant appears to have improved
relative to six other plants that adopted ABC only in 1998. Details of financial performance in
1998 at the plant level are not yet available.
       Next we compare the financial performance of Insteel with that of other firms in the
industry. Insteel's four digit SIC code is 3310. We found fourteen other firms with the same SIC
code. We collected financial performance information from Standard and Poor's Compustat
database. Since Insteel Introduced ABC to its non-Andrew plants only in 1998, we can think of
the financial performance in 1998 and 1999 (first two quarters) as being post ABC and the
financial performance in 1996 and 1997 as pre ABC. Five firms did not have any of the relevant
financial data available for any of the periods during 1996-1999. We deleted these firms. We can



                                                                                                 16
analyze financial performance using accounting measures of performance and/or stock market
returns. We used Return on Equity, Return on Assets, and Stock returns as three measures of
financial performance. We expect Stock returns to be leading indicators of performanc and
accounting measures (ROE and ROA) to be lagging indicators of financial performance. This is
because anticipated improvements would be reflected in stock returns when initiatives such as
ABC are announced, while accounting measures would reflect these improvements, if and when,
they are realized.
       Measured by ROE (see Table 9A), Insteel's performance has lagged the median industry
performance throughout the period 1996-1999. It's hard to discern any patterns in Insteel's
financial performance in 1998-1999, relative to the industry median. In Table 9B we compare
Insteel's performance, measured by Return on Assets, to that of other firms in its industry.
Measured by ROA, Insteel has lagged its industry median till 1998. However, it appears to have
out performed the industry median in 1999. In Table 9C we compare Insteel's performance,
measured by stock returns, to that of other firms in its industry. Insteel's stock appears to have
outperformed the industry median for the last thirty months. The three measures taken together
provides some indication of improving financial performance at Insteel, relative to the industry
median in 1998-99. Any attribution of this improvement to ABC would be highly speculative.
However, this evidence is not inconsistent with senior management's opinion that ABC has
contributed to Insteel's improvement in financial performance.



7. Organizational Issues

The adoption of ABC at Insteel has developed from a 'project' in one location in 1996 to a
company-wide managerial tool in 1999. Interviews with the management indicate that they
consider this effort to have been successful in terms of the improvement to the bottom-line
relative to the cost of analysis, implementation, and managerial energy invested in the effort.
Judging from our own observations at five other companies, readings of case histories of similar
projects, observations of Insteel managerial and worker meetings, and the input from Insteel
managers, several factors played a role in this success:
• The ABC initiative was seeded in a controlled setting - the Andrews plant. The plant had a
   successful history and plant management was enthusiastic and supportive. Those managers


                                                                                              17
   spent a great deal of their time communicating the goals of the project and getting buy-in for
   the intensive interviewing and data gathering process.
• Insteel acted quickly in 'gathering up low-hanging fruit' i.e., implementing prpcess
   improvements with a quantifiable payback; these tactical improvements got employees at all
   levels involved and excited about the project, while management debated and planned more
   strategic, longer-term actions. Quick wins were shared and celebrated with all associates (a
   term that includes plant-floor workers).
• The ABC initiative was given a high level of visibility within Insteel's upper management.
   This translated, in part, to adequate levels of financial support, computing resources and
   managerial attention during the early project phases.
• Although not highlighted in our discussions with Insteel managers, we must also point out
   that Insteel's sales-force compensation is composed mainly of straight salary. This means
   that they are usually willing to give a new sales strategy a try even at the risk of losing some
   volume. While the motivational effects of such a wage scheme are debatable, we observed a
   high level of conviction and enthusiasm for the market actions suggested by the ABC
   analyses among the sales managers.


       All Insteel managers (including ex-employees) in production, sales, and finance consider
   the ABC project at Insteel a success. At the current time, almost three years after the start of
   the ABC initiative, a full roll-out to all plants is underway, supported by a new Oracle ERP
   relational database system. While the use of outside consultants has been discontinued, more
   staff and IT resources have now been devoted to the ABC project. Automated data collection
   and analysis on a monthly basis provides real-time feedback to managers as they implement
   new market strategies and pursue operational improvements. Looking back, those most
   closely involved with the ABC project feel that the initiative should have been rolled out
   earlier to the other plants.



8. Conclusions

   In this study we sought answers to the following two questions:
   1) Do managers intuitively know ABC costs even in the absence of an ABC system?


                                                                                               18
   2) Do managers change decisions based on ABC information?


   We regress product prices on various cost elements and find that prices do not fully rflect
cost categories other than materials cost and freight costs. Thus overhead costs are not fully
impounded in prices. This finding leads us to conclude that market prices are some what efficient
in reflecting the diversity across products in the consumption of overhead resources but they do
not fully capture this diversity. Likewise, we conclude that managers perhaps had some
understanding of the diversity across products in the consumption of overhead resources but they
probably did not have a complete understanding of ABC costs intuitively before the ABC study
was done.
   Interviews with managers and our statistical analysis lend some support to the hypothesis of
changes in managerial decisions at Insteel following the ABC study. Rationalizing the product
portfolio and pricing decisions appear to have been influenced by the ABC study. Customers are
now billed for freight in a more direct way. The company has made several process changes
attributable to the ABC study. The company has introduced new product lines. However,
rationalizing the customer portfolio, although initiated by the company, cannot be statistically
detected. These strategy changes will, we suspect, be reflected in the data in the following two
years.




                                                                                             19
9. References

1.   Anderson, S., "Measuring the Impact of Product Mix Heterogeneity on Manufacturing
     Overhead Cost," Accounting Review, July 1995, V 70 N 3, pp. 363-387.
2. Anderson, S. and S. Young, "Evaluation of Activity Based Costing Systems: The Impact of
     Contextual and Procedural Factors," University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Working paper.
     September 1997.
3. Anderson, S., J. Hesford, and S. Young, "Implementing Activity Based Costing: A Field
     Study of ABC Development Teams in Two U.S. Automobile Firms," University of Michigan
     Ann Arbor, Working paper. October 1997.
4. Banker, R. and H. Johnston, "An Empirical Study of Cost Drivers in the US Airline
     Industry," Accounting Review, July 1993, V 68 N 3, pp. 576-601.
5. Banker, R., G. Potter, R. Schroder, " An Empirical Analysis of Manufacturing Overhead
     Cost Drivers," Journal of Accounting and Economics V 19, 1995, pp. 115-137.
6. Cooper, R., "Cost Classifications in Unit-Based and Activity-Based Manufacturing Cost
     Systems," Journal of Cost Management (Fall 1990) 4-14.
7. Cooper, R. and R. Kaplan, "Measure Costs Right: Make the Right Decisions," Harvard
     Business Review (September-October 1988), 97-98.
8. Cooper, R. and R. Kaplan, "Profit Priorities from Activity-Based Costing," Harvard Business
     Review (May-June 1991).
9. Datar, S., S. Kekre, T. Mukhopadhyay, and K. Srinivasan, "Simultaneous Estimation of Cost
     Drivers," Accounting Review, July 1993, V 68, N 3, pp. 602-6 14.
10. Foster, G. and M. Gupta, "Manufacturing Overhead Cost Driver Analysis," Journal Of
     Accounting & Economics 1990. Vol. 12 (1-3) pp. 309-337.
11. Foster, G. and D. Swenson, "Measuring the Success of Activity Based Cost Management and
     Its Determinants," Journal of Management Accounting Research Vol. 9. 1997.
12. March, A. and R. Kaplan, "John Deere Component Works," Harvard Business School Case
     187-107, 1987.
13. Narayanan, V. and R. Sarkar, "Insteel Wire Products: ABM at Andrews," Harvard Business
     School Case 198-087, 1998.




                                                                                           20
14. Roberts, M.W. and Silvester, K., "Why ABC Failed and How it May Yet Succeed," Journal
   of Cost Management Research Winter 1998 pp. 23-35.
15. Shields, M. " An Empirical Analysis of Firms' Implementation Experiences with Activity
   Based Costing," Journal of Management Accounting Research, V 7, Fall 1995.




                                                                                       21
</ref_section>
Appendix I: Interviews
Questionnaire for Insteel Management
Name: Michael Gazmarjan                          Position/Title: CFO and Treasurer
1. Management Support
   Has the ABC effort been successful at Insteel? Do you think the effort will be continued?
   Expanded? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
   I believe that the ABM effort has already yielded some significant successes at Insteel and
we will continue to expand the program and further develop our capabilities going forward.
2. Organizational Factors
   How has the ABC effort at Insteel been different from other initiatives implemented at
   Insteel? (EVA, TQM, fIT, etc.) What factors have contributed to or hindered the success of
   ABC implementation at Insteel? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
   The ABM effort has been well received by Insteel's management team as it has produced a
tremendous amount of insight in comparison to the historical performance measurement tools
that were in existence. It has served to facilitate the communication between manufacturing and
sales and break down any functional barriers that may have existed. ABM has supplemented the
EVA implementation by providing managers with a tool that can be utilized to model the impact
of their decisions on EVA drivers and ultimately, shareholder value.
3. Impact on Decisions
   Has the adoption of ABC at Insteel, influenced any decision-making in your organization? If
   so, how? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
   ABM has provided us with a valuable tool to utilize in making a range of business decisions,
including: (1) identification of process improvement opportunities, (2) optimization of customer
and product mixes, (3) assessing the profitability of product lines, products of customers and
determining appropriate actions that can be taken to enhance the company's financial
performance, (4) analyzing the financial impact of product line expansions and (5) performing a
multitude of "what-if' analysis to determine the financial impact of manufacturing as well as
commercial decisions.
Questionnaire for Insteel Management
Name: John Calcagni        PositionlTitle: Product Sales Manager—Industrial wire
1. Management Support
  Has the ABC effort been successful at Insteel? Do you think the effort will be continued?
  Expanded? (Use other side of this sheet fnecessary).
ABC has been successful. We have already expanded the effort to begin including plants other
than SC.
2. Organizational Factors
 How has the ABC effort at Insteel been different from other initiatives implemented at Insteel ?
  (EVA, TQM, JIT, etc.) What factors have contributed to or hindered the success of ABC
  implementation at Insteel? (Use other side of this sheet fnecesswy).
An up front commitment from sales, manufacturing and finance have insured the moving
forward of ABC. Most past initiatives did not include certain departments, particularly finance.
The assigning of a Financial Advisor to each division has in my opinion, been key our moving
forward.
Impact on Decisions
 Has the adoption of ABC at Insteel, influenced any decision-making in your organization? If
 so, how? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
ABC has certainly clarified and identified areas of improvement as it relates to individual
customers and products. I feel, however, our greatest strides are being made presently by
applying ABC properly to what is a volume sensitive business. We are beginning to MODEL
our business with all the factors being considered (i.e., volume, labor, product mix) and seeing
financial results that largely conform to our suppositions.




                                                                                              23
Questionnaire for Insteel Management
Name: Richard Wagner                                      PositionlTitle: VP-GM

1. Management Support
 Has the ABC effort been successful at Insteel? Do you think the effort will be continued?
 Expanded? (Use other side of this sheet f necessary).
YES. ABC has brought information to the management which has enabled stronger strategic
marketing decisions with regard to customer and product mix selection, as well as help target
areas for process improvement.
2. Organizational Factors
 How has the ABC effort at Insteel been different from other initiatives implemented at Insteel ?
 (EVA, TQM, JIT, etc.) What factors have contributed to or hindered the success of ABC
 implementation at Insteel? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
In my opinion, EVA is the benchmark for operating the business successfully, but realistically,
ABC is the tool which enables better decisions in support of improving EVA. To me EVA is the
destination and ABC the roadmap. Information systems have been the biggest roadblock for
ABC so far, and the next biggest, getting it understood by managers making decisions.
3. Impact on Decisions
 Has the adoption of ABC at Insteel, influenced any decision-making in your organization? If
 so, how? (Use other side of this sheet if necessary).
ABC has affected our decision-making. Our three largest improvement in concrete products
have been product mix, standardization of products in pipe fabric, and firing a significant
customer who was dominating our order book at net selling values that were killing us. Over the
years, we thought that volume justified it, but ABC gave us the information to decide to go no
longer. Since then, they are back at about 2/3 the previous business level at prices that can earn
acceptable profit levels (above our EVA hurdle).




                                                                                                 24
                        IN          IMean      lStdDev    1Mm        Qi         IMedian IQ         Max
1996 WIRE:
Price                   224          0.276     0.037      0.181      0.245       0.278     0.299   O'.392
MaterialCost            224          0.175     0.018      0.145      0.155       0.175     0.185   0.228
ConversionCost          224          0.038     0.020      0.010      0.023       0.032     0.049   0.123
CustomerCost            224          0.023     0.018      0.005      0.013       0.017     0.023   0.099
OverheadCost            224          0.061     0.025      0.015      0.043       0.053     0.071   0.140
FreightCost             224          0.023     0.011      0.001      0.016       0.278     0.030   0.063

1996 NAILS:
Price                   170          0.386     0.094      0.226      0.345       0.393     0.430   0.690
MaterialCost            170          0.232     0.055      0.177      0.188       0.220     0.246   0.380
ConversionCost          170          0.105     0.056      0.009      0.071       0.100     0.134   0.291
CustonierCost           170          0.011     0.006      0.000      0.006       0.010     0,014   0.034
OverheadCost            170          0.117     0.058      0.012      0.078       0.113     0.145   0.296
FreightCost             170          0.011     0.011      0.000      0.007       0.010     0.016   0.033

1997 WIRE:
Price                   289         0.262      0.036      0.192      0.235      0.259      0.285   0.390
MaterialCost            289         0.150      0.010      0.139      0.140      0.149      0.159   0.179
ConversionCost          289         0.055      0.034      0.000      0.027      0.044      0.080   0.172
CustomerCost            289         0.021      0.020      0.006      0.012      0.014      0.021   0.203
OverheadCost            289         0.076      0.042      0.013      0.041      0.064      0.102   0.232
FreightCost             289         0.022      0.010      0.000      0.015      0.023      0.030   0.050

1997 NAILS:
Price                   160         0.373      0.090      0.228      0.313      0.375      0.416   0.644
MaterjalCost            160         0.168      0.024      0.145      0.154      0.160      0.181   0.311
ConversionCost          160         0.165      0.088      0.045      0.113      0.145      0.207   0.529
CustomerCost            160         0.019      0.010      0.004      0.012      0.017      0.022   0.050
OverheadCost            160         0.183      0.091      0.054      0.126      0.173      0.225   0.565
FreightCost             160         0.016      0.006      0.000      0.012      0.016      0.019   0.036

                                 TABLE 1: Univariate Statistics for Regression Variables
Notes:
1. All variables are in dollars per pound.
2. Zero values are due to rounding.




                                                                                                      25
1996 Wire:               Price       MaterialCost ConversionCost CustomerCost OverheadCost FreightCost
Price                     1.000        0.517 ***     0.373 ***       0.000       0.299 *** 0.394
MaterialCost              0.5 17 ***    1.000        0.639          -0.27 1      v.318       0.095
ConversionCost            0.373  ***   0.639  ***    1.000          -0.136  **   0.704 ***   0.103
CustomerCost              0.000       -0.271 ***    -0.136 **        1.000       0.607 *** 0.373 ***
OverheadCost              0.299 ***    0.3 18 ***    0.704 ***       0.607 ***   1.000       0.350 ***
OverheadCost              0.394  ***   0.095         0.103           0.373       0.350 ***   1.000

1996 Nails:              Price      MaterialCost ConversionCost CustomerCost OverheadCost FreightCost
Price                     1.000       0.628 ***     0.450 ***       0.292 ***   0.465 *** 0.073
MaterialCost              0.628 ***    1.000        0.04 1          0.188 **    0.060      -0.035
ConversionCost            0.450 ***   0.041         1.000           0.296 ***   0.995 *** 0.292 ***
CustomerCost              0.292 ***   0.188 **      0.296 ***       1.000       0.394 *** -0.053
OverheadCost              0.465 ***   0.060         0.995  ***      0.394 ***   1.000       0.275 ***
OverheadCost              0.073      -0.035         0.292  ***     -0.053       0.275 ***   1.000

1997 Wire:               Price            Materi alCost ConversionCost CustomerCost OverheadCost FreightCost
Price                     1.000              0.448 ***     0.524 ***       0.037       0.434 *** 0.336 ***
MatenalCost               0.44 8***          1.000         0.265 ***      -0.021 *     0.201 *** 0.078
ConversionCost            0.524 ***          0.265 ***     1.000           0.205 ***   0.891 *** 0.25 1 ***
CustomerCost              0.037             -0.021  *      0.205 ***       1.000       0.627 *** 0.195 ***
OverheadCost              0.434 ***          0.201  ***    0.891 ***       0.627 ***   1.000       0.290 ***
OverheadCost              0.336 ***          0.078         0.251 ***       0.195 ***   0.290 *** 1.000

1997 Nails:              Price      MaterialCost ConversionCost CustomerCost OverheadCost FreightCost
Price                     1.000       0.646 ***     0.716 ***       0.286 ***   0.723 *** -0.022
MaterialCost              0.646 ***    1.000        0.493 ***       0.191 **    0.497 *** 0.016
ConversionCost            0.716 ***   0.493  ***    1.000           0.264 ***   0.995      -0.113
CustomerCost              0.286 ***   0.191 **      0.264 ***       1.000       0.360 *** -0.185
OverheadCost              0.723 ***   0.497 ***     0.995 ***       0.360 ***   1.000      -0.129
OverheadCost             -0.022       0.016        -0.113          -0.185 **   -0.129       1.000

                          Table 2: Correlations among variables by product category and year
    Indicates significance at 99% level
** Indicates significance at 95% level
* Indicates   significance at 90% level




                                                                                                   26
                                                BEFORE ABC (1996 data)
                                                                                                 a
                                         Wire Products                       Nail Products             t
        c                     0.083***         0.076***           0.069***            O.070***
                              (3.50)           (3.94)             (2.90)              (2.95)

        13m                   0.934***         0.978***            1.028**            1.030***
                              (6.35)            (8.55)             (11.63)            (11.86)
        Sig. duff from 1.0?   No               No                 No                  No
                              0.088            N/A                O.703***            N/A
                              (0.68)                              (7.45)
        Sig. less than 1.0?   Yes                                 Yes

        CuSt                  0.000            N/A                0.809               N/A
                              (0.00)                              (1.01)

        I3OH                  N/A              0.043              N/A                 0.708***
                                               (0.48)                                 (8.30)

        Sig. less than 1.0?                    Yes                                    Yes


        13f                   1.147***         1.123***           -0.405              -0.424
                              (5.94)           (6.03)             (0.47)              (0.50)
        Sig. diff from 1.0?   No               No                 No                  No
        Adj.R2                38%              38%                57%                 57%
        N                     224              224                170                 170


              Table 3: Tests of Hypothesis 1: Price/ABC relationship in '96 (t-stats in parentheses)
Indicates that the estimates are significantly different from zero with p values less than .01




                                                                                                           27
                                                      AFTER ABC (1997 data)
                                                                                                    S
                                            Wire Products                     Nail Products
                     cx              0.043               0.017        0.0253             0.030
                                     (1.64)               (0.64)       (0.75)             (0.89)

                    13m            1.208***             1.388***     1.396***           1.400
                                     (6.91)               (7.73)       (6.69)             (6.73)
             Sig. diff from 1.0?       No             Yes (p=lO%)   Yes (p=lO%)        Yes (p=lO%)

                   13              0.422***               N/A        0.527***             N/A
                                     (8.16)                            (8.97)
             Sig. less than 1.0?      Yes                               Yes

                   Cust             ..0.150               N/A         0.823*              N/A
                                     (1.76)                            (1.69)

                   I3OH               N/A              0.249***        N/A              0.537***
                                                          (5.89)                          (9.56)

             Sig. less than 1.0?                           Yes                                Yes



                     13i           0.801***            0.782***       0.694              0.626
                                     (4.82)              (4.49)        (0.92)             (0.84)
             Sig. diff from 1.0?       No                  No           No                    No
                  Adj.R2             42%                  36%          63%                63%
                     N                289                 289           160               160


                Table 4: Tests of Hypothesis 2: Price/ABC relationship in '97 (t-stats in parentheses)
    Indicates estimates significant with p values less than .01
* Indicates estimates significant with p values less than . 1




                                                                                                         28
                                          No. of profitable          No. of unprofitabLe
                Description               products in 1996           products in 1996

      No. of products that were
      sold in '96 and also in 1997              203 (78%)                  125 (58%)
      "Continued Products"

      No. of products that were
      sold in '96 but discontinued
                                                53 (22%)                   89 (42%)
      in 1997
      "Discontinued Products"
      Total                                    256 (100%)                 214 (100%)


    Table 5: Frequency Distribution of Products, by 1996 profitability and 1997 availability for sale


                                                                                No. of
                                                No. of profitable
                  Description                                               unprofitable
                                                products in 1996
                                                                          products in 1996
    No. of products that were sold in
    '96 and also in 1997 for which
                                                    113 (56%)                 53 (42%)
    prices were decreased in 1997
    relative to 1996
    No. of products that were sold in
    '96 and also in 1997 for which
                                                    90 (44%)                  72 (58%)
    prices were increased in 1997
    relative to 1996
    Total                                           203 (100%)               125 (100%)

Table 6: Frequency Distribution of Product by 1996 profitability and 1997 price changes relative to 1996.




                                                                                                        29
                                    No. of profitable nail     No. of     unprofitable
          Description               customers in 1996          nail customers in 1996
No. of        customers      that
purchased from Insteel '96
                                          66 (66%)                    20 (53%)
and also in 1997
"Continuing Customers"
No.     of customers         that
purchased from Insteel in '96
                                          34 (34%)                    18 (47%)
but not in 1997
"Discontinued Customers"

Total                                    100 (100%)                  38 (100%)


  Table 7: Frequency Distribution of nail customers, by '96 profitability and '97 purchases


                                                   % Gross Profit on Sales
                Site                     Oct 1995-Jun 1996         Oct 1996-Jun 1997
Andrews Plant                           8.28                      8.43
6 Non-Andrews plants combined           7.99                      6.94
Median of 6 Non-Andrews plants           10.18                    6.07


              Table 8: Gross Profit scaled by sales revenue at Insteel's plants




                                                                                              30
                                                  1996        1997        1998         99Q1     99Q2
Cold Metal Products Inc.                         9.56         6.53        @NA          @r*A     @NA
Friedman Industries                              15.93        18.69       @NA          @NA      @A
Gibraltar Steel Corp.                             13.12       11.72       12.38        12.54    12.54
Haynes International Inc.                         1.37        -38.46      -2.70        -1.20    -1.18
MMJ Products Inc.                                 22.21       -37.07      -84.03       -99.24   @NA
National Standard Co.                             -64.32      38.81       20.64        20.53     14.35
Niagara CP                                        6.85        7.64        @NA          @NA      @NA
Steel Technologies                                11.53       7.81        8.62         9.03     9.45
Worthington Industries                            13.04       10.55       @NA          @NA      @NA
Industry Median                                   11.53       7.81        8.62         9.03     10.99
Insteel Industries                                5.76        3.56        0.47         5.00     8.90
Relative Performance of Insteel                   -5.77       -4.26       -8.15        -4.03    -2.09
                            Table 9A: ROE of Insteel and other firms in its industry


                                                  1996        1997        1998         99Q1     99Q2
Cold Metal Products Inc.                          2.20        1.55        -10.23       -10.23   @NA
Friedman Industries                               9.52        10.45       @NA          @NA      @NA
Gibraltar Steel Corp.                             7.18        5.84        4.53         4.65     4.65
Haynes International Inc.                         -1.10       16.79       1.18         0.52     0.52
Mlviii Products Inc.                              4.68        5.06        4.96         5.86     @NA
National Standard Co.                             7.72        -7.94       -5.82        -5.69    -3.97
Niagara CP                                        2.25        2.39        @NA          @NA      @NA
Steel Technologies                                5.38        3.30        3.68         3.64     3.96
Worthington Industries                            5.98        4.47        @NA          @NA      @NA
Industry Median                                   5.38        4.47        2.43         2.08     2.24
Insteel Industries                                2.91        1.48        0.22         2.48     4.32
Relative Performance of Insteel                   -2.47       -2.99       -2.21        0.40     2.08
                            Table 9B: ROA of Insteel and other firms in its industry


                                                  1996        1997        1998         99Q1     99Q2
Cold Metal Products Inc.                          -4.65       -12.20      -61.11       @NA      @NA
Friedman Industries                               65.53       34.52       -39.55       @NA      @NA
Gibraltar Steel Corp.                             116.49      -24.76      15.19        -0.12    @NA
Haynes International Inc.                         @NA         @NA         @NA          @NA      @NA
MMI Products Inc.                                 @NA         @NA          @NA         @NA      @NA
National Standard Co.                             -43.52      -2.47       -57.98       -0.08    0.04
Niagara CP                                        -2.78       125.71      -41.14       0.08     @NA
Steel Technologies                                26.02       0.37        -41.19       -0.06    0.17
Worthington Industries                            -6.38       -1.98       -24.08       @NA      @NA
Industry Median                                   -2.78       -1.98       -41.14       -0.07    0.11
Insteel Industries                                -5.41       23.31       -37.02       0.03     0.17
Relative Performance of Insteel                   -2.64       25.29       4.12         0.10     0.06
                     Table 9C: Stock Returns of Insteel and other firms in its industry



                                                                                                        31
a-




n



1
C
n
ft



ft
