                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE COMPETITION BETWEEN
                                     COMPETITION RULES

                                           Hans-Werner Sinn

                                          Working Paper 7273
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7273


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1999




The author gratefully acknowledges research support by Juli Irving-Lessman and Frank Westermann as well
as useful comments by Klaus Schmidt and Bernd Genser. The paper was prepared for the conference “Fiscal
Competition and Federalism in Europe”, ZEW, Mannheim, June 2-3, 1999. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Hans-Werner Sinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Competition between Competition Rules
Hans-Werner Sinn
NBER Working Paper No. 7273
July 1999
JEL No. H7, D43, L43

                                            ABSTRACT

       Open borders imply systems competition. This paper studies the implications of systems
competition for the national competition rules. It is shown that an equilibrium where all countries
retain their antitrust laws does not exist, since abolishing this law makes it possible for a single
country to establish a cartel that successfully appropriates foreign business profits. Instead of such
an equilibrium, a deregulation race is likely to emerge in which all but the last country repeal their
antitrust laws. The deregulation race results in a chain of Stackelberg leadership positions taken over
by national cartels that renders lower profits and higher consumer rents than would have been the
case with harmonization of the antitrust laws.

Hans-Werner Sinn
CESifo
Schackstraße 4
80539 Munich
Germany
and NBER
hans-werner.sinn@ces.vwl.uni-muenchen.de
1. A Tottering Credo

Europe, indeed the whole world, is now at the start of a new stage of development in which the

landscape of its firms is being redrawn. The common European market has been created, and

international competition has become far more intense in the process of globalization than anyone

could have anticipated. In the years to come the world of large firms will be completely

restructured. Economists have been astonished by the increasingly frequent news reports about

mega mergers and "strategic alliances" which previously would have been quite unthinkable.

Former bitter rivals are now amalgamating and creating conglomerates that occupy large shares

of the domestic markets. European companies, in particular, have been caught up in the wave of

mergers. These companies feel they must prepare for globalization and are now attempting to put

themselves in the best possible position do this. The belief in the importance of getting a good

start is widespread. The conglomerate which gets into position first can occupy ground before the

others come. It enjoys a first mover advantage, forcing its followers to content themselves with

the share of the market that remains.

       In this situation, the national cartel authorities will face considerable pressure to distance

themselves from their old established ideas and make it easier for strategic alliances and mergers

between firms to take place by relaxing the restrictions on them as rapidly as possible. Domestic

competition is now taking second place to international competition and this is forcing thecartel

authorities to behave like competitors themselves.

        It was the credo of German "ordo liberalism" and similar neo-liberal lines of thought in

the US that, although an unconstrained competitive market economy would be able to ensure an

 efficient allocation of resources, this type of economy would be inherently unstable. The

 competing firms would always have an incentive to merge, because, by doing so, they could
                                                 2

impose limits on the quantities sold in the market, increase their prices and raise their profits. A

cartel authority would be necessary to stabilize the competition and it would do so by prohibiting

the collusion of firms. Competition could only function if it was subject to strict rules enforced by

the state. The German Antitrust Law and the Federal Cartel Office were established as a result of

this way of thinking, and other countries have chosen similar policies even though they have

preferred to name them differently.

       The ordo liberal recommendations obviously make sense in a closed economy. A

government which endeavors to maximize the welfare of its citizens will try to establish effective

monopoly controls in order to produce a workable form of competition. The question is, how will

this incentive structure change in the era of globalization? How will the forces of systems

competition influence the behavior of the cartel authorities and the decisions of the legislators. if

these legislators are concerned with the welfare of their own people? Has an ordo liberal

economic policy any chance of surviving in the competition between systems?

        Interest in ordo liberal policies has already waned as a result of the globalization of the

economy. Warnings about domestic mergers are usually pushed aside by arguing that

international competition is fierce and that the domestic industries must be armed against this

competition. The ordo liberal credo is tottering. It is not quite clear whether a retreat from the

ordo liberal way of thinking is really wise from a national point of view and it is even less clear

whether, if this retreat is universal, a rational international competitive equilibrium will follow.

The direction that will be taken by the competition between competition rules and whether this

 competition will ever be workable are open questions.

        In view of the ensuing theoretical difficulties, this analysis can only deal with these

 problems in a very rudimentary way and must limit itself to providing food for thought.
                                                 3


Theoretical rigor, freedom from value judgement and verifiability of the analysis must precede a

balanced political judgemcnt.



2. Regulating the Domestic Monopoly

Before analyzing the competition between competition rules, it will be useful to briefly review

the ordo liberal arguments for putting restrictions on setting up domestic cartels and company

mergers. For the well informed reader, in this introductory section it will be sufficient to go

quickly over the definitions of the variables and certain simplified basic assumptions.

       Restricting cartels is necessary because competitive firms always have an incentive to

merge to the disadvantage of the consumer. The cartel reduces the quantity it sells and thus raises

prices. Whether this will cause revenue to rise or fall is not clear, In any case, costs will fall and

profits will rise because of the reduction in sales. The consumers get the worst of the bargain.

They pay higher prices, and the consumer surplus becomes smaller. On balance, setting up cartels

is a loss for society because the cartel gains less than the consumers lose. Ordo liberal policy

prevents this happening by prohibiting cartels and mergers.

        This relationship can be illustrated with the textbook oligopoly model with n identical

firms, linear demand, constant marginal costs c, and homogeneous products. The individual firm /

chooses its quantity supplied X/ under the Cournot-Nash assumption that it has no influence on

the quantities planned by other firms, but that it can influence the common market price P to a

 limited extent through its own decision. A market equilibrium is reached when the market clears
                                                     4

and all quantities are chosen so that no supplier has any incentive to change its quantity1 . The

goal of the firm i is to maximize profits,



                        rnaxP(X)x1—cx,, i=l,...,n,

where

                        X=       xi


is the total quantity sold, which, according to the linear demand function, determines the market

price:



(1)                      P(X) = b(K — X)+ c;b,K,c = const >0.



Here -b is the slope of the demand curve, and K the quantity that would be sold in a competitive

market. In such a market



                                                          (competition)



and therefore

                        X= K                              (competition).



The profit maximizing conditions for problem (1) are




 As Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) have shown, the Cournot- Nash model also can be substantiated very well in a
                                                           5


(2)                                  P(X)+P'(X)x,=c V i=l,..,,n.


These say that the marginal revenue equals the marginal cost of production. The marginal

revenue from the sale of one more unit of the product is equal to the price at which this unit can

be sold minus the reduction in revenue resulting from the fact that the sale of the extra unit is

only possible if the infra marginal units are sold at a lower price. It is expressed by the term F'

(X)x which is negative because F' < 0.

        The reduction in revenue with the infra marginal units obviously implies that P(X) >

that is, that price is above marginal cost and the quantity sold is below the competitive quantity

K. The effect is stronger, the larger the market share of the individual firm, because the share of

the total detriment resulting from the price reduction that the individual firm has to bear is larger.

This can be seen at once when it is considered that (2) implies a symmetrical equilibrium in

which

                           nx1=X Vi=l,...,n.


Equation (2) then becomes




(3)                         P(X)+'P'(X)'X=c


where 1/n is the market share, Applying equation (1), it follows from (3), with a little

transformation, that




two step game structure, where first the capacities, and then the prices, are set as in a Bertrand competition.
                                                 6


(4)                    X=         K           (competition, Cournot-Nash behavior).
                            1
                            —+1
                            n



This expression shows that, with linear demand, the quantity sold is a simple falling function of

the market share of the single firm. In the extreme case of a monopoly, (1/n = 1), the quantity

sold is half the competitive quantity X =K/2, and in the other extreme case where the market share

approaches zero, 1/n —* 0, it is equal to the competitive quantity X=K.

       The deeper reason for this implication of alternative market shares is negative externality

the single firm imposes on other firms by forcing them to lower their price if it decides to

increase its sales, The smaller the market share the smaller is this externality and lower is the

single firm's incentive to deviate from the monopoly quantity. The externality              can be

internalized by merging with other firms or by establishing a cartel. With perfect collusion, there

is no externality, and with a linear demand curve and constant marginal costs, only half the

competitive quantity is produced.

       Figure 1 illustrates these relationships. In a price — quantity diagram it shows the marginal

cost curve c, the demand curve P (A) and the marginal revenue curve for the cartel. The last

mentioned graphs the left hand side of equation (3) for the case where n =1. Using the particular

linear demand curve (1), the marginal revenue curve starts at the same place on the ordinate as

the demand curve, that is, at point A, and it is twice as steep as the latter. In the cartel optimum,

F, the marginal revenue equals the marginal cost and the price is above the marginal cost by the

amount BF. With an oligopoly of five suppliers, on the other hand, the markup would be only

CE and the quantity sold would increase by IH.
                                               7

                               Figure 1: The Ordo Liberal Creed

      P




Cartel                               Cartel
price
                                                     Oligopoly (n = 5)
                                                     C
                                                               Competition
                                                               D
     G                                                                         C




     0
                                  Cartel                       K                   x
                                  quantity

                                                           Marginal revenue




         Setting up the cartel benefits the suppliers because profit increases by the area FEL.

(Since the revenue can be measured by the area under the marginal revenue curve and cost by the

area under the marginal cost curve.) At the same time social welfare falls. Social welfare can be

defined as the sum of all economic surpluses, which are equal to the difference between the

consumers' maximum willingness to pay — the area under the demand curve — and the production

costs — the area under the marginal cost curve. With perfect competition, where price equals

marginal cost, social welfare is measured by the triangle ADO, with the oligopoly (with five

members) it is measured by the area ACEG, and with the cartel by the area ABFG. Establishing a
                                                 8

cartel obviously brings about a reduction in the total surplus of BCEF, although profit, which is

part of this total, increases. The cake is smaller but the producers can cut themselves an

absolutely bigger piece of it.

       The economic inefficiency of setting up a cartel proved in this way is the basis of the ordo

liberal credo. The economy can be protected from the damaging effects of empowering the

market by means of effective antitrust controls. In the present example, antitrust regulation would

prevent welfare from falling by the area BCEF.



3. The Retreat from Ordo Liberal Policy in the Open Economy

The question of whether an ordo liberal equilibrium exists in the competition between systems

will now be examined. Equilibrium is defined as a situation in which a parliament acting in the

national interest prohibits cartels if all other governments do the same. For use in a theoretical

model, the term "cartel" will be defined here in the classical sense. The members of the cartel

make binding arrangements about the quantities produced and ensure that these are kept to by

including appropriate sanctions in the contract. Everybody finds these arrangements credible. No

credible quantity commitments would be possible without the cartel. The cartel may also be taken

to reflect approximately other forms of amalgamations, such as takeovers, mergers, or strategic

alliances.

        Assume that there is a limited number of identical countries over which the identical firms

are equally distributed. As in the initial model, constant average costs and linear demand curves

are assumed. Parliaments chose their competition laws so as to maximize national social welfare.

        Where the countries' borders are closed, all parliaments will prohibit cartels. As was

shown in the previous section, such a prohibition on cartels leads to a higher level of national
                                                        9

welfare than where cartels are permitted. The question is whether prohibiting cartels will also

maximize national welfare when the borders are opened and there is a common international

market for all the firms of a branch2. A positive answer to this question is necessary for the

existence of an ordo liberal equilibrium in the competition between competition rules.

        The existence of such an equilibrium can only be usefully studied when it is assumed that

setting up cartels is damaging to competition. This sounds more trivial than it really is. If the

number of firms in the international market is large enough for genuine competition to take place

despite setting up cartels in one of the countries, at least partial erosion of the antitrust laws

would not be damaging. This would be the case when, for example, the convenient, and for many

purposes permissible, assumption of a small country unable to affect the world market price

through its own actions is made. A problem worth studying only arises when in the initial

situation there are already sufficiently few firms for expecting that establishing a cartel of the

firms in one country will have a significant influence on the price level. This is the ease that will

be considered in what follows.



Stackelberg position through lifting the prohi bition on cartels

The model initially used is sufficient for analyzing the strategic situation of the supervisory

authorities and/or the legislators in a systems competition. It is assumed that n firms are equally

distributed over z countries between which free trade in goods is allowed. The first m firms are

located in various countries where the ordo liberal economic policies are in place. The remaining




2
 In what follows, national welfare will be defined as the sum of national profits and consumer surpluses. Little
would change in the following model when it is assumed that the national parliament maximizes the profits of the
domestic firms rather than the national welfare, which Olson's (1965) theory of the political dominance of the
producers interests would imply.
                                                       10


n— m     firms may belong to a certain country, which we will call "Germany", which is

considering lifting the prohibition on cartels.

        If Germany lifts its ban on cartels, it creates a starting advantage for the German firms.

The starting advantage comes from their now being able to credibly set their production capacity

by means of a reciprocal cartel agreement, so that the firms in the other countries are now only

able to adapt as best they can. In this case the government helps the German firms to occupy the

position of a Stackelberg leader, while the firms in the other countries are prevented from setting

their own quantities by the cartel prohibition. The Stackelberg leader knows how its rivals would

react to its own behavior and uses this knowledge to arrive at the best possible, profit

maximizing, decision. Unlike in the Cournot-Nash model, where all the players are in

symmetrical positions, the leader does not assume that it must adapt to the quantity set by the

others. It knows that it can confront the others with its own production capacity and, to this

extent, present them with a fait accompli,

        The behavior of the firms in the other countries which can only react must be examined

next in order to determine the optimal policy of the Stackelberg leader. This behavior will be

determined by the rules set out in the previous section, i.e. by condition (2). Now, though, the

aggregate amount of sales, which according to equation (1) determines the product price, is given

by

(5)                     X=X/?+X(
where

                               II,                tI

(6)                     Xl? x, and X(.
                              /=1
                                                  Ill


are the total quantities supplied. Here G stands for Germany and R stands for the rest of the

countries. Using (1), it follows from (2) that the supply of an individual firm which is located in

the other countries is determined by the equation



(7)                    x,=K—X Vi=1,...,m.


The gap between the total supply and the competitive quantity is thus just equal to the supply of

the individual firm which behaves as a Cournot-Nash adapter. Given the quantity supplied by all

the other firms, the individual firm can still vary the total supply within a certain range up to the

competitive quantity. As it is faced with a decision problem like that of a monopolist it will cover

half of this range with its supply, that is, it will leave a gap between the total quantity and the

competitive quantity equal to the quantity it supplies itself

       Summing all m equations of type (7), and taking (5) and (6) into account, gives the total

supply of the firms (which are not in cartels) in the rest of the countries, formally like in (4), as




(8)                             Xj?=11(K—XG)



This reacts negatively to the quantity supplied chosen by the German cartel and covers a fixed


share, ii[I + l9 of the difference between the competitive supply and the German supply.

Knowing this reaction pattern, the German cartel can choose its quantity X(1 so as to maximize

its profits. The decision problem of the German cartel is
                                                         12




 (9)                    max P(X)X(. — cX(


                       subject to (5) and (8).



Applying the demand function (1), (9) becomes



                                                 1               m
                       max bK + c — bX.                  —   b       K X(. — cX(..
                         x(.                 1+m                 1+m )


From the first order condition of this optimization problem it follows that




(10)




which means that the German cartel provides half the competitive quantity just as a monopolist

does. The firms of the rest of the world, which are not in a cartel, comply with rule (8), and thus.

because of(10), supply a quantity given by



                                   1   K
                       1?      1


                               m

The total quantity supplied is



                                                     1
(11)                               X X(; + Xi?                                (Stackelberg).
                                                     1+ni 2
                                                        13




National Welfare Gain

Taking a Stackelberg position can increase the "German" profits and the "German" welfare but

it does not have to. Because of the revealed preference theorem, the profits increase when the

quantity sold changes compared to the Cournot game. And the consumer surplus obviously only

rises when the price falls and this requires there to be higher total sales. When taking a

Stackelberg position results in the same aggregate quantity sold as in the case where the antitrust

laws are retained, then neither German profits nor German welfare change3. When the aggregate

quantity sold falls, the German profits increase but the consumer surplus falls. Only when the

quantity sold increases when a cartel is established can an increase in both the profits of the

German firms and the German consumer surplus be expected, providing strong incentives for the

German legislator to abolish the antitrust law.

        The change in the quantity sold as a result of establishing a cartel is the net effect of two

counteracting forces. On the one hand, the cartelization of the German firms leads to a reduction

in the number of competitors in the international market and this tends to reduce the quantity

sold. This effect is similar to the one that makes it wise not to permit cartelization in a closed

economy. On the other hand, in an open economy, the Stackelberg leader may be able to expand

sales at the expense of his rivals, increasing the aggregate quantity sold. This effect resembles

the one emphasized by the strategic trade literature4. If there were sufficiently many German

firms initially relative to the number of firms in the rest of the world, the first effect would

dominate, and the aggregate quantity sold would fall. If, on the contrary, there was only one


 The profits and the welfare of the other countries also remain constant.
                                                  14


German firm initially, and if this firm was now able to position itself ahead of the other firms,

that is, to change from a Cournot- Nash player to a Stackelberg player, there would certainly be

an increase in the aggregate quantity. In which direction the quantity supplied will change when

the number of German firms is between the two extremes is not obvious.

        Letting XA stand for the quantity sold which results when all antitrust laws are in force and

X stand for the quantity which, in the case of the Stackelberg game, results from abolishing the

German antitrust law, then, after a little transformation,




(12)
                         xv{}xArn+l{}n_rn


follows from (4) and (11). The result says that establishing a cartel of German firms leads to an

increase in total sales, and thus to a fall in price, when the number of firms in the other countries,

rn, is larger than, or equal to, the number of German firms before the cartel was set up, n-rn. Only

when in the initial situation there are at least two more firms in Germany than there are in the rest

of the world, will the quantity sold fall and the price level rise. Because identical countries were

assumed, this case is not possible here, and of course, it is not realistic where a country like

Germany is being considered. Thus the national consumer surplus unambiguously increases as a

result of setting up the cartel. The following consequences emerge.




 See Brander and Spencer (1981).
                                                 15


Proposition 1: In autarchy each country maximizes its own welfare when it imposes an effective

antitrust regulation. However, once the borders are opened, it is in the national interest ofany

single country to repeal this regulation and make it possible for the national firms to jbrm a

cartel. Using binding quantity commitments, the cartel will take on a Stackelberg leadership

position f the other countries continue to stick to ordo liberal policies. The leadership position

results in an increase of national welfare by lowering prices and shifting profits from .foreign to

domestic pockets. Therefore, an ordo liberal equilibrium does not exist in systems competition.



Oligopoly of national cartels

The result just derived is a negative one. It says that with ordo liberal policies no equilibrium

exists in the competition between systems. It does not say that a country will be able to take on

the position of a Stackelberg leader thanks to a liberal cartel policy. It should probably be

assumed that the other countries will also get rid of their antitrust laws and allow their own firms

to form national cartels. In this case, the German cartel may not achieve the position of a

Stackelberg leader, so that the different national cartels interact again in the sense of a Cournot-

Nash equilibrium.

       The total quantity sold, will, analogously to (4), be given by the equation




               X=        K            (simultaneous deregulation in all countries)




where z is the number of national cartels or countries. Since there are fewer supplying countries

than firms, z < n, a comparison with (4) shows that such an equilibrium would be associated with
                                                  16


smaller quantities, and thus higher prices, than in the initial equilibrium where ordo liberal

policies were chosen in all countries. The welfare in every country would be smaller in a

symmetrical equilibrium than in the case of a uniform ordo liberal policy.

        If it were assumed that the countries taking part in the systems competition are

collectively rational, the prospect of getting such an equilibrium after abolishing the antitrust laws

would be off putting enough to cause them to stick with their ordo liberal policies. However, the

assumption of collective rationality is not only a long way from reality, it is also inadmissible for

the analysis of the competition between systems. Competition is an activity where the actors

exhibit individual rationality and selfish goals and where they neither make arrangements with

one another nor coordinate their actions. From this perspective, it cannot be expected that a single

country will refrain from abolishing its antitrust laws.



4. The Deregulation Race

It is not very likely, though, that the result of a systems competition in which ordo liberal policy

is generally given up can be described by a Cournot oligopoly model, because, under realistic

conditions, the repeal of the antitrust laws will occur sequentially not simultaneously. Countries

with strong powerful governments will reject the policy first, those with weak governments will

follow after a delay, and some countries will first have to overcome the impediments to a reform

of the antitrust laws even after many other countries have deregulated. In such a situation, it

counts to be quick in order to achieve the position of a Stackelberg leader. A country which,

thanks to rapid deregulation, is able to establish universally respected conglomerates of firms

more quickly, than other countries can, has created facts which the firms of all successive

countries must take into account in planning their own capacities. Speed is important. First come,
                                                     17


first served — but those who come second or third may still be better off than those who come

even later because they, too, can create unalterable facts for the latecomers. The later you come,

the more ground is already occupied and the smaller the position that you must be content with. A

deregulation race starts because the starting position will decide long term success.



A sub-game perfect equilibrium

The order in which the countries' governments make the decision about repealing the national

antitrust law depends on national features which are not considered here and, indeed, it is not

important to do this. What is important is to know how the parliaments decide when it is their

turn and how the private firms behave as a result. The parliament has three choices.

-   It may repeal its antitrust law immediately.

- It may repeal its antitrust law later, after other parliaments have done so.

- It may decide never to repeal its antitrust law.

         Firms also have similar decision opportunities, because setting up a cartel is a right, but

not a duty. If the national antitrust law is not repealed (and possibly before it is repealed), the

firms in the country are not in a position to make binding quantity agreements and thus they

behave like Cournot-Nash competitors, adapting themselves to the quantities fixed by the

national cartels of the other countries. Once the national antitrust law is repealed, the firms of a

country

- may immediately build a national cartel,

- may decide to build such a cartel later or

- decide   not to cartelize at all.
                                                  18


        As assumed above, all countries are the same size and have the same number of firms in,

in    2, with the same constant average and marginal cost c. The buyers are distributed equally

over all countries.

         A deductive solution to the game structure just described is extremely difficult because

of the large number of possible decisions. Another method will therefore be used here. We start

with a conjecture about the behavior of the parliaments and firms (a), continue with a recursive

calculation of the details of the game among the firms which results from the parliaments'

conjectured decisions (b), and conclude with the proof that no parliament can make its country,

and no firm can make its owners, better off when they make policy decisions different from those

conjectured (c).



(a) The conjecture is that each national parliament uses its scope for decision making to repeal

the antitrust law as soon as the chance arises and as long as there is at least one other parliament

that has not yet decided to repeal the law. The repeal makes it possible for the national firms to

establish cartels and to credibly set the quantities they sell in advance of other firms in order to

shift profits to their own pockets. It is conjectured that only the parliament that is the last to

decide does not repeal, because by doing so it will not bring about a profit transfer but only a

reduction in the consumer surplus. It is also conjectured that the firms immediately use the right

to establish a national cartel as soon as their parliament allows them to.



(b) In order to analyze the behavior of the firms in detail, given the conjectured behavior of the

parliaments, the decision situation of the players must be looked at recursively. Technically

speaking, the task is finding a sub-game perfect solution for the quantity planning of the firms.
                                                 19


The players are the firms of the z countries. The countries will be numbered in reverse order of

their decision to repeal the national antitrust law, where the last country, which is conjectured to

retain the law, will be number 1. The last country will produce the quantity x1, the second last x7,

the third last x3, and so on. The total quantity that the i last countries produce is X and the total

quantity that the z-i previous countries produce is X.

       For the moment, it will still be assumed, in accordance with the conjecture described, that

the firms use the right to form a cartel as soon as they are allowed to. At the moment, it is not a

question of whether they will use it, but how they use it when they do.

       The firms of the last country, I, are confronted with fixed quantity X', X <K given

by the earlier players, where K is once again the competitive quantity, that is, the quantity at

which the international demand curve cuts the horizontal marginal cost curve. The firms in

country 1 play a Cournot-Nash game because of the cartel ban and thus choose, analogously to

(8), the aggregate quantity




(Ii)                     1

                       Xl?    xl=   1
                                        1
                                            (K—XA )
                                    m




where m is now the number of firms in country 1. The second last country, 2, has, as conjectured,

a cartel which is confronted with the given aggregate quantity chosen by the previous cartels

X, X2 X. The cartel knows from (13) and



(14)                   X'      x, + X2
                                                  20

that it can influence the quantity chosen by the firms of country 1. It solves the maximizing

problem




                        maxP(X)x2—cx,, X=Xh+x2+X22

                        subject to (13) and given XfJ



Because of(l) and (14)




(15)                    x2




follows from this, which then determines




(16)                    Xx,+Xh.

The cartel of the third last country is faced with the fixed quantity Xj3 , X3   X given by the
z— 3   earlier cartels and knows from (13), (15) and




                        x-2     x3   +



how it can influence the behavior of the succeeding countries with its quantity decision. It solves

the maximization problem
                                                 21



                       maxP(X).x3 —cx3, X=X +x3 +X

                       subject to (13) and (15) given X3



which, because of(1), (15) and (16), determines




(17)




and therefore also




The chain of decisions continues in a similar fashion. The cartel of the i-th last country solves the

problem



                       max P(X).x1—cx1, X=X'+x1+X'


once again subject to the solutions for all succeeding countries and given the decisions of all

preceding ones as summarized by X'. It chooses the quantity




(18)




which determines
                                                 22




This formula also holds for the cartel of the first country, i=z, where, of course,




                        xi =0.


The simple decision rule in such a sub-game perfect equilibrium is that country i covers with its

production half the range K —    X' between the competitive level and the quantity given by the
previous cartels. This decision rule can once again be understood by comparing it with the profit

maximizing decision rule of a monopolist. The monopolist, too, supplies exactly half of the range

available to him when the demand curve is linear. The difference from the monopoly case is only

that the range no longer starts at zero but at the quantity given by the previous cartels, and that the

perceived demand curve is flatter because it also takes account of the fact that the cartel can partly

drive out the quantities of the following countries if it decides to expand its own quantity. As the

slope of the perceived demand curve, given the competitive quantity K where the demand curve

intersects the marginal cost curve, has no influence on the quantity planning, the number of

countries that follow plays no role for a particular cartel's decision. In every case, it will itself

cover half of the range still open to it.

        Country 1 is the only exception to the rule that the quantity supplied is exactly half the

still available range up to the competitive quantity because no cartel will be set up in that country.

The oligopoly of the in firms in this country also covers a fixed share of the range K — X1, but

this share is in/(l+m) which, because m 2, is more than 1/2 (         at   least 2/3). Interestingly, the
                                                   nfl
                                                   Li

number of firms in this country has no influence on the prior cartels although the total sales

quantity is an increasing, and the product price is a falling, function of this number. An increase

in the number of firms in country 1 would only make the perceived demand curves of the prior

cartels flatter, but it would not influence those cartels' profit maximizing quantities. Even if

country 1 permitted a monopolistic policy with m =1, this would have no influence on the

quantity planning of the previous cartels. This can be easily seen as x2, x3 andx in (15), (17) and

(18) are independent of m



(c) It is now time to prove that the conjectured behavior of the national parliaments and firms

does actually maximize their national welfare. Consider the parliaments first. There are, in

principle, three options open to the parliament of a particular country at the exogenously fixed

time of decision. It can repeal the antitrust law. It can decide to enter the time hierarchy after a

country that comes later and then repeal the law. And it can refrain from repealing the law at all.

For the moment, it is still assumed that the firms use the right to set up a cartel as soon as they are

allowed to.

        Let us begin once more with the parliament which decides last. This parliament does not

have the three options, because there is no other parliament whose decision it can wait for. It can

only choose between repealing and retaining its antitrust law, It was conjectured that it retains

the antitrust law.

        Suppose, to the contrary, that the law is repealed. In this case the firms in the country set

up a cartel and decide as a monopolist would in relation to the remaining range, that is, they fix a

           /                              m    /                  ,           .   ,
 quantity —K —
           2
                     X
                     £   ) rather than   1+m
                                                   —
                                                       X:1   ). This means a price increase, A F, which

 lowers the country's consumer surplus and increases its profits. The key question for the
                                                   24


parliament is which effect predominates. Only if the former does, such that there is a net welfare

 loss, will our conjecture that the country does not repeal its antitrust law be correct.

        For the size of the loss of consumer surplus, AV,




(19)
                         AV>.1[X+I(K_X)]

holds as can easily be concluded, since the share liz of the consumers lives in country 1 and since

the right hand side of (19) contains the part of the loss of consumer surplus that results from the

price increase with a given quantity, but not the part that results from a fall in quantity with a

given price. Considering that the optimal decision rule of the cartels according to (18) implies




(20)




it follows from (19), after a little transformation, that




(21)
                        AV>AP.IK[l__LJ


On the other hand, taking (20) into account, the estimation




(22)                    AG<AP.I(K-X)=
                            2
                                      AP1K
                                        22
                                                 25




 holds for the increase in the firms' profits, A G, because the right hand side of (22) only covers

 the profit increasing effect of a price increase with given quantity, and not the profit reducing

 effect that results from a reduction in quantity with a given price. It obviously follows from (21)

and (22) that AV>AG, when




                AP—KIl-—>
                  z
                          •—K
                               2z)      2

or, what amounts to the same thing, when



                          2z >l+z.

Since this condition is satisfied for all z2 it is clear that country I will, as assumed, really not

repeal its antitrust law. The repeal would increase the profits but would lower the sum of the

national consumer and producer rents.

       Next, whether country 2 could improve its position by choosing a different policy must be

examined. Let us first consider the case where it retains its antitrust law while country 1 does so,

too. In this case, country 2 is clearly worse off than when it repeals its antitrust law. It is

sufficient here to outline the proof because the result can be derived analogously toProposition 1.

In the case of a cartel ban, the firms of country 1 and country 2 are in thesame situation as the n

firms in the whole economy which was considered when deriving this proposition. The
                                                                                    only

difference is that the range available to the firms is narrowed by the quantity X2 already given.

Taking into account that 2m rather than n firms take part in the Cournot game, it is found

analogously to (4) that
                                                   26




                             =
                                       (K_X2)                                   (Cournot)
                                 2m



 and, analogously to (11), it can be worked out for the case where country 2 is the Stackelberg

leader that




                            = 1 + 2m.I(
                                 1+m 2     _X2)                                 (Stackelberg).




Analogously to (12), it is immediately obvious from the comparison of the two magnitudes that

the last two countries taken together produce a bigger quantity with the Stackelberg solution and,

because of the revealed preference theorem, this indicates both a higher profit and a higher

consumer surplus for country 2. Country 2 will therefore not renounce its Stackelberg position

when it believes that country 1 will continue to play a Cournot game.

        A fortiori, country 2 will not renounce its Stackelberg position when doing so would lead

to country 1 preceding it and taking the Stackelberg position itself Since the Stackelberg leader

chooses a higher quantity and makes a larger profit than its followers and since the change of

places will affect neither the aggregate quantity supplied nor the price the consumers have to pay.

it certainly never pays to leave the leadership position to another country. Country 2 will thus

also behave as conjectured, that is, it will repeal its antitrust law when it can do so.

       Let us now look at country 3, which is the country that can decide before country 2. Its

situation is clear. If it does not use its opportunity to decide and repeals its antitrust law so late
                                                 27


that country 2 precedes it, its firms experience a reduction in profits. Changing places does not

alter the aggregate quantity supplied, the sales price or the consumer surplus. However, it cuts

the sales quantity and the profit of the domestic firms in half. If the country does not repeal its

antitrust law at all, it slips behind even country 1. Country 2 will now behave as country 3 would

otherwise have, and country 1 as country 2 would have, thus taking a Stackelberg position in

relation to country 3. Because, as was shown, country 2 would lose if it changed places with

country 1 by not repealing its antitrust law, country 3 would lose a fortiori . Country 3. too, will

therefore repeal its antitrust law as quickly as possible and use the decision opportunity it has

been offered.

        The conclusion we can infer for country 4 and the countries which are able to decide even

 earlier is obvious. Each individual country will behave exactly as conjectured in (a) because any

 other economic policy would lead to lower national welfare.

        Finally the conjecture that firms cartelize as soon as they can has to be proved. This is

 trivial since the firms' decision possibilities, given the decisions of their parliaments, are similar

 to the three decision possibilities of the parliaments. The firms can set up the cartel, they can

 postpone the decision to set up the cartel until after the establishment of another cartel, or they

 can choose not to set up a cartel at all. As postponing and doing without a cartel, would, as just

 shown, reduce profits, the firms in each country will set up a cartel as soon as the national

 antitrust law is repealed.



  Proposition 2: The competition between competition rules is a race to repeal the national

  antitrust law as quickly as possible. The aim is to give the own economy a lead in achieving an

  early Stackelberg position, which it then exploits, as soon as it is allowed to. The quantity sold
                                                28

and the prqfit of the firms are smaller the later in the succession Icountries this country decides

to repeal its antitrust law. All countries except the last one repeal their antitrust laws. The lasi

country retains its law and thus forces its firms to behave like Cournot-Nash players. The

deregulation race between the national parliaments just described is a sub-game perfect

equilibrium in systems competition.



5. An Uncomfortable Proposition

The result derived confirms the judgement that once the borders between countries are opened

and competition between competition rules starts the day of ordo liberalism is over. The question

now is how is this result to be judged in allocative terms? Intuitively one would tend to reach a

negative judgement, because "cartelizing        the national markets" does not sound exactly

confidence inspiring. But semantics may not lead very far.

       It follows from (13) that the range K—X1 which the z-1 first countries leave for the last

country, will be covered by that country's own production with the share in! (1+iii). The share of

this range not covered is therefore 1/(1+m). Moreover it follows from (20) that the range, which

the first z-1 countries leave for the last country, itself has a share of the competitive quantity K

equal to l/2z'. Taking these pieces of information together shows that in the deregulation race

the gap between the competitive quantity and the actual production is




                       K—X
                                 K      1
(23)                                                                        (deregulation race).
                                2 1+m
                               =—----
                                                29


        The cartelization of the market made possible by the deregulation race can be prevented

either by harmonizing the regulation policies of all the individual countries or by creating a single

antitrust authority which covers all the countries. Such measures would force the firms in all

countries to behave in a Cournot-Nash manner, and, in accordance with (4), there would then be a

gap between the competitive quantity and total production equal to



                                     K
(24)                    K—   X=                      (cartel ban covering all countries)
                                  zm+l


where the number of firms n is replaced by the product of the number of countries and the

number of firms per country.

       It obviously follows from (23) and (24) that total sales with the deregulation race are

larger than with the overall cartel ban, if




                        2(l+ m)> 1+zm


or, which comes to the same thing, if




                               > in(z —2)


This inequality will obviously hold when there are at least two countries and at least two firms

per country as was assumed. The following result is therefore obvious.
                                                 30


Proposition 3: The deregulation race, which leads to a sequential repeal of the antitrust laws of

the individual countries, and which allows these countries' firms to set up national cartels,

results in higher total sales, lower prices, a higher consumer surplus and lower firm profits than

would be expected in the case of a cartel ban covering all countries.



        Surprisingly, an all clear is appropriate for the allocation problem. Paradoxical and

uncomfortable as it may sound, a deregulation race that results in the cartelization of the national

markets does not threaten to be at the expense of the consumers or to lower the welfare of all

countries combined. On the contrary, at least in the symmetrical case of equally sized countries,

the deregulation race has a very positive effect from an allocative point of view.

       This does not mean that the race for the starting position does not create problems. One of

the most serious of these is the very different distribution of profits which occurs in equilibrium.

The disadvantaged industries will find it difficult to accept the unequal distribution and will

attempt to achieve an equal distribution by means of centralized policy measures. The falling

aggregate sum of profits will also lend support to such a policy measure.

       One of the measures to achieve an equal profit distribution would be the establishment of

an international antitrust board, preventing the single countries from taking on Stackelberg

leadership positions. Another one would be an international agreement to build one big cartel

covering all countries coupled with a sharing rule for the profits. However, all of this would

violate our basic assumption that governments are welfare maximizers. Welfare maximizing

governments would not agree to such centralized policy measures.
                                                  31




6. Reconsideration of Regulation Policy

Europe is now at a new establishment stage in which new conglomerates of firms will be set up in

a big way in order to be prepared for an economy without borders. This applies particularly to

branches like banking and finance, for which a large European market where homogeneous

banking services can be supplied in the various countries has been created abruptly with the

introduction of the euro. But very many other branches will be affected too and will be

reorganized in order to get a good starting position in the new common market. In this situation

the interest in mergers is scarcely controllable and the national monopoly authorities and the

legislators will be under enormous pressure to liberalize the antitrust laws.

        In fact, it is in the national interest to plan for more liberal antitrust laws than there could

have been in the old national states. A country which allows cartels to be set up by its own firms

while all other countries continue to carry out ordo liberal economic policies can place itself in an

absolutely better position. It paves the way for credible quantity agreements in cartel contracts

which the firms can exploit as Stackelberg leaders. The result is a shift of profits from foreign to

domestic firms which does not hurt the national consumers. An equilibrium in the competition

between systems where all countries continue to carry out traditional antitrust policies in their

own interest can thus scarcely exist.

        It is more likely that there will be a deregulation race in which each country tries to create

the best possible starting position for its firms in the new Europe by repealing its antitrust law. In

that event, the deregulation race will lead to a cartelization of the national markets.

        Such a cartclization is, however, more a problem for the distribution of profits than an

allocative worry that would endanger the provision of the European consumers. It is possible, if
                                                  '1
                                                  3


not likely, that a race for the starting position will result in an increase of aggregate supply,

falling prices and falling profits. Looked at in this way, a verdict about whether a competition

between competitive rules is workable would be premature. This competition leads to an erosion

of these regulatory systems, but this may be less bad than it appears at first.

       This paper is highly theoretical and should be seen as a stimulus for further debates rather

than a balanced judgement on the future of ordo liberalism. It must be left to future scientific

discussions to show whether there are other models which confirm the pessimistic prejudice of

the ordo liberal economist. A critical judgement about the competition between systems would

have to be made if, instead of the race for starting positions modeled here, there were to be a

concerted loosening of the European antitrust laws, because then a classical oligopoly with a

smaller number of participants might be established. It is not clear what the national interest

would consist of with this solution, and, incidentally, because of the international arrangements,

this situation could hardly be called a systems competition.
                                              33




                                        References



Brander, S.A, and B.J. Spencer (1981): "Tariffs and the Extraction of Foreign Monopoly Rents
      under Potential Entry," Canadian Journal of Economics 14, 37 1-389.

Kreps, D.M., and J.A. Scheinkman (1983): "Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand
       Competition Yield Cournot Outcomes," Bell Journal of Economics 14. 326-33 7.

Olson, M. (1965): The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press: Cambridge MA.
</ref_section>
