NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE STABILITY AS A TARGET
FOR MONETARY POLICY:
DEFINING AND MAINTAINING
PRICE STABILITY
Lars E.O. Svensson
Working Paper 7276
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7276

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

This paper was presented at the Bundesbank conference on “The Monetary Transmission Process: Recent
Developments and Lessons for Europe,” March 26–27, 1999. I thank the discussants Mervyn King and José
Viñals, and Claes Berg, Donald Brash, John Faust, Torsten Persson, Anders Vredin and participants in
seminars at IIES and Sveriges Riksbank for comments. Special thanks are due to Jon Faust and Dale
Henderson. Over the years, I have benefited a great deal from many discussions with them on monetary policy
and from their very constructive (sometimes relentless) criticism of previous work of mine. Dale has also
directed me to an early, very relevant, literature. I also thank Christina Lönnblad for editorial and secretarial
assistance and Marcus Salomonsson for research assistance. Needless to say, the views expressed and any
errors are my own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Lars E.O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Price Stability as a Target for Monetary Policy:

Defining and Maintaining Price Stability
Lars E.O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 7276
August 1999
JEL No. E42, E52, E58
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses how price stability can be defined and how price stability can be
maintained in practice. Some lessons for the Eurosystem are also considered.
With regard to defining price stability, the choice between price-level stability and low
(including zero) inflation and the decisions about the price index, the quantitative target and the role
of output stabilization are examined. With regard to maintaining price stability, three main alternatives
are considered, namely a commitment to a simple instrument rule (like a Taylor rule), forecast
targeting (like inflation-forecast targeting) and intermediate targeting (like money-growth targeting).
A simple instrument rule does not provide a substitute for a systematic framework for monetary
policy decisions. Such a framework is instead provided by forecast targeting. Forecast targeting can
incorporate judgmental adjustments, extra-model information, and different indicators (including
indicators of “risks to price stability”). By extending mean forecast targeting to distribution forecast
targeting, nonlinearity, nonadditive uncertainty and model uncertainty can be incorporated.
Eurosystem arguments in favor of its money-growth indicator and against inflation-forecast targeting
are scrutinized and found unconvincing.
Lars E.O. Svensson
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
and NBER
Lars.Svensson@iies.su.se

1 Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to provide an up-to-date discussion of monetary policy with “price
stability” as the primary objective. The paper discusses how price stability can be de…ned,
and how price stability can be maintained in practice. It also discusses some lessons for the
Eurosystem.
De…ning price stability involves deciding between price-level stability and low (including
zero) in‡ation, choosing the appropriate price index, and selecting the appropriate level for
a quantitative target. It also involves deciding on the role of real variables, like output, in
the objectives for monetary policy. Thus, de…ning price stability boils down to de…ning the
monetary-policy loss function.
Maintaining price stability involves meeting the objectives of price stability, that is, minimizing the monetary-policy loss function. I consider three main alternatives, namely commitment to
a simple instrument rule (for instance, a commitment to following a Taylor rule), forecast targeting (for instance, in‡ation-forecast targeting) and intermediate targeting (for instance, monetary
targeting). A sizeable part of the literature on monetary policy seems to focus on the properties
of optimal and simple reaction functions for monetary policy, like the performance of Taylor-type
reaction functions (that is, linear reaction functions responding to deviations of in‡ation from
an in‡ation target and to the output gap). This literature provides considerable insights into
the characteristics of optimal monetary policy and the properties of di¤erent reaction functions,
and thereby provides considerable guidance and benchmarks for actual monetary policy, but I
argue that a commitment to any of these reaction functions is, for several reasons, neither a
good nor a practical way of conducting monetary policy, if monetary policy is to achieve price
stability in an e¢cient way. Such commitment is not a substitute for a systematic operational
framework for policy decisions by central banks.
Instead, I believe forecast targeting provides such a systematic and operational framework.
Indeed, I believe that the current best practice of conducting real-world monetary policy can be
interpreted as the application of forecast targeting. Thus, most of this paper is a discussion of
forecast targeting. I examine its theoretical background and how, in practice, it can incorporate
judgemental adjustments and extra-model information, the role of di¤erent indicators (including
indicators of “risks to price stability”) and, in particular, how it can incorporate complications
like nonlinearity and model uncertainty.
The discussion of forecast targeting builds on Svensson [96]. The new elements include
1

a more explicit discussion of policy multipliers, judgemental adjustments, the choice between
mean, median and mode forecasts, and the role of indicators (the latter builds on Svensson and
Woodford [101]). In particular, I discuss forecast targeting under nonlinearities, nonadditive
uncertainty and model uncertainty, and the related generalization of what can be called mean
forecast targeting to distribution forecast targeting.
Intermediate targeting, in particular monetary targeting, is treated fairly brie‡y, for several
reasons. The recent interest in monetary targeting has mainly been motivated by the view that
monetary targeting is the reason behind Bundesbank’s outstanding record on in‡ation control
and the possibility that the Eurosystem would choose monetary targeting as its monetary-policy
strategy. However, with regard to whether monetary targeting lies behind Bundesbank’s success,
as discussed for instance in Svensson [98], a number of studies of Bundesbank’s monetary policy,
by both German and non-German scholars, have come to the unanimous conclusion that, in
the frequent con‡icts between stabilizing in‡ation around the in‡ation target and stabilizing
money-growth around the money-growth target, Bundesbank has consistently given priority to
the in‡ation target and disregarded the monetary target.1 Thus, Bundesbank has actually been
an in‡ation targeter in deeds and a monetary targeter in words only. Furthermore, although the
Eurosystem has adopted a money-growth indicator, it has strongly rejected monetary targeting
as a suitable strategy, on the grounds that the relation between prices and money may not be
su¢ciently stable and that the monetary aggregates with the best stability properties may not be
su¢ciently controllable (see Issing [56]). (Furthermore, an extensive and convincing discussion
some 25 years ago concluded that intermediate targeting was generally inferior (see, for instance,
Kareken, Muench and Wallace [58], Friedman [45] and Bryant [19]).)
The discussion of the lessons for the Eurosystem builds on Svensson [98]. The new elements
includes further scrutiny of Eurosystem arguments in favor of its money-growth indicator and
against in‡ation-forecast targeting.
In discussing monetary-policy strategy, as in Svensson [98], I …nd it helpful to distinguish two
of its elements, namely the framework for policy decisions and communication. By the framework for policy decisions, I mean the monetary policy procedures inside the central bank, which,
from observations of various indicators, eventually result in decisions about the central bank’s
instruments, in short, the principles for setting the instruments (which, in the Eurosystem’s
1
This litureature includes Neumann [71], von Hagen [109], Bernanke and Mihov [12], Clarida and Gertler [27],
Clarida, Gali and Gertler [25] (note a crucial typo: the coe¢cient for money supply in Table 1 should be 0.07
instead of 0.7), Laubach and Posen [63], and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen [11].

2

case, will be a two-week repurchase rate). By communication, I mean the central bank’s way
of communicating with outsiders (the general public, the …nancial market, governments, policymakers and policymaking institutions, which, in the Eurosystem’s case, includes EU institutions
and national governments and parliaments). Communication is part of the implementation of
monetary policy, in that it a¤ects the e¢ciency of monetary policy by, for instance, in‡uencing
expectations, predictability and credibility of the policy. Communication also in‡uences how
transparent policy is, which is crucial for central-bank incentives and for accountability and
arguably also for the political legitimacy of the policy.
In terms of the distinction between decision framework and communication, this paper almost
exclusively deals with the decision framework. I have extensively discussed communication
and transparency in in‡ation targeting in [90] and [96] and the same issue with regard to the
Eurosystem in [98]. The concluding section 5 includes some comments on transparency and
forecast targeting.
A large part of the monetary-policy literature uses the concept of “rules” in the narrow sense
of a prescribed reaction function for monetary policy. As in previous papers, for instance [90] and
[96], I …nd it helpful to use monetary-policy rules in a wider sense, namely as “a prescribed guide
for monetary policy.” This allows “instrument rules,” prescribed reaction functions, as well as
“targeting rules,” prescribed loss functions or prescribed conditions that the target variables (or
forecasts of the target variables) shall ful…ll.
Furthermore, (as in Cecchetti [23], for instance) “targeting” here refers to loss functions and
“target variables” refer to variables in the loss function. Thus “targeting variable Yt ” means
minimizing a loss function that is increasing in the deviation between the variable and a target
level. In contrast, in some of the literature “targeting variable Yt ” refers to a reaction function
where the instrument responds to the same deviation. As discussed in Svensson [96, section
2.4] and [94], these two meanings of “targeting variable Yt ” are not equivalent. “Responding to
variable Yt ” seems to be a more appropriate description of the latter situation.
Section 2 discusses the de…nition of price stability, section 3 discusses maintaining price
stability, section 4 discusses lessons for the Eurosystem, and section 5 presents some conclusions.

3

2 De…ning price stability
2.1 Price-level stability vs. low in‡ation
How to de…ne “price stability”? The most obvious meaning of price stability would seem to
be a stable price level, “price-level stability.” Nevertheless, in most current discussions and
formulations of monetary policy, price stability instead means a situation with low and stable
in‡ation, “low in‡ation” (including zero in‡ation). The former de…nition implies that the price
level is stationary (or at least trend-stationary). The latter de…nition implies base drift in the
price level, so that the price level will include a unit root and be non-(trend-)stationary. Indeed,
the price-level variance increases without bound with the forecast horizon. Thus, to refer to low
in‡ation as price stability is indeed something of a misnomer.
Let me refer to a monetary-policy regime as price-level targeting or in‡ation targeting, depending upon whether the goal is a stable price level or a low and stable in‡ation rate. We can
represent (strict)2 price-level targeting with an intertemporal loss function
Et

1
X

±¿ Lt+¿ ;

(2.1)

¿ =0

to be minimized, where ± (0 < ± < 1) is a discount factor and the period loss function is the
quadratic loss function

1
Lt = (pt ¡ p¤t )2 :
2

(2.2)

Here, pt denotes the (log) price level in period t and p¤t denotes the (log) price-level target. The
price-level target could be a constant or a (slowly) increasing path,
p¤t = p¤t¡1 + ¼¤ ;

(2.3)

where ¼¤ ¸ 0 is a constant (low or zero) in‡ation rate.3 Similarly, we can represent (strict)
in‡ation targeting with a period loss function given by
1
Lt = (¼t ¡ ¼¤ )2 ;
2

(2.4)

where ¼t ´ pt ¡pt¡1 denotes (the) in‡ation (rate) and ¼¤ denotes a low (or zero) in‡ation target.
Following Cecchetti [23], we can use more compact notation by representing in‡ation targeting in (2.2) by the state-dependent price-level target
p¤t = pt¡1 + ¼¤
2

(2.5)

“Strict” and “‡exible” targeting is de…ned below.
If arguments in favor of a small positive in‡ation rate is accepted, an upward-sloping price-level target path
may be preferable.
3

4

instead of (2.3), or by representing price-level targeting in (2.4) by the state-dependent in‡ation
target
¼¤t = p¤t ¡ pt¡1

(2.6)

instead of a constant ¼¤ . Hence, (2.5) illustrates the base drift in in‡ation targeting; the in‡ation
target applies from the realized price level pt¡1 rather than from the target price level p¤t¡1 .
Similarly, (2.6) illustrates that the in‡ation target becomes endogenous and time-varying under
price-level targeting.
In the real world, there are currently an increasing number of monetary-policy regimes with
explicit or implicit in‡ation targeting, but there are no regimes with explicit or implicit pricelevel targeting. Whereas the Gold Standard may be interpreted as implying implicit price-level
targeting, so far the only regime in history with explicit price-level targeting occurred in Sweden
during the 1930s (see Fisher [44] and Berg and Jonung [10]; this regime was quite successful in
avoiding de‡ation).
Even if there are no current examples of price-level targeting regimes, price-level targeting
has been subject to an increasing interest in the monetary policy literature. At the Jackson
Hole Symposium 1984, Hall [51] argued for price-level targeting. Several recent papers compare
in‡ation targeting and price-level targeting, some of which are collected in Bank of Canada
[7]. Some papers compare in‡ation and price-level targeting by simulating the e¤ect of postulated reaction functions. Other papers compare the properties of postulated simple stochastic
processes for in‡ation and the price level (see Fischer [42]). A frequent result, which has emerged
as the conventional wisdom, is that the choice between price-level targeting and in‡ation targeting involves a trade-o¤ between low-frequency price-level variability on the one hand and
high-frequency in‡ation and output variability on the other. Thus, price-level targeting has the
advantage of reduced long-term variability of the price level. This should be bene…cial for longterm nominal contracts and intertemporal decisions, but it would come at the cost of increased
short-term variability of in‡ation and output. The intuition is straightforward: In order to stabilize the price level under price-level targeting, higher-than-average in‡ation must be succeeded
by lower-than-average in‡ation. This would seem to result in higher in‡ation variability than
under in‡ation targeting, since base drift is accepted in the latter case and higher-than-average
in‡ation need only be succeeded by average in‡ation. Via nominal rigidities, the higher in‡ation
variability would then seem to result in higher output variability.4
4

An interesting issue is to what extent the degree of nominal rigidity depends on whether there is in‡ation or

5

However, this intuition may be misleadingly simple. In more realistic models of in‡ation
targeting and price-level targeting with more complicated dynamics, the relative variability of
in‡ation in the two regimes becomes an open issue. As shown in Svensson [91, appendix], this
is the case if there is serial correlation in the deviation between the target variable and the
target level; for instance, if the price level displays mean reversion towards the price-level target
under price-level targeting and in‡ation displays mean reversion towards the in‡ation target
under in‡ation targeting. Svensson [100] gives an example where the absence of a commitment
mechanism and at least moderate persistence in the Phillips curve imply that in‡ation variability becomes lower under price-level targeting than under in‡ation targeting, without output
variability becoming higher.5 For some empirical macro models (both small and large), reaction
functions with responses of the instrument to price level deviations from a price level target lead
to as good or better overall performance (in terms of in‡ation and output variances) than with
responses to in‡ation deviation from in‡ation targets.6
I believe these results show that the relative properties of price-level targeting and in‡ation
targeting are far from settled. In particular, the potential bene…ts from reduced long-term price
level variability and uncertainty are not yet well understood. Still, I believe that low and stable
in‡ation may be a su¢ciently ambitious undertaking for central banks at present. However,
once central banks have mastered in‡ation targeting, in perhaps another …ve or ten years, it
may be time to increase the ambitions and consider price-level targeting. By then, research and
experience may provide better guidance about which regime is preferable.
The rest of the paper will refer to “low in‡ation,” corresponding to (2.4), with possible
additional terms in the loss function, rather than “price-level stability,” corresponding to (2.2).
Reluctantly, I will occasionally refer to “low in‡ation” as “price stability,” even without using
quotation marks. Some of the discussion below is applicable to both price-level stability and
low in‡ation, though.
2.2 The loss function
Is (2.4) an appropriate loss function for a monetary policy aimed at low in‡ation? As reported
below, there seems to be considerable agreement among academics and central bankers that the
price-level targeting.
5
This result requires at least moderate output persistence with a Lucas-type Phillips curve, and does not
hold for a Lucas-type Phillips curve without persistence. Kiley [59] shows that the result does not hold for a
Calvo-type Phillips curve without persistence.
6
See, for instance, McCallum and Nelson [70] and Williams [113].

6

appropriate loss function is instead of the form
1
Lt = [(¼t ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¸(yt ¡ yt¤ )2 ];
2

(2.7)

where yt is (log) output, yt¤ is potential output, so that yt ¡yt¤ is the output gap, and ¸ > 0 is the
relative weight on output-gap stabilization. As in Svensson [97] and [99], the case when ¸ = 0
and only in‡ation enters the loss function, can be called strict in‡ation targeting, whereas the
case when ¸ > 0 and the output gap (or concern about stability of the real economy in general)
enters the loss function can be called ‡exible in‡ation targeting.7
Whereas there may previously have been some controversy about whether in‡ation targeting
involves concern about real variability, represented by output-gap variability and corresponding
to the second term in (2.7), there is now considerable agreement in the literature that this is
indeed the case. In‡ation targeting central banks are not what King [62] called an “in‡ation
nutter.” For instance, Fischer [43], King [61], Taylor [103] and Svensson [89] in Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City [39] all discuss in‡ation targeting with reference to a loss function of
the form (2.7) with ¸ > 0. As shown in Svensson [90] and Ball [5], concern about outputgap stability translates into a more gradualist policy. Thus, if in‡ation moves away from the
in‡ation target, it is brought back to target more gradually. Equivalently, in‡ation-targeting
central banks lengthen their horizon and aim at meeting the in‡ation target further in the future.
As further discussed in Svensson [97], concerns about output-gap stability, simple forms of
model uncertainty, and interest rate smoothing all have similar e¤ects under in‡ation targeting,
namely a more gradualist policy. Sveriges Riksbank has explicitly expressed very similar views.8
The Chancellor’s remit to Bank of England [54] mentions “undesired volatility of output.”9
The Minutes from Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee [8] are also explicit about
stabilizing the output gap.10 Several contributions and discussions by central bankers and
academics in Lowe [68] express similar views. Ball [6] and Svensson [93] give examples of a
gradualist approach of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Indeed, a quote from the ECB [37,
p. 47] also gives some support for an interpretation with ¸ > 0, as well as some weight on
minimizing interest rate variability:
7

As in‡ation-targeting central banks, like other central banks, also seem to smooth instruments, the loss
function (2.7) may also includes the term ¹(it ¡ it¡1 )2 with ¹ > 0.
8
See box on p. 26 in Sveriges Riksbank [102] as well as Heikensten and Vredin [53].
9
“...actual in‡ation will on occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances. Attempts
to keep in‡ation at the in‡ation target in these circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output.”
10
See Bank of England [8], para. 40: “... [I]n any given circumstances, a variety of di¤erent interest rate paths
could in principle achieve the in‡ation target. What factors were relevant to the preferred pro…le of rates?...
There was a broad consensus that the Committee should in principle be concerned about deviations of the level
of output from capacity.”

7

“... a medium-term orientation of monetary policy is important in order to permit a
gradualist and measured response [to some threats to price stability]. Such a central
bank response will not introduce unnecessary and possibly self-sustaining uncertainty
into short-term interest rates or the real economy...”
Thus, it is seems noncontroversial that real-world in‡ation targeting is actually ‡exible in‡ation
targeting, corresponding to ¸ > 0 in (2.7).
The loss function (2.7) highlights an asymmetry between in‡ation and output under in‡ation
targeting. There is both a level goal and a stability goal for in‡ation, and the level goal, that is,
the in‡ation target, is subject to choice. For output, there is only a stability goal and no level
goal. Or, to put it di¤erently, the level goal is not subject to choice; it is given by potential
output. Therefore, I believe it is appropriate to label minimizing (2.7) as “(‡exible) in‡ation
targeting” rather than “in‡ation-and-output-gap targeting,” especially since the label is already
used for the monetary policy regimes in New Zealand, Canada, U.K., Sweden and Australia.
2.3 What index and which level?
Which price index would be most appropriate? Stabilizing the CPI should simplify consumer’s
economic calculations and decisions. The CPI has the advantage of being easily understood,
frequently published, published by authorities separate from central banks, and very rarely revised. Interest-related costs cause well-known problems with the CPI, though: An interest-rate
increase to lower in‡ation has a perverse short-term e¤ect in increasing in‡ation. It makes sense
to disregard this short-term e¤ect in monetary-policy decisions, but it still presents a pedagogical problem in the central bank’s communication with the general public. To avoid this problem,
Bank of England and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand have in‡ation targets de…ned in terms of
CPIX (RPIX in Britain), the CPI less interest-related costs.11 The Eurosystem has also de…ned
price stability in terms of the HICP, which excludes interest costs. Furthermore, changes in indirect taxes and subsidies can have considerable short-run e¤ects on the CPI. Di¤erent measures
of underlying in‡ation, core in‡ation, try to eliminate such e¤ects. Eliminating components
over which monetary policy has little or no in‡uence serves to avoid misleading impressions
of the degree of control. The disadvantage with subtracting too many components from the
index used for the in‡ation target is that the index becomes more remote from what matters to
consumers and less transparent to the general public. It may also be di¢cult to compute in a
11
The Reserve Bank’s target was previously de…ned in terms of a somewhat complex underlying in‡ation rate.
In the Policy Target Agreement of December 1997, there was a change to the more transparent CPIX .

8

well-de…ned and transparent way. Opinions generally di¤er on what components to deduct from
the CPI. My own view is that deducting interest-related costs and using CPIX, together with
transparent explanation of index movements caused by changes in indirect taxes and subsidies,
is an appropriate compromise for making the index an operational target for monetary policy.
What level of the in‡ation target is appropriate? Although zero in‡ation would seem to be
a natural focal point, all countries with in‡ation targets have selected positive in‡ation targets.
The in‡ation targets (point targets or midpoints of the target range) ranging between 1.5 percent
(per year) in New Zealand, 2 percent in Canada, Sweden and Finland (before joining the EMU),
and 2.5 percent in the United Kingdom and Australia (the Reserve Bank of Australia has an
in‡ation target in the range 2–3 percent for average in‡ation over an unspeci…ed business cycle).
The Bundesbank had a 2 percent in‡ation target for many years (called “unavoidable in‡ation,”
“price norm,” or “medium-term price assumption”). During 1997 and 1998, it was lowered to
1.5–2 percent (which could perhaps be translated into a point in‡ation target of 1.75 percent).
EMI [38] de…ned price stability as 0–2 percent. The Eurosystem has announced “annual increases
in the HICP below 2 percent” as its de…nition of price stability, which has been interpreted as
the intervals 0–2 percent or 1–2 percent; the Eurosystem used a point in‡ation target of 1.5
percent in constructing its reference value for money growth. The Eurosystem’s de…nition of
price stability is further scrutinized in section 4.1.
That the in‡ation target exceeds zero can be motivated by measurement bias, nonnegative
nominal interest rates and possible downward nominal price and wage rigidities.12 Two percent
is the borderline in Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1], who study the e¤ects of downward rigidity of
nominal wages. One percent is the borderline in Orphanides and Wieland [74], who examine the
consequences of non-negative nominal interest rates. These studies indicate that in‡ation targets
below those borderlines risk reducing average output or increasing average unemployment.13
Altogether, announcing an explicit in‡ation target (a point target or a range) may be more
important than whether the target (the midpoint of the range) is 1.5, 2 or 2.5 percent.
A symmetric in‡ation target implies that in‡ation below the target is considered equally
12
On the other hand, the argument that in‡ation increases capital-market distortions, examined in Feldstein
[40] and [41], would, under the assumption of unchanged nominal taxation of capital, motivate a zero or even a
negative in‡ation target.
13
For reasons explained in Gordon [48], I believe that Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1] reach too pessimistic
a conclusion. On the other hand, their data is from the United States and Canada, and downward nominal
wage rigidity may be more relevant in Europe. The conclusions of Orphanides and Wieland [74] are sensitive
to assumptions about the size of shocks and the average real interest rate; the latter is taken to be 1 percent
for the United States. If the average real rate is higher in Europe, and the shocks not much larger than in the
United States, nonnegative interest rates may be of less consequence in Europe. Wolman [115] and [114] provides
a rigorous examination of the consequences of nonnegative interest rates in a more explicit model, and …nds
relatively small e¤ects.

9

bad as in‡ation the same distance above the target (which is the case if in‡ation targeting is
represented by a symmetric loss function like (2.7)). This would seem to be a precondition for
in‡ation expectations being focused on the in‡ation target. A point target with or without a
tolerance interval would, from this point of view, be better than just a range. A range would, in
turn, be better than an asymmetric formulation like “below 2 percent.” These aspects may be
particularly important when persistent de‡ation is a possibility, of which recent developments
in Japan remind us. A symmetric in‡ation target would seem to be the best defence against
persistent de‡ation and against the appearance of de‡ationary expectations.
Interestingly, a price-level target may have special advantages relative to an in‡ation target
in avoiding persistent de‡ation, since an unanticipated de‡ation which makes the price level fall
below the price-level target will, if the price-level target is credible, result in increased in‡ation
expectations that will, in themselves, reduce the real interest rate and stabilize the economy.14

3 Maintaining price stability
The basic problem of maintaining price stability is thus to set the monetary policy instrument
(or instruments) so as to minimize the intertemporal loss function (2.1) with the period loss
function (2.7), subject to current information about the current and future state of the economy
and the transmission mechanism.
The transmission mechanism is taken to be represented by a linear model on state-space
form

2
4

Xt+1
xt+1jt

3

2

5 = A4

Xt
xt

3

2

5 + Bit + 4

ut+1
0

3
5;

(3.1)

where Xt = (¼t ; yt ; yt¤ ; ::; 1)0 (where 0 denotes transpose) is a column vector of nX predetermined
variables (also called state variables), xt is a column vector of nx forward-looking variables (also
called non-predetermined variables), it is a column vector of ni central bank instruments (also
called control variables), ut+1 is a column vector of nX exogenous iid shocks with zero means
and a constant covariance matrix §uu , and A and B are matrices of appropriate dimensions.
The predetermined variables include in‡ation, output, potential output, and other variables. I
use the convention that the last element of the vector of predetermined variables is unity. This
is a convenient way of allowing non-zero means of the variables; the last column of A is then a
function of these means.
14
Also, Wolman [115] …nds that a reaction function responding to price-level deviations from a price-level
target (rather than in‡ation deviation from an in‡ation target) has good properties for low in‡ation rates.

10

Although the framework is general enough for handling multiple monetary policy instruments, I will, realistically, assume that there is only one instrument (ni = 1) and take that
instrument to be a short nominal interest rate (for instance, an overnight interest rate or a oneor two-week repurchase rate).
The expression xt+1jt denotes Et xt+1 , the expectation of xt+1 conditional upon all information available in period t, including any information about the state of the economy and the
model of the economy. The forward-looking variables include asset prices, like exchange rates
and interest rates of longer maturity than the instrument, and other variables partially or fully
determined by the expectations of future variables.
Thus, at this stage I assume that there are no nonlinearities in the transmission mechanism
(or that shocks and deviations from a steady state are moderate so a linear approximation
is acceptable). Furthermore, I make the assumption that the model is known, that the central
bank and the private sector have the same information, and that the predetermined and forwardlooking variables in period t are observable in period t. I will discuss generalizations of those
assumptions below.
A more general representation of the monetary-policy loss function is to let Yt denote a
column vector of nY target variables, given by
3
2
Xt
5 + Ci it ;
Yt ´ C 4
xt
where C and Ci are matrices of appropriate dimension. Let Y ¤ denote the column vector of nY
target levels, and let the period loss function be
Lt = (Yt ¡ Y ¤ )0 W (Yt ¡ Y ¤ );
where W is positive-semide…nite weight matrix. The period loss function (2.7) is a special case
of this more general loss function, where the target variables are given by Yt ´ (¼t ; yt ¡ yt¤ )0 , the
target levels by Y ¤ ´ (¼¤ ; 0) and the weight matrix W is a diagonal matrix with the diagonal
(1=2; ¸=2).
Given this representation of the loss function and the transmission mechanism, the problem
is now to …nd the principles for setting the instrument it in each period t. I will consider two
such main principles, …rst what can be called “commitment to an instrument rule” or “interestrate targeting” in section 3.1, and then “forecast targeting” in section 3.2. A third principle,

11

“intermediate-variable targeting,” especially monetary targeting, is brie‡y considered in section
3.5.
3.1 Commitment to a simple instrument rule: Interest-rate targeting
Make the unrealistic assumption that the central bank can commit, once and for all, in period
t = 0 to a particular reaction function for all future periods. Furthermore, assume that the
model (3.1) is known, that the predetermined and forward-looking variables are observable in
each period, and that X0 is given. Under these assumption, it is possible to …nd the optimal
reaction function under commitment that minimizes (2.1) in period 0 (see Backus and Dri¢ll
[4], Currie and Levine [30] and Söderlind [85]). This reaction function will be a linear function
of the predetermined variables and the predetermined Lagrange multipliers (shadow prices) of
the forward-looking variables,
it = fXt + '¥t ;

(3.2)

for t ¸ 0 and X0 given, where f and ' are row vectors with nX and nx elements (called response
coe¢cients, or reaction coe¢cients), respectively. Furthermore, the multipliers ¥t ful…ll
¥t+1 = M21 Xt + M22 ¥t ;

(3.3)

for t ¸ 0 and ¥0 = 0, where M21 and M22 are matrices of appropriate dimension. It follows
from (3.2) and (3.3) that the optimal reaction function under commitment can be written as a
distributed lag of past predetermined variables,
it = fXt + '

t
X
¿ =1

¿ ¡1
M22
M21 Xt¡¿ :

(3.4)

If there are no forward-looking variables, there is no distinction between commitment and
discretion. Furthermore, the optimal reaction function is a linear function of the current predetermined variables only,
it = fXt :

(3.5)

Even when there are forward-looking variables, many papers consider the optimal reaction function under commitment over the class of reaction functions (3.5) of the current predetermined
variables only (mostly without notifying the reader that this is a restriction).
The optimal reaction function under commitment is normally a function of all the predetermined variables (and the lagged predetermined variables) and is, in this sense, a rather complex
12

construction. Consider also the class of simple reaction functions, the class of linear reaction
functions restricted to being simple in the sense of having few arguments (for instance, some
of the elements of vector f and all the elements of vector ' are restricted to zero). A typical
simple reaction function is the much discussed Taylor rule, where the instrument only responds
to current or lagged in‡ation and the output gap. Let the optimal simple reaction function
under commitment be the reaction function in a particular class of simple reaction functions
that minimizes (2.1) in period 0, given X0 :
An optimal reaction function under commitment is likely to be too complex, in the sense
of involving speci…c responses to a large number of predetermined variables, to be veri…able.
Therefore it is di¢cult to conceive of a commitment of the central bank to this reaction function.
A simple reaction function is easier to verify. Therefore, in principle we can conceive of a
commitment to a simple reaction function, a commitment to a simple instrument rule.
Such a commitment could also be expressed as a targeting rule, more precisely a commitment
to the particular loss function corresponding to “interest-rate targeting.” Then, for a particular
simple reaction function f ¤ , a time-varying interest-rate target, i¤t , is de…ned as
i¤t ´ f ¤ Xt :

(3.6)

Then, instead of the period loss function (2.7), the central bank is committed to the new period
loss function

1
Lt = (it ¡ i¤t )2 :
2

(3.7)

Clearly, a trivial …rst-order condition for minimizing (3.7) is given by15
it = i¤t :

(3.8)

Thus, (3.8) can either be interpreted as a targeting rule, a …rst-order condition resulting from
the commitment to the particular loss function (3.7) with the interest target (3.6), or it can
be interpreted directly as an instrument rule, a prescribed rule for setting the instrument as a
function of observed variables.
As an example, we can consider a Taylor-type reaction function with smoothing, which
corresponds to an interest rate target given by
r + ¼¤ + g¼ (¼t ¡ ¼¤ ) + gy (yt ¡ yt¤ )] + ½it¡1 ;
i¤t ´ (1 ¡ ½)[¹
15

Note that this simple …rst-order condition only arises if the variables in Xt are predetermined.

13

where r¹ is the average real interest rate, g¼ and gy are the long-run response coe¢cients, and
½ (0 · ½ < 1) is a smoothing parameter.
Furthermore, we realize that under this commitment to a simple policy rule, the central bank
need no longer be forward-looking. It need only be forward-looking once and for all in period
0, when it decides to which simple reaction function it will commit. After that, it need never
be forward-looking; to set the instrument according to the prescribed reaction function, or it
simply needs to minimize the period loss function each period with the prescribed interest rate
target.
Although most of the current and previous discussion of monetary-policy rules is in terms of
commitment to alternative instrument rules (see, for instance, McCallum [69] and the contributions in Bryant, Hooper and Mann [20] and Taylor [105]), I do not believe that a commitment
to an instrument rule is either a practical or desirable way of maintaining price stability, for
several reasons.
First, there are overwhelming practical di¢culties in deciding once and for all which instrument rule to follow. The optimal reaction function will involve speci…c responses to a large
number of (current and lagged) information variables and is therefore unlikely to be veri…able.
Furthermore, results by Levin, Williams and Wieland [66]) indicate that the optimal reaction
function (in their case with the restriction that ' is zero) is quite sensitive to the model. This is
problematic, since the model is, in practice, not precisely known. A simple reaction function may
be more robust, in the sense of performing reasonably well in di¤erent models. This is an idea
promoted and examined in several papers by McCallum and recently restated in McCallum [69].
The results of Levin, Williams and Wieland also indicate that a simple reaction function may be
quite robust in this sense. On the other hand, as shown by Currie and Levin [29], the optimal
simple reaction function does not only depend on the model and the loss function but also on
the stochastic properties of the shocks and the initial state of the economy, X0 , so that the performance of simple rules generally depends on these stochastic properties (certainty-equivalence
does not hold for simple reaction functions in linear models with quadratic loss functions, in
contrast to the case for the optimal unrestricted reaction function).16
Second, a commitment to an instrument rule does not leave any room for judgemental
adjustments and extra-model information. As argued further below, the use of judgemental
16
There is an additional philosophical objection to once-and-for-all commitment: How come the once-andfor-all commitment can be done in period 0? Why was it not already done before, so nothing remains to be
committed to in period 0? Why is there something special about period 0?

14

adjustments and extra-model information is both unavoidable in practice and desirable in principle. Also, there is no room for revision of the instrument rule, when new information results
in a revision of the model. By disregarding such information, a commitment to an instrument
rule would be ine¢cient.
Third, although a commitment to a complex instrument rule also seems inconceivable in
principle, since it will hardly be veri…able, a commitment to a simple instrument rule is, in
principle, feasible, for instance by an interest-rate targeting regime as above. Still, such a
commitment is unheard of in the history of monetary policy, for obvious reasons. It would
involve committing the decision-making body of the central bank to reacting in a prescribed
way to prescribed information. Monetary policy could be delegated to the sta¤, or even to
a computer. It would be completely static and not forward-looking. Such a degradation of
the decision-making process would naturally be strongly resisted by any central bank and, I
believe, arguments about its ine¢ciency would easily convince legislators to reject it as well.
In practice, there is therefore no commitment mechanism that commits the decision-making
body to reacting in a prescribed way to prescribed information. In practice, decision-making
under considerable discretion is unavoidable, and nothing prevents the decision-making body
from reconsidering their decisions more or less from scratch, without being bound by previous
decisions and commitments. As Blinder [15, p. 49] puts it, “Enlightened discretion is the rule”.
Fourth, in the absence of a commitment mechanism, a prescribed simple instrument rule
would not be incentive-compatible. There would be frequent incentives to deviate, often for
very good reasons, due to new, unforeseen, information (stock-market crash, Asian crisis, Brazil
‡oating) and corresponding sound judgemental adjustment.
Although alternative instrument rules can serve as informative guidelines (see, for instance,
the contributions in Taylor [105] or, with regard to the performance of a Taylor rule for the
Eurosystem, Gerlach and Schnabel [46], Peersman and Smets [77] and Taylor [104]) and decisions
ex post may sometimes be similar to those prescribed by the simple instrument rules, they are
not a substitute for a decision-making procedure for the central bank. Interest-rate targeting
for the Eurosystem was indeed rejected by the European Monetary Institute, the predecessor of
the European Central Bank, in [38, p. 1] (with, arguably, not the most exhaustive argument):
“[T]he use of an interest rate as an intermediate target is not considered appropriate
given di¢culties in identifying the equilibrium real interest rate which would be
consistent with price stability.”

15

Indeed, instead of having a decision-making procedure and being forward-looking only once and
for all, at the time of a commitment to a simple rule, the central bank needs to have a continuous
decision-making procedure and be continuously forward-looking. To quote Greenspan [50, p.
244],
“Implicit in any monetary policy action or inaction, is an expectation of how the
future will unfold, that is, a forecast.
The belief that some formal set of rules for policy implementation can e¤ectively
eliminate that problem is, in my judgement, an illusion. There is no way to avoid
making a forecast, explicitly or implicitly.”17
Therefore, I now turn to a practical and realistic, and indeed already practiced, way of maintaining price stability, namely by way of “forecast targeting.”18
3.2 Forecast targeting
As a background, recall that, with a quadratic loss function and a linear model, with the assumption of a known model and only additive uncertainty, certainty-equivalence applies. The
problem of minimizing the loss function can be separated into a deterministic problem involving
conditional forecasts, the conditional means of current and future variables, and a stochastic
problem involving deviations between realized outcomes and conditional forecasts. The solution to the deterministic problem is the same as to the stochastic problem (see Chow [24] for
models with only predetermined variables and Currie and Levin [30] for models with forwardlooking variables as well). Thus, the discussion can focus on the deterministic problem involving
conditional forecasts.
For any variable » t , let » t+¿ jt for ¿ ¸ 0 denote the expectation Et » t+¿ given information in
a …xed period t. The information in period t includes the information available about the
state of the economy as well as about the model, (3.1).19

Let » jt denote the future path

» tjt ; » t+1jt ; » t+2jt ; ::: Consider the set It of given paths ijt = (itjt ; it+1jt ; :::) of instrument settings, for which there exist bounded paths ¼jt and yjt ¡ yjt¤ of future in‡ation and output gaps,
respectively. For each ijt 2 It , let » jt (ijt ) denote the corresponding path for variable » = ¼ and
17

I found this appropriate quote in Budd [21].
See Budd [21] for an interesting and detailed discussion of the advantages of explicitly considering forecasts
rather than formulating reaction functions from observed variables to the instrument.
19
It is important that these expectations are conditional on the central bank’s model, and hence are “structural,”
rather than being private-sector expectations, in order to avoid the problems of nonexistence or indeterminacy
of equilibria, arising from responding mechanically to private-sector expectations, as has been emphasized in
Woodford [116] and further discussed in Bernanke and Woodford [14].
18

16

y (yjt¤ is taken to be exogenous), and call it the corresponding conditional forecast (conditional
on information in period t, ijt and the model (3.1)). Let
Yt ´ f¼jt (ijt ); yjt (ijt ) ¡ yjt¤ jijt 2 It g
denote the set of feasible conditional forecasts of the target variables. Constructing conditional
forecasts in a backward-looking model (that is, a model without forward-looking variables) is
straightforward. Constructing such forecasts in a forward-looking model raises some speci…c
di¢culties, which are explained and resolved in Svensson [92, appendix A].20
Due to the certainty-equivalence, the stochastic optimization problem of minimizing the
expected intertemporal loss function (2.1) over future random target variables in (2.7), subject
to (3.1), is equivalent to the deterministic problem of minimizing the deterministic intertemporal
loss function

1
X

~ t+¿ jt
±¿ L

(3.9)

¿ =0

with the deterministic period loss function
~ t+¿ jt ´ 1 [(¼t+¿jt ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¸(yt+¿ jt ¡ y ¤ )2 ]
L
t+¿ jt
2

(3.10)

¤
(where the stochastic ¼t+¿ and yt+¿ ¡ yt+¿
have been replaced by the deterministic ¼t+¿ jt and
¤ ) subject to
yt+¿ jt ¡ yt+¿

(¼jt ; yjt ¡ yjt¤ ) 2 Yt .

(3.11)

Thus, the problem of the central bank is to choose the path ijt ; such that the resulting ¼jt and
yjt minimize (2.1) with (3.10). The …rst element of ijt , itjt , is then the appropriate instrument
setting for period t; it . If there is no new relevant information in period t + 1, the instrument
setting in period t will be the second element in ijt . If there is new relevant information, that
information is used for solving the problem again in period t + 1.21
This procedure thus involves making conditional forecasts of in‡ation, output and the output
gap for alternative interest rate paths, using all relevant information about the current and
future state of the economy and the transmission mechanism. It involves making consistent
assumptions about exogenous and endogenous variables (for instance, that exchange rates and
20
The conditional forecasts for arbitrary interest-rate path derived in Svensson [92, appendix A] assume that
the interest-rate paths are “credible”, that is, anticipated and allowed to in‡uence the forward-looking variables.
Leeper and Zha [64] discuss an alternative way of constructing forecasts for arbitrary interest-rate paths, by
assuming that these interest-rate paths result from unanticipated deviations from a normal reaction function.
21
The consequences of imposing the restriction of time-consistency of it remain to be examined. That is, that
the elements it+¿ jt in it shall be consistent with the decision in period t + ¿ conditional on Xt+¿ jt (see footnote
22).

17

interest rates are consistent with appropriate parity conditions). As discussed further below,
it also allows judgemental adjustments and extra-model information (section 3.2.3), as well as
partially observable states of the economy (section 3.3). As discussed in section 3.4, forecast
targeting can even be adapted to take nonlinearities and model uncertainty into account, which
both result in nonadditive uncertainty.
The procedure requires estimates of policy multipliers, the e¤ects on the conditional forecasts
of changes in the instrument. The policy multipliers are easily calculated in a simpli…ed model
with only predetermined variables,
Xt+1 = AXt + Bit + ut+1

(3.12)

(see Svensson [92, appendix A] for a case with forward-looking variables). The conditional
forecast for Xt+¿ jt then ful…lls
¿

Xt+¿ jt = AXt+¿ ¡1jt + Bit+¿ ¡1jt = A Xtjt +

¿ ¡1
X

A¿ ¡1¡s Bit+sjt

(3.13)

s=0

for ¿ ¸ 1, so that the policy multipliers dXt+¿ jt =dit+sjt ; 0 · s · ¿ ¡ 1, are given by
dXt+¿ jt
= A¿ ¡1¡s B:
dit+sjt

(3.14)

3.2.1 Optimality criterion
What is the criterion for having found an optimal interest-rate path and corresponding conditional forecasts of in‡ation and the output gap? One criterion can be formulated as follows. Suppose the central bank sta¤ have constructed a potential optimal combination of an interest-rate
path and such conditional forecasts. Consider a change dijt = (ditjt ; dit+1jt ; :::) in the interestrate path ijt . This will result in changes dXjt = (0; dXt+1jt ; dXt+2jt ; :::) in the predetermined
variables, given by
dXt+¿ jt =

¿ ¡1
X
dXt+¿ jt
s=0

dit+s

dit+sjt :

Let d¼jt and dyjt denote the corresponding changes in the in‡ation and output forecasts (the
output-gap forecast yjt¤ is taken to be exogenous). A necessary condition for optimality is then
that the corresponding change in the intertemporal loss function is nonnegative, that is,
d

1
X
¿ =0

± ¿ Lt+¿ jt =

1
X
¿ =0

¤
± ¿ [(¼t+¿ jt ¡ ¼ ¤ )d¼t+¿ jt + ¸(yt+¿ jt ¡ yt+¿
jt )dyt+¿ jt ] ¸ 0:

18

(3.15)

Given ¼jt , yjt , yjt¤ d¼;jt and dyjt ; as well as ±, ¼¤ and ¸; this expression is easily checked,
and a relatively easy way of making pairwise comparisons of alternative interest-rate paths and
conditional forecasts. For instance, a delay in an interest rate increase can be compared with an
immediate increase, a small increase now can be compared with a larger increase two quarters
later, etc.
Within the simple model in Svensson [90] and [97], I have shown that the …rst-order conditions for an optimum can be expressed as particularly simple targeting rules (in the form of
equations for the conditional forecasts of the target variables). For instance, the in‡ation gap
¤
¼t+¿ +1jt ¡ ¼¤ and the output gap yt+¿ jt ¡ yt+¿
jt should be of the opposite signs and related

according to
¼t+¿ +1jt ¡ ¼¤ = ¡

®y c(¸)
¤
(y
¡ yt+¿
jt ); ¿ ¸ 1;
1 ¡ c(¸) t+¿ jt

where the coe¢cient ®y is the sensitivity of the change in in‡ation to the output gap and the
coe¢cient c(¸) is an increasing function of ¸ that ful…lls 0 · c(¸) < 1, c(0) = 0 and c(1) = 1.
Alternatively, the targeting rule can be expressed as the in‡ation forecast approaching the
in‡ation target at a constant rate,
¼ t+¿ +1jt ¡ ¼¤ = c(¸)(¼t+¿ jt ¡ ¼¤ ); ¿ ¸ 1:
In practice, the decision-making body may get far by just visually examining alternative
in‡ation and output gap forecasts and then choosing the one that is the best compromise between
hitting the in‡ation target at an appropriate horizon and avoiding output-gap stability. If done in
a consistent way, this will be equivalent to minimizing the intertemporal loss function. Compared
to many other intertemporal decision problems that households, …rms and investors solve one
way or another (usually without the assistance of a substantial sta¤ of economics PhDs), this
particular decision problem does not seem to be overly complicated or di¢cult.
3.2.2 Instrument assumptions
In the above discussion, the problem is to …nd the appropriate interest rate path ijt , which
requires constructing conditional forecasts for exogenous interest-rate paths.
Forecasts for unchanged interest rates, where the interest-rate path ful…lls
it+¿ jt = it¡1 ; ¿ ¸ 0;
can be used as indicating “risks to price stability.” They are used by Bank of England and
Sveriges Riksbank to motivate changes in the interest rate and their direction (see section 3.3.1).
19

Conditional forecasts can also be constructed for given reaction functions, in which case the
interest rate path is endogenous and ful…lls
it+¿ jt = f Xt+¿ jt
for a given f.22 Some central banks, notably Bank of Canada and Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
construct forecasts conditional on reaction functions involving what Rudebusch and Svensson
[80] call “responding to model-consistent forecasts,” what Batini and Haldane [9] call “forecastbased” reaction functions. This implies an interest-rate path ful…lling
it+¿ jt = fXt+¿ jt + gXt+T +¿ jt ;
where T > 0 is the forecast horizon (typically some 6–8 quarters), and sometimes f = 0:
Among reaction functions involving responses to forecasts, it would seem more natural that
the forecast responded to is one for unchanged interest rates. Indeed, under strict in‡ation
targeting, the optimal instrument adjustment is proportional to the deviation of the conditional
forecast for unchanged interest rate from the in‡ation target, as demonstrated in Svensson [98].23
3.2.3 Judgemental adjustments
A major advantage of forecast targeting relative to commitment to an instrument rule is that
it allows a systematic and disciplined way of incorporating judgemental adjustment and extramodel information, by “…ltering information through the forecasts.”
Given that every model of the transmission mechanism is an abstraction and a simpli…cation,
and given that there is considerable uncertainty about the details of the transmission mechanism,
monetary policy will never, it seems, be able to rely on models and the information entering
models alone. There will always be an important role for additional extra-model information
and judgemental adjustments of the instrument. Never using such information and judgement
would neither be e¢cient nor incentive-compatible for the decision-making body of the central
bank. At the same time, such information and informal adjustment opens up monetary policy
to arbitrariness and potential abuse. Forecast targeting allows some system and discipline in
the use of extra-model information and judgemental adjustments.
22
Note that one way of taking the discretionary nature of decision making into account is to set it in period t
under the restriction that the reaction function that will apply in period t+¿ for ¿ ¸ 1 will be it+¿jt = ft+¿ jt Xt+¿jt ,
where ft+¿jt is the reaction function that is likely to result from the decision in period t + ¿ .
23
Note that an equation like it = gXt+T jt , where Xt+T jt is a model-consistent forecast (including this equation),
especially in a model with forward-looking models, is a rather complex equilibrium condition. For reasons detailed
in Svensson [96, section 2.3.1], I am rather sceptical about these equilibrium conditions as reaction functions
representing in‡ation targeting.

20

Judgemental adjustments can be made in several ways in the framework outlined here. One
is in the form of adjustments of the coe¢cients of the model. This means that the coe¢cients
of matrices A and B become time-varying, At+¿ jt and Bt+¿ jt , which is easily incorporated when
constructing the forecasts (as long as the time-variation is deterministic; see below in section
3.4.2 on non-additive uncertainty).
Another kind of judgemental adjustments consists of simple additive shifts in the forecasts.
For the model with only predetermined variables, this means that the model in period t can be
represented as
Xt+1+¿ jt = AXt+¿ jt + Bit+¿ jt + jt+¿ jt ;
where the column vector jt+¿ jt corresponds to additive judgemental adjustments to Xt+¿ in
period t. Suppose, as above, that the last element in Xt is unity, in order handle nonzero means.
Add the additive judgemental adjustment jt+¿ jt to the last column of the matrix A to form the
matrix At+¿ jt . Then, the system can be written
Xt+1+¿ jt = At+¿ jt Xt+¿ jt + Bit+¿ jt ;
formally as a model with time-dependent coe¢cients.24
Only if a particular piece of information can be convincingly shown to a¤ect the conditional
forecasts at relevant horizons does it warrant a change in the instrument. It is not correct to
adjust the instrument without “…ltering the information through the forecasts.” Thus, targeting
rules and forecast targeting bring some system and discipline to the use of judgments and extramodel information, and provide some protection against the arbitrariness in use and temptations
of abuse that might easily arise. This is, I believe, one aspect of what Bernanke and Mishkin
[13] call “constrained discretion” (although they are not explicit about the role of forecast
targeting).25
3.2.4 Mean, median or mode forecasts?
Is it the mean, the median or the mode forecast that is relevant in forecast targeting? Under
a linear model with additive uncertainty and a quadratic loss function, the previous discussion
have demonstrated that certainty equivalence holds and that it is the mean forecast that is
24
See Tinsely [106] and Reifschneider, Stockton and Wilcox [78] for further discussion of judgemental
adjustments.
25
Mervyn King has emphasized that it is important that the decision-making body of the central bank agrees
with the forecast. This requires iterations between the sta¤ and the decision-making body, with the decisionmaking body having the last say on the forecast.

21

relevant. When would median or mode forecasts be relevant? Vickers [108] and Wallis [110]
have provided systematic discussions of this issue. Under the maintained assumption of a linear
model with additive uncertainty and objectives corresponding to minimum expected loss, the
nature of the loss function determines which forecast is relevant. Thus, with a quadratic loss
function, it is the mean forecast. Under a linear loss function (that is, linear in the deviation
from target, V-shaped), it is the median forecast. Under an “all or nothing” loss function with
extreme favorable weight on the target level, it is the mode forecast. Finally, under a loss
function assigning a constant loss outside a tolerance interval and a zero loss inside, the forecast
should maximize the probability of being inside the interval, which implies that the upper and
lower bounds should have the same probability density.26
The mean, median and mode alternatives di¤er only when the probability distribution is
asymmetric. When they di¤er, unless certainty equivalence is explicitly assumed not to hold,
it seems that the mean forecast should still have prominence and never be excluded, also when
the mode and/or the median is reported. Still, both Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank
report the mode forecast as their central forecast, in spite of the mode being associated with a
relatively bizarre loss function, the all-or-nothing one.27
Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank, however, aim to illustrate not only a point forecast
but the probability distribution of the forecasted variable, so as to indicate the uncertainty of
the forecast, as well as the “balance of risks,” that is, whether the distribution is symmetric or
not. Thus, Bank of England produce its famous fan chart, which can be interpreted as showing
iso-level contours for the density function of the probability distribution, where each shade of
color (red for in‡ation, green for the output forecast) encloses a given fraction of the probability
mass (see Britton, Fisher and Whitley [18]). Thus, the fan chart displays the density function
in the same way as a contour map illustrates a hill (with the di¤erence that maps usually have
contours with equal vertical distance whereas the fan chart has equal increments of the enclosed
probability mass). Furthermore, the mode will be at the center of the narrow central band,
the deepest shade of color which denotes the most likely outcomes, the highest portion of the
probability density. As noted by Wallis [110], this means that Bank of England uses non-central
prediction (or con…dence) intervals, which are di¤erent from standard central prediction intervals
26

Thus, for the “strict” case with in‡ation as the only argument in the loss function, the four loss functions are
(1) Lt = 12 (¼ t ¡ ¼ ¤ )2 , (2) Lt = j¼t ¡ ¼¤ j, (3) Lt = k ¡ ±(¼Rt ¡ ¼ ¤ ), where ±(x) is the so-called Dirac delta function
1
with the properties ±(x) = 0 for x 6= 0; ±(0) = 1; and ¡1 ±(x)dx = 1, and (4) Lt = 0 for j¼ t ¡ ¼ ¤ j · a > 0,
¤
Lt = k > 0 for j¼ t ¡ ¼ j > a.
27
Another problem with reporting the mode forecast is evident in the hypothetical case when the forecast is
bimodel with approximately equal probability density at the two modes.

22

in that they do not have the same probability mass above and below the intervals (when the
distribution is asymmetric).
Bank of Sweden instead reports the mode together with standard central prediction intervals,
with the same probability above and below the prediction interval (see Blix and Sellin [16]). As
a consequence, for an asymmetric distribution, the mode will not be at the center of the most
narrow con…dence interval (instead, the center of the most narrow con…dence interval is the
median).
As long as these alternative graphs are clearly understood as di¤erent ways of illustrating
the whole distribution, and policy is based on the whole distribution, the ways of illustrating
need not have any e¤ect on the policy. Still, with the ways of illustration that these central
banks have chosen, I believe that most observers are led to focus on the mode, when the mean
arguably in many cases is a more appropriate focus. Therefore I believe that it might be better
plot the mean rather than the mode, together with the di¤erent con…dence intervals. I believe
this might be better also under distribution forecast targeting, to be discussed in section 3.4.3,
when the whole distribution matters.28
3.3 The role of indicators
So far, the maintained assumption in the discussion has been that the central bank can directly
observe the state of the economy, more precisely, observe the predetermined and forward-looking
variables, Xt and xt in period t. In order to discuss the role of indicators, I now assume that
the predetermined and forward-looking variables are not necessarily observable. Consequently,
introduce a vector of nZ observable variables, indicators, Zt . The indicators depend on the
predetermined and forward-looking variables and the instrument according to
3
2
Xt
5 + Di it + vt ;
Zt = D 4
xt
where D and Di are matrices of appropriate dimension and vt is a vector of nZ iid shocks
with zero means and constant covariance matrix §vv : These shocks may be interpreted as mea28
Two separate arguments are sometimes presented in favor of emphasizing the mode forecast. First, in
presenting and discussing the forecast, it may often be natural and intuitive to consider a most likely scenario
together with one or two alternative scenarios.. The most likely scenario would then correspond to the mode
forecast. Second, before that stage, in constructing the forecast, it may be practical to start with a most likely
scenario and then add various uncertainties and complications later on. Whereas the …rst argument may be a
legitimate argument in favor of the mode, the second is not, since the presentation and the construction can be
independent.
Furthermore, the mode and the median have the property that they are not a¤ected by outlines, which may or
may not be an advantage, depending on one’s view.

23

surement errors. Assume that the central bank’s information in period t is represented by the
information set
It ´ fZt¡¿ ; ¿ ¸ 0; A; B; C; Ci ; D; Di ; §uu ; §vv g:
That is, in period t, the central bank knows the current and past indicators, in addition to the
model and the stochastic properties of the shocks.
This formulation allows some variables to be directly observable, some to be observed with
measurement error, and some to be completely unobservable. The discussion in previous sections,
the full-information case, corresponds to the special case Zt ´ (Xt0 ; x0t ; i0t )0 .
For simplicity, assume that there are no forward-looking variables, so that the model is
(3.12), and let the indicators depend on the predetermined variables according to
Zt = DXt + vt :

(3.16)

This setup is examined in more detail in Chow [24], Tinsley [106] and LeRoy and Waud [67].29
The case of partial information with forward-looking variables is examined in Pearlman, Currie
and Levin [76], Pearlman [75], Aoki [3] and Svensson and Woodford [101]. The present discussion
follows Svensson and Woodford [101] (although without forward-looking variables).
Under these assumptions, certainty-equivalence continues to hold. In period t, the central
bank needs to form the estimate Xtjt of the predetermined variables in order to construct its
conditional forecasts and set its instrument. The optimal estimate is given by a Kalman …lter,
with the updating equation
Xtjt = Xtjt¡1 + K(Zt ¡ Ztjt¡1 );

(3.17)

where the matrix K is the Kalman gain matrix.30
The elements of the gain matrix give the optimal weights on the indicators in estimating the
predetermined variables. Using (3.16), the updating equation can be written
Xtjt = (I ¡ KD)Xtjt¡1 + KZt ;

(3.18)

so the matrices K and I ¡ KD give the weights on the indicators Zt and the prior information
Xtjt¡1 . If D = I and §vv = 0, Zt coincides with the predetermined variables; then K = I
and all weight is on the indicators and none on the prior information. Generally, a row in
29

See Orphanides [73] and Smets [84] for recent related work.
In a steady state, the Kalman gain is given by K = P D 0 (DP D0 + §vv )¡1 , where the covariance matrix P
of the forecast errors Xt ¡ Xtjt¡1 is given by P = M [P ¡ P D 0 (DP D 0 + §vv )¡1 DP ]M 0 + §uu , where M is the
transition matrix in the transition equation Xt+1 = M Xt + ut+1 :
30

24

K gives the optimal weights on the indicators in estimating the corresponding predetermined
variable. A column in K gives the weights given to the corresponding indicator in estimating
the di¤erent predetermined variables. Assume that a particular indicator, Zjt , is equal to one
of the predetermined variables, Xkt , plus a measurement error, vjt ;
Zjt = Xkt + vjt :
If the variance of the measurement error approaches zero, all the elements in row k of K approaches zero except element j, which approaches unity. Thus, all the weight in estimating Xkt
falls on Zjt . If the variance of the measurement error goes to in…nity, Zjt becomes a useless
indicator. The elements in column j of K then all become zero. The indicator Zjt gets zero
weight in estimating the predetermined variables.
Assume, for simplicity, that forecast targeting has resulted in a reaction function f in the
past. That is, it¡¿ = fXt¡¿ jt¡¿ for 1 · ¿ · t. Then, by (3.12),
X¿ j¿ ¡1 = (A + Bf)X¿¡1j¿ ¡1
for 1 · ¿ · t. Using this in (3.18), we can write the updating equation as a distributed lag of
past indicators,
Xtjt = (1 ¡ KD)(A + Bf )Xt¡1jt¡1 + KZt
t¡1
X
= [(1 ¡ KD)(A + Bf)] X0j0 +
[(1 ¡ KD)(A + Bf )]¿ KZt¡¿ :
t

¿ =0

This gives the weight on indicators Zt¡¿ as [(1 ¡ KD)(A + Bf )]¿ K for ¿ ¸ 0.
These equations illustrate the gradual updating of the estimate of the predetermined variables. We can summarize the e¤ects of the indicators in period t on the forecasts Xt+¿ jt in terms
of “indictor multipliers,” dXt+¿ jt =dZt , given by
dXt+¿ jt
dXt+¿ jt dXtjt
=
= A¿ K:
dZt
dXtjt dZt
Thus, the indicator multiplier is the product of the e¤ect of the estimate of the current state of
the forecast, dXt+¿ jt =dXtjt , which by (3.13) is given by A¿ , and the e¤ect of the indicators on
the estimate of the current state, with by (3.17) is given by the gain matrix K. It follows that
an indicator will a¤ect the instrument setting via a¤ecting the current state of the economy,
then the forecasts, and …nally the instrument. Schematically,
Zt ! Xtjt ! Xt+¿ jt ! it :
25

Especially, the weights on any given indicator depends exclusively on its power in predicting future in‡ation and output gap. Monetary aggregates, for instance, have no special role
beyond that, and any weight on monetary aggregates will exclusively depend on its predictive
performance.
3.3.1 An indicator of “risks to price stability”
An indicator of what the Eurosystem calls “risks to price stability,” that is, in‡ationary or
de‡ationary pressure, or risks of over- or under-shooting the in‡ation target, should be useful
when discussing monetary policy that aims to maintain price stability. What requirements
should such an indicator ful…ll? It would seem that, …rst, it should signal in which direction
and to what extent the in‡ation target will be missed in case policy is not adjusted. Second, it
should signal in which direction and to what extent the instrument should be adjusted. Finally,
it should be intuitive and easy to understand, so that it can be used to communicate with the
public and explain why an instrument change is warranted or not.
The Eurosystem has put forward a money-growth indicator, namely the deviation between
current M3 growth and a reference value, as an indicator of risks to price stability, indeed the
…rst of the “two pillars” of its monetary strategy. As discussed in Svensson [98], such a moneygrowth indicator seems quite unsuitable for this purpose, since it is largely just a noisy indicator
of the deviation of current in‡ation from the in‡ation target (which deviation can be more
easily observed directly).31 Instead, the obvious candidate is a conditional in‡ation forecast,
conditional upon unchanged monetary policy in the form of an unchanged interest rate. That
is, it is constructed for the interest rate path that ful…lls it+¿ jt = it¡1 , ¿ ¸ 0. Constructing this
in‡ation forecast is straightforward in a model without predetermined variables, as is apparent
from (3.13). It is somewhat more complicated in a model with forward-looking variables, as
shown in Svensson [92, appendix A].32 This indicator signals whether and in which direction
the in‡ation target is likely to be missed, if policy is not adjusted, and thereby it also signals in
which direction the instrument needs to be adjusted.
Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank, in their quarterly In‡ation Reports, use conditional
31
That such a money-growth indicator is unsuitable on its own is fairly obvious, since money is not the only,
not even the major, predictor of in‡ation at the horizons relevant for monetary policy (see Estrella and Mishkin
[33]). What is perhaps less obvious is that the money-growth indicator is unsuitable even for a completely stable
money-demand function without velocity shocks (see Svensson [98] and Rudebusch and Svensson [81]).
32
More speci…cally, with forward-looking variables, the interest rate is kept unchanged for a few periods (4-6
quarters, say), but then, there is a shift to “normal” policy, or to some policy stabilizing in‡ation and determining
the future forward-looking variables.

26

in‡ation forecasts for unchanged interest rates as their main vehicle for motivating why the
instruments need to be adjusted or not.
3.4 Complications to mean forecast targeting and generalization to distribution
forecast targeting
Nonlinearities and nonadditive uncertainty in the model are two complications to forecast targeting. These complications both imply that the certainty-equivalence underlying conditional
mean forecasts no longer holds. These two complications are discussed in sections 3.4.1 and
3.4.2.33 A solution to the complications is to move from conditional mean forecast targeting to
conditional distribution forecast targeting, which is discussed in section 3.4.3.
3.4.1 Nonlinearites
So far, the maintained assumption has been that the model is linear. Sources of nonlinearity
that have been discussed in the literature include nonlinear Phillips curves (see Debelle and
Laxton [31], Gordon [49] and Isard and Laxton [55]), nonnegativity of nominal interest rates
and downward nominal rigidity of prices and/or wages (see references in section 2.3). Suppose
now that the model is nonlinear. Assume that the model remains known, that there are no
forward-looking variables, that the predetermined variables are observable, and that the model
can be written as
Xt+1 = M(Xt ; it ; ut+1 );

(3.19)

where M( ) is a nonlinear function. This has two consequences. First, the conditional mean
forecasts, Xt+¿ jt , are now nonlinear functions of the interest-rate path, ijt , the current state
of the economy, Xt , and the covariances of the shocks, §uu . Second, the policy multipliers,
dXt+¿ =dit+sjt ; will be stochastic, and the “forecast” policy multipliers, dXt+¿ jt =dit+sjt ; will be
endogenous and not constant. Then, certainty-equivalence no longer applies, and using the
period loss function (3.10) is no longer equivalent to using (2.7).
The reason why certainty-equivalence no longer holds can be demonstrated with reference to
the optimality criterion (3.15). Consider the change in the intertemporal loss function (2.1) with
(2.7) of a change dijt for the optimal instrument path, which implies the optimality criterion
0 · dEt

1
X

± ¿ Lt+¿

¿ =0
33

A non-quadratic loss function would also imply that certainty-equivalence no longer holds (see section 3.2.4).

27

= d
=
=

1
X

1
¤
± ¿ Et [(¼t+¿ ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¸(yt+¿ ¡ yt+¿
)2 ]
2
¿ =0

1
X
¿ =0
1
X
¿ =0

+

©
ª
¤
± ¿ Et [(¼ t+¿ ¡ ¼¤ )d¼t+¿ ] + ¸Et [(yt+¿ ¡ yt+¿
)dyt+¿ ]
o
n
¤
± ¿ (¼t+¿ jt ¡ ¼¤ )d¼t+¿ jt ] + ¸(yt+¿ jt ¡ yt+¿
)dy
]
t+¿ jt
jt

1
X
¿ =0

©
ª
¤
± ¿ Covt [¼t+¿ ; d¼t+¿ ] + ¸Covt [yt+¿ ¡ yt+¿
; dyt+¿ ] ;

(3.20)

where Covt [¢; ¢] denotes the covariance conditional on information available in period t.
With a linear model, the changes d¼t+¿ and dyt+¿ caused by the change dijt are deterministic
and independent of ¼t+¿ and yt+¿ , so that the covariance terms in (3.20) vanish. The change
dXt+¿ in the random variable Xt+¿ is identical to the change dXt+¿ jt in the conditional forecast
Xt+¿ jt . Then the optimality criterion (3.15) applies, and it is su¢cient to think in terms of
conditional forecasts. With a nonlinear model, the changes d¼t+¿ and dyt+¿ are stochastic and
depend on ¼t+¿ and yt+¿ and therefore the covariance terms in (3.20) are not necessarily zero.
In order to see this, note that with the linear model (3.12), the change dXt+¿ from a change
dit+sjt (0 · s < ¿ ¡ 1) is given by
dXt+¿ =

dXt+¿ jt
dXt+¿
dit+sjt =
di
= A¿ ¡1¡s B dit+sjt ;
dit+s
dit+sjt t+sjt

where we use that dXt+¿ =dit+s = dXt+¿ jt =dit+sjt = A¿ ¡1¡s B, so dXt+¿ is deterministic and
independent of Xt+¿ (since the policy multipliers are constant). With the nonlinear model
(3.19), the same change is
!
Ãr=¿ ¡s¡1
Y @M(Xt+s+r ; it+s+r ; ut+s+r+1 ) @M (Xt+s ; it+s ; ut+s+1 )
dit+sjt ;
dXt+¿ =
@X
@i
r=1
so that dXt+¿ is stochastic and generally correlated with Xt+¿ (since the policy multipliers
dXt+¿ =dit+sjt are now endogenous and not constant).34
With a nonlinear model, the optimal reaction function is nonlinear,
it = f (Xt );
and it will generally depend on the covariances §uu . The covariance terms in (3.19) also imply
that the optimal policy may imply a bias, in the sense that it is optimal to, on average, either
over- or under-shoot the in‡ation target (also, the optimal average output gap may not be zero).
34

Note that we use the convention that ¦tr=s » r = 1 for t < s:

28

Doing forecast targeting under a nonlinear model and selecting the instrument such that
(3.10) is minimized would still imply a nonlinear reaction function, since the conditional forecasts
would be nonlinear functions of the instrument path. It would imply disregarding the optimal
bias, though. How costly forecast targeting would be relative to the optimal policy would,
of course, depend on the degree of nonlinearity in the transmission mechanism, which is an
empirical question. My reading of the literature is that there is considerable controversy about
the extent and the relevance of any nonlinearity (see for instance Gordon [49] and Isard and
Laxton [55]).
3.4.2 Non-additive uncertainty
So far, only additive uncertainty has been considered, appearing as the additive shock ut+1
in (3.1). Uncertainty about parameters in the model, that is, uncertainty in the coe¢cients
of the matrices A and B in (3.1), results in multiplicative uncertainty, an example of nonadditive uncertainty. Multiplicative uncertainty has consequences similar to nonlinearity, in that
certainty equivalence no longer holds, even if the model remains linear and the loss function is
quadratic.
Assume that the model is linear, that there are no forward-looking variables, and that
the predetermined variables are observable, but assume now that the model has time-varying
stochastic parameters, with known stochastic properties. Then the model can be written
Xt+1 = At+1 Xt + Bt+1 it + ut+1 ;

(3.21)

where At and Bt are stochastic processes with known stochastic properties. It follows that Xt+¿
can be written
Xt+¿ =

¿Y
¡1

At+1+s Xt +

s=0

¿ ¡1
X
s=0

Ã¿ ¡s¡1
Y

!
At+1+s+r

Bt+s+1 it+s +

r=1

Ã¿ ¡s
¿
X
Y
s=1

!
At+s+r

ut+s :

r=1

Then the policy multipliers,
dXt+¿
=
dit+s

Ã¿ ¡s¡1
Y

!
At+1+s+r

Bt+s+1 ;

r=1

for 0 · s · ¿ ¡ 1, are stochastic. It follows that a change in the interest rate path, dijt , results
in stochastic changes d¼t+¿ and dyt+¿ in in‡ation and output.
Once more, the covariance terms in (3.20) do not vanish, and certainty equivalence no longer
applies. As shown in the classic paper by Brainard [17] and, for instance, in a recent application
29

to strict in‡ation targeting in Svensson [97], the optimal instrument response to disturbances
usually becomes more cautious, and a bias enters such that the optimal policy implies that the
in‡ation either over- or under-shoots the in‡ation target. However, some covariance patterns
for the parameters, as well as uncertainty about the in‡ation persistency, may make the optimal
instrument response more sensitive to disturbances than in the absence of parameter uncertainty
(see Söderström [86]).
Monetary policy under model uncertainty is currently a very active research area, with a
number of recent papers.35 Practically all work is directed towards the understanding how the
optimal reaction function changes with model uncertainty. But how should practical monetary
policy incorporate model uncertainty? This is the issue to be discussed next.
3.4.3 Generalized forecast targeting: Distribution forecast targeting instead of
mean forecast targeting
One possibility for handling nonlinearity and model uncertainty might seem to be to commit, once and for all, to a simple instrument rule, either to an optimal reaction function that
minimizes the expected intertemporal loss, taking Bayesian priors on the nature of the model
uncertainty into account, or a simple rule with reasonable robustness properties across potential
models. However, I believe the objections to this solution raised in section 3.1 apply with even
greater force under nonlinearity and model uncertainty, since the unavoidability and desirability of judgemental adjustments, extra-model information and updated Bayesian priors are even
more apparent. Therefore, I believe that the solution must be found elsewhere, namely in a
generalization of forecast targeting.
Nonlinearity and model uncertainty both imply that certainty-equivalence does not apply.
This, in turn, means that it is not optimal to rely on forecast targeting with conditional mean
forecasts, that is, using conditional mean forecasts as intermediate variables. Thus mean forecast targeting is not optimal. Still, we can consider a kind of generalized forecast targeting,
distribution forecast targeting, as a way of handling nonlinearity and multiplicative uncertainty.
Distribution forecast targeting simply consists of constructing conditional probability dis35
Recent work on and discussion of monetary policy under model uncertainty includes Blinder [15], Cecchetti
[23], Clarida, Gali and Gertler [26], Estrella and Mishkin [34], Levin, Wieland and Williams [66], McCallum [69],
Onatski and Stock [72], Peersman and Smets [77], Rudebusch [79], Sack [82], Sargent [83] Smets [84], Söderström
[86] and [87], Stock [88], Svensson [97], and Wieland [111] and [112].
In contrast to the standard Brainard result in favor of caution, recent work on so-called robust control (where
the reaction function is chosen so as to minimize expected loss for the most unfavorable model) indicates that
model uncertainty may well result in more aggressive optimal responses (see, for instance, Sargent [83] and Stock
[88]).

30

tributions of the target variables instead of means only. For any random variable » t , let » t
denote the random path (» t ; » t+1 ; :::) (recall that » jt denotes the path of the conditional means
(» tjt ; » t+1jt ; :::)). Then, for a given interest-rate path ijt , the central bank sta¤ should construct
the joint conditional density function of the random path of in‡ation and the output gap, denoted
't (¼ t ; yt ¡ y ¤t ; ijt ), conditional upon all information available in period t and the interest-rate
path ijt .
Then, this conditional probability distribution is used to evaluate the loss function (2.1) with
(2.7). This can either be done numerically, or informally by the decision-making body of the
bank being presented with the probability distributions for a few alternative interest rate paths
and then deciding which path and distribution provides the best compromise.
This alternative is actually much more feasible than many readers might think. Bank of
England and Sveriges Riksbank have already developed methods for constructing con…dence intervals for the forecasts published in their In‡ation Reports (see Blix and Sellin [16] and Britton,
Fisher and Whitley [18]). Bank of England presents fan charts for both in‡ation and output,
and Sveriges Riksbank gives con…dence intervals for its in‡ation forecasts.36

37

Furthermore,

scrutiny of the motivations for interest rate changes (including the minutes for Bank of England’s
Monetary Policy Committee and the Riksbank’s Executive Board) indicate that both banks occasionally depart from certainty-equivalence and take properties of the whole distribution into
account in their decisions, for instance, when the risk is unbalanced and “downside risk” di¤er
from “upside risk.”
The result of distribution forecast targeting can be compared with what would result if only
conditional mean forecasts were considered. In practice, there may not be a big di¤erence in the
resulting instrument setting, in which case there is not much point in letting distribution forecast
targeting replace mean forecast targeting. Distribution forecast targeting seems meaningful and
worth the e¤ort only if it results in signi…cantly di¤erent, and more adequate, instrument settings
than mean forecast targeting. This remains to be examined.
36
Bank of England’s fan charts for in‡ation and output should probably be interpreted as marginal distributions.
However, since the distributions for in‡ation and the output gap are unlikely to be independent, distribution
forecast targeting requires the joint distribution to be conveyed. This may require some further innovation in
display, beyond the already beautiful fan chart.
37
As discussed in Wallis [110], Bank of England’s fan charts present prediction intervals that di¤er from
normal con…dence intervals, central prediction intervals. Sveriges Riksbank, however, presents normal con…dence
intervals, see Blix and Sellin [16]. Both banks present the mode as their point forecast, whereas it seems to me
that it would be more natural and consistent with the theory to present the mean (or, in distribution forecast
targeting, at least the median) (see section 3.2.4).

31

3.5 Intermediate targeting
When would intermediate targeting be optimal? Assume, for simplicity, strict in‡ation targeting,
(2.4). Consider, for simplicity, the model without forward-looking variables, (3.12). Decompose
0 ; X 0 )0 , where the …rst element
the vector of predetermined variables according to Xt = (¼t ; X2t
3t

is in‡ation and the rest of the variables are decomposed into two vectors, X2t and X3t . Suppose
that the two vectors X2t and X3t can be chosen such that the model (3.12) of the transmission
mechanism ful…lls
2

¼t+1

6
6
6 X2;t+1
4
X3;t+1

3

2

0

A12

0

32

7 6
7 6
7 = 6 A21 A21 A23
5 4
A31 A32 A33

¼t

76
76
7 6 X2t
54
X3t

3

2

0

3

7 6
7
7 6
7
7 + 6 B2 7 it + ut+1 ;
5 4
5
B3

that is, where the A and B matrices are such that A11 = 0, A13 = 0 and B1 = 0. Then in‡ation
ful…lls
¼t+1 = A12 X2t + u1;t+1 ;

(3.22)

and is exclusively determined by variables X2t ; and variables X2t are the only predictors of
in‡ation (aside from the zero-mean exogenous shock u1;t+1 ). Under these assumptions, the
instrument it a¤ects in‡ation exclusively by …rst a¤ecting X2;t+1 and then by X2;t+1 a¤ecting
¼t+2 . Schematically, we have
it ! X2;t+1 ! ¼t+2 .
Because of this property of X2t ; its elements can be called intermediate variables.
Let X2¤ ful…ll
¼¤ = A12 X2¤ :

(3.23)

Substituting (3.22) and (3.23) into (2.4) for t + 1 and taking the expectation in period t result
in

1
1
1
Lt+1jt = (¼t+1jt ¡ ¼¤ )2 + ¾2u1 = (X2t ¡ X2¤ )0 W (X2t ¡ X2¤ ) + ¾2u1 ;
2
2
2

where ¾2u1 is the variance of u1t and the weight matrix W ful…lls W = 12 A012 A12 .
Clearly, using the period loss function
~ t ´ (X2t ¡ X2¤ )0 W (X2t ¡ X2¤ )
L
is equivalent to using (2.4). Now we can call X2t intermediate target variables, X2¤ intermediate
~ t instead of (2.4) we can call intermediate targeting.
target levels, and minimizing (2.1) with L
We thus have a situation where intermediate targeting is as good as strict in‡ation targeting.
32

In particular, assume that in‡ation is exclusively determined by money growth according to
¼t+1 = ¢mt + u1;t+1 ;
where ¢mt ´ mt ¡ mt¡1 and mt is the log of a monetary aggregate. Then, the instrument
exclusively a¤ects in‡ation via …rst a¤ecting money-growth, that is,
it ! ¢mt+1 ! ¼t+2 :
Thus, let X2t ´ ¢mt , A12 = 1, X2¤ = ¼¤ and W =

1
2;

and strict in‡ation targeting can be

replaced by strict money-growth targeting with the period loss function
~ t ´ 1 (¢mt ¡ ¼¤ )2 :
L
2
Both kinds of targeting will be equivalent.
In the example above, the transmission mechanism is recursive in a special way, such that the
target variables (in the above case only in‡ation) are only determined by a set of intermediate
variables (the only exception being zero-mean exogenous shocks). Clearly, this is an extremely
special case. In the real world, and in reasonable models, the transmission mechanism is too
complex for intermediate variables in this sense to exist, that is, the transmission mechanism is
not recursive in the above sense.38
Therefore, intermediate targeting in general, and monetary targeting in particular, is not a
good monetary policy strategy. However, there is one exception to the general nonexistence of
intermediate variables. As discussed in Svensson [90] and [96], one set of intermediate variables
always exists, namely conditional forecasts. For any vector Yt of target variables, we can write
Yt+¿ = Yt+¿ jt + "t+1 ,
where Yt+¿ jt is a conditional forecast of Yt+¿ , conditional on information available in period
t, and "t+1 is an error term uncorrelated with information in period t. Formally, conditional
forecasts can be seen as intermediate variables, and forecast targeting can be seen as intermediate
targeting. As King [60] stated early in the history of in‡ation targeting, in‡ation targeting means
having in‡ation forecasts as intermediate targets.
38
See Bryant [19], Friedman [45], Kalchbrenner and Tinsley [57] and Kareken, Muench and Wallace [58] for
this and other arguments against intermediate targeting in general and monetary targeting in particular. See
Rudebusch and Svensson [81] for simulations of monetary targeting in the U.S. with lessons for the Eurosystem.
These simulations show that monetary targeting in the U.S. would be quite ine¢cient compared to ‡exible in‡ation
targeting, in the sense of bringing higher variablility of both in‡ation and the output gap.

33

4 Lessons for the Eurosystem
4.1 De…ning price stability
In its …rst announcement of its monetary-policy strategy, on October 13, 1998, the Eurosystem
[35] stated:
“Price stability shall be de…ned as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index
of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%.”
Thus, only an upper bound of 2 percent was unambiguously announced. About a month
later, the Eurosystem clari…ed that “increase” in this de…nition shall be interpreted as excluding
de‡ation. This might seem to imply that the lower bound for in‡ation is zero. On the other
hand, the Eurosystem also stated that it had not announced a lower bound, giving the reason
that the size of any measurement bias in the HICP is not known. On December 1, 1998, the
Eurosystem [36] announced a monetary reference value for M3 of 4.5 percent. Then, subtraction
of the sum of its estimates of potential output growth and trend decline in velocity from 4.5
percent revealed that it had applied an in‡ation target of 1.5 percent. If this is the middle of
an interval with an upper bound of 2 percent, that interval is obviously 1–2 percent. Hence, the
Eurosystem seems to have implicitly announced a lower bound of 1 percent.
Clearly, observers should not have to piece together the de…nition from di¤erent statements,
including the announcement of the reference value. Any remaining ambiguity with regard to
the de…nition seems to serve no purpose. If the Eurosystem wants to to avoid misinterpretation
and to provide a clear anchor for in‡ation expectations, it should replace the ambiguous and
asymmetric statement “below 2%” and state an unambiguous and symmetric in‡ation target,
say in the form of a point target of 1.5 percent or in the form of the interval 1–2 percent, possibly
with the addendum that this de…nition may be somewhat modi…ed when more evidence about
the quality of the HICP becomes available. Absent such a statement, it seems that observers
should currently interpret the Eurosystem as having an in‡ation target of 1.5 percent, and
evaluate its policy accordingly.
As argued in section 2, it is by no means clear that interpreting price stability as an in‡ation
target should be the …nal word, since that implies accepting a unit root and nonstationarity
of the price level, making “price stability” a misnomer. After some 5 or 10 years of successful
in‡ation targeting, the Eurosystem may want to seriously consider the pros and cons of moving
to price-level targeting.
34

4.2 Maintaining price stability
In addition to the de…nition of price stability, on October 13, the Eurosystem announced what
was later called the “two pillars” of its strategy, namely
² “a prominent role for money with a reference value for the growth of a monetary aggregate”
and
² “a major role for a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for future price developments.”39
With regard to the role of money, the Eurosystem has emphasized that the reference value
should not be interpreted as an intermediate target for money growth. Indeed, it has rejected
monetary targeting, on the grounds that the relationship between money and prices may not be
su¢ciently stable, and that it is not clear that the monetary aggregates with the most stable
relationship is su¢ciently controllable in the short run. As Issing [56] summarizes:
“In these circumstances, relying on a pure monetary targeting strategy would constitute an unrealistic, and therefore misguided, commitment.”
Instead, the Eurosystem plans to use money growth as an indicator of “risks to price stability,”
such that deviations of current money growth from the reference value signals risks to price
stability.
“The reference value will be derived in a manner that ensures, as far as possible,
that deviations of monetary growth from the value will signal risks to price stability.
In the …rst instance, such a deviation will prompt further analysis to identify and
interpret the economic disturbance that caused the deviation, and evaluate whether
the disturbance requires a policy move to counter risks to price stability.” (Issing
[56])
As I argue in some detail in Svensson [98], there is little ground for such a prominent role
for money. It is easily shown in the simple and conventional model used there, that such a
money-growth indicator will be a relatively useless indicator of risks to price stability and,
indeed, mostly a noisy indicator of the deviation of current in‡ation from the in‡ation target.
As argued in section 3.3, the weight on money as an indicator should be strictly determined
by its predictive power in forecasting in‡ation. As argued in section 3.3.1 and demonstrated
39
Since the …rst version of this paper was written, an extensive discussion and motivation of Eurosystem
strategy has been presented by Angeloni, Gaspar and Tristani [2].

35

in some detail in Svensson [98], the best indicator of “risks to price stability” is an in‡ation
forecast conditional for an unchanged interest rate.40
I believe it worthwhile to look more closely at the Eurosystem’s arguments in favor of a
prominent role to money, stated very clearly in Issing [56]. Three arguments for giving a prominent role for money are provided: (1) “In‡ation is fundamentally monetary in origin over the
longer term,” (2) “It creates a …rm ‘nominal’ anchor for monetary policy and therefore helps to
stabilise private in‡ation expectations at longer horisons,” and (3) “[It] emphasizes the responsibility of the ESCB for the monetary impulses to in‡ation, which a central bank can control
more readily than in‡ation itself.”
With regard to argument (1), it is based on the empirical high long-run correlation between
money and prices. This correlation, however, holds in any model where demand for money is
demand for real money, for instance in the simple model used in Svensson [98] to demonstrate
the inferiority of the Eurosystem’s money-growth indicator. The correlation is actually a relation
between two endogenous variables, and says nothing about causality. The direction of causality is
determined by the monetary policy pursued. Under strict monetary targeting, when the central
bank aims at maintaining a given money growth rate regardless of what happens to prices,
money growth becomes exogenous in the relation and causes in‡ation, which is endogenous.
Under in‡ation targeting, when the central bank aims at maintaining a given in‡ation rate
regardless of what happens to money, in‡ation becomes exogenous in the relation and causes
money growth, which is endogenous. Hence, argument (1) is neutral to the monetary strategy.
With regard to argument (2), it seems that the de…nition of price stability provides the
best nominal anchor and is the best stabilizer of in‡ation expectations. Emphasizing a second
nominal anchor seems redundant and even misguided, since more than one nominal anchor could
confuse, rather than stabilize, private expectations.
40
Rudebusch and Svensson [81] examine monetary targeting in empirical model of in‡ation, output and money
for U.S. data and draw some lessons for the Eurosystem. They …nd that monetary targeting would be a very
ine¢cient compared to in‡ation targeting, in the sense of increasing the variability of both in‡ation and output.
Counter to conventional wisdom, this is the case also if money-demand shocks are set to zero so the money demand
is completely stable.
Gerlach and Svensson [47] examine the indicator properties of monetary aggregates for the euro area. Somewhat
surprisingly, they …nd considerable empirical support for the so-called P ¤ model of Hallman, Porter and Small
[52], adapted to Germany by Tödter and Reimers [107]. This implies that monetary aggregates, in the form of the
“real money gap,” the gap between current real balances and long-run equilibrium real balances, has considerable
predictive power for future in‡ation. They …nd little or no empirical support for the Eurosystem’s money-growth
indicator, though.
Indeed, the theoretical analysis in Svensson [95] shows that the P ¤ model, although emphasizing the role of
the real money gap in forecasting and controlling in‡ation, does not provide any support for a Bundesbank-style
money-growth target or a Eurosystem-style money-growth indicator.

36

With regard to argument (3), it is not clear how “monetary impulses to in‡ation” can be
de…ned in any unambiguous and useful way. I am not sure the argument means anything
but monetary aggregates being easier to control than in‡ation. Furthermore, it seems obvious
that the Maastricht Treaty does not assign “stability of monetary impulses to in‡ation” as the
primary objective of the Eurosystem; it assigns “price stability,” period.
Thus, the …rst pillar is unlikely to provide much support for the maintenance of price stability.
Instead, this must to rely on the second pillar, the “broadly-based assessment of the outlook
for future price developments.” This is, of course, nothing but a long euphemism for in‡ationforecast targeting. Indeed, I believe the success of the Eurosystem maintenance of price stability
depends strongly on its learning to do forecast targeting, as practiced by an increasing number
of in‡ation-targeting central banks.
Strangely enough, Eurosystem statements argue that in‡ation-forecast targeting would be
unsuitable for the Eurosystem, on the grounds that forecasting in‡ation will be di¢cult and that
the understanding of the transmission mechanism is imperfect. To quote Issing [56] further:41
“In the uncertain environment likely to exist at the outset of Monetary Union, forecasting in‡ation will be di¢cult, not least because of the many conceptual, empirical
and practical uncertainties faced by the ESCB at the start of Stage Three. Forecasting models estimated using historic data may not o¤er a reliable guide to the
behaviour of the euro area economy under Monetary Union. Forecast uncertainty is
likely to be relatively large.
Forecasting in‡ation requires thorough knowledge of the properties of the new euro
area-wide data series and experience and understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy in the new euro area economy. Both are likely to be
quite di¤erent from what we have been used to in the existing environment of eleven
distinct national economies prior to Monetary Union.”
Certainly, forecasting and forecast targeting will not be easy, and forecast uncertainty is
likely to be relatively large. Nevertheless, forecasting is simply necessary, given “the need
for monetary policy to have a forward-looking, medium-term orientation” that Issing and the
Eurosystem emphasizes. Furthermore, forecast targeting implies using existing information in
the most e¢cient and ‡exible way. It incorporates both model and extra-model information,
allows judgemental adjustments, takes additive uncertainty for granted and even allows imperfect
understanding of the transmission mechanism and model uncertainty, as I have tried to explain
in this paper. Of course, the less the uncertainty and the better the understanding of the
transmission mechanism, the more successful forecast targeting is likely to be. But this does not
41

See also Angeloni, Gaspar and Tristani [2].

37

mean that there is some better way of maintaining price stability, if there is more uncertainty
and less understanding of the transmission mechanism.42

5 Conclusions
This paper argues that forecast targeting is likely to be the best way of maintaining price
stability, on the grounds that with lags and uncertainty in the transmission mechanism, forecast
targeting is the most e¢cient and ‡exible way of using available information. By generalizing
forecast targeting from mean forecast targeting to distribution forecast targeting, it should also
be the best way of handling model uncertainty. Indeed, I believe the current best practice in
central banks’ maintaining price stability must be understood as forecast targeting.
The paper has, so far, only discussed the framework for policy decisions and not at all
the central bank’s communication, degree of transparency and degree of accountability. Under
forecast targeting, the conditional forecasts for in‡ation and the output gap are the crucial inputs
in the policy decision. Therefore, policy decisions are best explained and motivated, and policy
is best understood and anticipated by the public, with reference to these conditional forecasts.
This has the bene…cial e¤ect that any criticism of the policy must be more speci…c: for instance,
is it the target or the central bank’s forecast that is wrong? Furthermore, making these forecasts
public provides the best opportunity for outside observers to monitor and evaluate the central
bank’s policy, and making sure that its decisions are consistent with its objective. Then policy
can be evaluated almost in real time, without waiting some two years to see the outcome of
an in‡ation rate that is, by then, contaminated by a number of intervening shocks. Finally,
making the forecasts public provides the strongest incentives for the central bank to improve its
competence and do the best possible job.
These are strong argument in favor of making these forecasts public, which practice is already
followed by Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bank of England, and Sveriges Riksbank. Against
42
As I argue in Svensson [98], it may be sobering to recall that the introduction of in‡ation targeting in the
United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland occurred under rather dramatic circumstances. The countries went through
dramatic boom-bust experiences, very serious banking and …nancial-sector crises, and a dramatic sudden shift
from a …xed exchange rate to a new monetary policy regime with a ‡oating exchange rate. Furthermore, this
occurred in a situation with very low credibility for monetary policy, with high and unstable in‡ation expectations,
much above the announced in‡ation targets. At least for Sweden (where I am naturally more informed) the central
bank’s commitment to the …xed exchange rate was so strong, that there was no contingency planning. When
the krona was ‡oated in November 1992, the new in‡ation-targeting regime, which was announced in January
1993, had to be conceived from scratch (although, of course, with the bene…t of the experiences mainly from New
Zealand and Canada). It is not easy to rank di¢culties and uncertainty about the transmission mechanism, but
it seems to me that the di¢culties facing the Eurosystem are still not of the same magnitude as the di¢culties
that the central banks of the United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland were facing. Since those central banks have,
nevertheless, managed quite well, the odds for the Eurosystem may be quite good, provided it adopts a similar
framework for policy decisions.

38

this background, the Eurosystem’s refusal to publish its forecasts, citing far from convincing
arguments,43 is very di¢cult to understand, except perhaps as an expression of an initial lack
of con…dence and experience and a desire to further improve its competence before going public
(but if so, why not announce that the forecasts will eventually be public?). I see no reason why
the Eurosystem should not aim for the current best standard of transparency, as demonstrated
by the mentioned central banks.
43
See, for instance, Duisenberg [32]: “... publishing an in‡ation forecast would obscure rather than clarify
what the Governing Council is actually doing. The public would be presented with a single number intended
to summarise a thorough and comprehensive analysis of a wide range of indicator variables. However, such a
summary would inevitably be simplistic. Moreover, because publishing a single in‡ation forecast would be likely
to suggest that monetary policy reacts mechanistically to this forecast, publication might mislead the public and
therefore run counter to the principle of clarity.”

39

References
[1] Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens and George L. Perry (1996), “The Macroeconomics
of Low In‡ation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1996, 1–76.
[2] Angeloni, Ignazio, Vitor Gaspar and Oreste Tristani (1999), “The Monetary Policy Strategy of the ECB,” Working Paper, ECB.
[3] Aoki, Kosuke (1998), “On the Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Noisy Indicators,”
Working Paper, Princeton University.
[4] Backus, David, and John Dri¢ll (1986), “The Consistency of Optimal Policy in Stochastic
Rational Expectations Models,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 124.
[5] Ball, Laurence (1997), “E¢cient Rules for Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No.
5952.
[6] Ball, Laurence (1998), “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” forthcoming in Taylor [105].
[7] Bank of Canada (1994), Economic Behavior and Policy Choice under Price Stability,
Ottawa.
[8] Bank of England (1998), Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting on 4–5 March
1998, Bank of England.
[9] Batini, Nicoletta, and Andrew G. Haldane (1998), “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary
Policy,” in Taylor [105], forthcoming.
[10] Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1998), “Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish
Experience 1931–1937,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
[11] Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1998), In‡ation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press.
[12] Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov (1997), “What Does the Bundesbank Target?” European Economic Review 41, 1025–1054.
[13] Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “In‡ation Targeting: A New Framework
for Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 97–116.

40

[14] Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (1997), “In‡ation Forecasts and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 653–684.
[15] Blinder, Alan S. (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, MIT Press, Cambridge
MA.
[16] Blix, Mårten, and Peter Sellin (1998), “Uncertainty Bands for In‡ation Forecasts,”
Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 65.
[17] Brainard, William (1967), “Uncertainty and the E¤ectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review 57, Papers and Proceeding; 411–425.
[18] Britton, Erik, Paul Fisher, and John Whitley (1998), “The In‡ation Report Projections:
Understanding the Fan Chart,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 38, 30–37.
[19] Bryant, Ralph C. (1980), Money and Monetary Policy in Interdependent Nations, Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
[20] Bryant, Ralph C., Peter Hooper and Catherine L. Mann, eds. (1993), Evaluating Policy
Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics, The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.
[21] Budd, Alan (1998), “Economic Policy, with and without Forecasts,” Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin 86, 379–384.
[22] Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1995), “In‡ation Indicators and In‡ation Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 10, 189–219.
[23] Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1997), “Central Bank Policy Rules: Conceptual Issues and Practical Considerations,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[24] Chow, Gregory C. (1975), Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic Systems, John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
[25] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1998a), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review 42, 1033–1067.
[26] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1998b), “The Science of Monetary Policy,”
Working Paper.
41

[27] Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler (1997), “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
Policy,” in Romer, Christina, and David Romer, eds., Reducing In‡ation: Motivation and
Strategy, Chicago University Press.
[28] Clark, Peter, Douglas Laxton, and David Rose (1996), “Asymmetry in the U.S. OutputIn‡ation Nexus,” IMF Sta¤ Papers 43, 216–251.
[29] Currie, David, and Paul Levine (1992), “Should Rules Be Simple?” Economics and Planning 25, 113–138. Reprinted in Currie and Levin [30].
[30] Currie, David, and Paul Levine (1993), Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic Policy
Coordination, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[31] Debelle, Guy, and Douglas Laxton (1997), “Is the Phillips Curve Really a Curve? Some
Evidence for Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States,” Sta¤ Papers 44,
249–282.
[32] Duisenberg, Willem F. (1998), “The ESCB’s Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy,” speech in Dublin, November 10, 1998, http://www.ecb.int.
[33] Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “Is there a Role for Monetary Aggregates
in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 279–304.
[34] Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1998), “Rethinking the Role of NAIRU in
Monetary Policy: Implications of Model Formulation and Uncertainty,” NBER Working
Paper No. 6518.
[35] European Central Bank (1998a), “A Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy for the
ESCB,” Press Release, October 13, 1998, http://www.ecb.int.
[36] European Central Bank (1998b), “The Quantitative Reference Value for Monetary
Growth,” Press Release, December 1, 1998, http://www.ecb.int.
[37] European Central Bank (1999), “The Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy of the
Eurosystem,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, January 1999, http://www.ecb.int, 39–50.
[38] European Monetary Institute (1997), The Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three: Elements of the Monetary Policy Strategy in the ESCB, European Monetary Institute.

42

[39] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996), Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City.
[40] Feldstein, Martin (1997), “The Costs and Bene…ts of Going from Low In‡ation to Price
Stability,” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing In‡ation: Motivation and Strategy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
[41] Feldstein, Martin, ed. (1999), Costs and Bene…ts of Price Stability, Chicago University
Press, forthcoming.
[42] Fischer, Stanley (1994), “Modern Central Banking,” in Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart,
Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadt, The Future of Central Banking, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
[43] Fischer, Stanley (1996), “Why Are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability?”
in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [39].
[44] Fisher, Irving (1934), Stable Money. Published 1935 in Britain under the title of Stable
Money: A History of the Movement, Allen & Unwin, London.
[45] Friedman, Benjamin M. (1975), “Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 1, 443–473.
[46] Gerlach, Stefan, and Gert Schnabel (1998), “The Taylor Rule and Average Interest Rates
in the EMU-11 Area: A Note,” Working Paper, Bank for International Settlements.
[47] Gerlach, Stefan, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), “Money and In‡ation in the Euro Area:
A Case for Monetary Indicators?” Working Paper.
[48] Gordon, Robert J. (1996), “Comments and Discussion,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1:1996, 60–66.
[49] Gordon, Robert J. (1997), “The Time-Varying NAIRU and its Implication for Economic
Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(1), 11–32.
[50] Greenspan, Alan (1994), “Discussion,” in Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadt, The Future of Central Banking, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K.

43

[51] Hall, Robert E. (1984), “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard,” in Price
Stability and Public Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, 137–159.
[52] Hallman, Je¤rey J., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small, (1991), “Is the Price Level
Tied to the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?,” American Economic Review 81,
841-858.
[53] Heikensten, Lars, and Anders Vredin (1998), “In‡ation Targeting and Swedish Monetary
Policy—Experience and Problems,” Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 4/1998, 5–33.
[54] HM Treasury (1997), “Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee,” News Release, June
12, 1997.
[55] Isard, Peter, and Douglas Laxton (1996), “Strategic Choice in Phillips Curve Speci…cation:
What if Bob Gordon is Wrong?” Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
[56] Issing, Otmar (1998), “The European Central Bank at the Eve of EMU,” speech in London,
November 26, 1998.
[57] Kalchbrenner, J.H., and P.A. Tinsley (1975), “On the Use of Optimal Control in the
Design of Monetary Policy,” Special Studies Paper No. 76, Federal Reserve Board.
[58] Kareken, John H., Thomas Muench, and Neil Wallace (1973), “Optimal Open Market
Strategy: The Use of Information Variables,” American Economic Review 63, 156–172.
[59] Kiley, Michael T. (1998), “Monetary Policy under Neoclassical and New-Keynesian Phillips
Curves, with an Application to Price Level and In‡ation Targeting,” Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Board.
[60] King, Mervyn A. (1994), “Monetary Policy in the UK,” Fiscal Studies 15, No. 3, 109–128.
[61] King, Mervin A. (1996), “How Should Central Banks Reduce In‡ation?—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [39].
[62] King, Mervyn A. (1997), “Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in
Practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 81–97.
[63] Laubach, Thomas, and Adam S. Posen (1997), Disciplined Discretion: Monetary Targeting in Germany and Switzerland, Essays in International Finance, No. 206, Princeton
University.
44

[64] Leeper, Eric M., and Tao Zha (1999), “Identi…cation and Forecasting: Joint Inputs to
Policy Analysis,” Working Paper.
[65] Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, eds. (1995), In‡ation Targets, Centre of
Economic Policy Research, London.
[66] Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland and John C. Williams (1998), “Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in Taylor [105], forthcoming.
[67] LeRoy, Stephen F., and Roger N. Waud (1977), “Applications of the Kalman Filter in
Short-run Monetary Control,” International Economic Review 18, 195–207.
[68] Lowe, Philip, ed., (1997), Monetary Policy and In‡ation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia.
[69] McCallum, Bennett T. (1997), “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” NBER
Working Paper No. 6016.
[70] McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1998), “Nominal Income Targeting in an
Open-Economy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
[71] Neumann, Manfred (1997), “Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Kuroda, Iwao, ed.,
Towards More E¤ective Monetary Policy, St. Martin’s Press, New York.
[72] Onatski, Alexei, and James H. Stock (1998), “Robust Monetary Policy under Model Uncertainty in a Small Model of the U.S. Economy,” Working Paper, Harvard University.
[73] Orphanides, Athanasios (1998), “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
[74] Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland (1998), “Price Stability and Monetary Policy
E¤ectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero,” Working Paper, Federal
Reserve Board.
[75] Pearlman, Joseph G. (1992), “Reputational and Nonreputational Policies under Partial
Information,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 339–357.
[76] Pearlman, Joseph G., David Currie and Paul Levine (1986), “Rational Expectations Models with Partial Information,” Economic Modelling 3, 90–105.
45

[77] Peersman, Gert, and Frank Smets (1998), “Uncertainty and the Taylor Rule in a Simple
Model of the Euro-Area Economy,” Working Paper.
[78] Reifschneider, David L., David J. Stockton and David W. Wilcox (1997), “Econometric Models and the Monetary Policy Process,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 47, 1–37.
[79] Rudebusch, Glenn D. (1998), “Is the Fed Too Timid? Monetary Policy in an Uncertain
World,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
[80] Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Lars E.O. Svensson (1998), “Policy Rules for In‡ation Targeting,” in Taylor [105], forthcoming.
[81] Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), “Eurosystem Monetary Targeting:
Lessons from U.S. Data,” Working Paper.
[82] Sack, Brian (1988), “Does the Fed Act Gradually? A VAR Analysis,” Discussion Paper
98–17, Federal Reserve Board.
[83] Sargent, Thomas J. (1998), “Discussion of ‘Policy Rules for Open Economies’ by Laurence
Ball”, in Taylor [105], forthcoming.
[84] Smets, Frank (1998), “Output Gap Uncertainty: Does it Matter for the Taylor Rule?”
Working Paper, Bank for International Settlements.
[85] Söderlind, Paul (1998), “Solution and Estimation of RE Macromodels with Optimal Policy,” Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
[86] Söderström, Ulf (1999a), “Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,” Working Paper,
Stockholm School of Economics.
[87] Söderström, Ulf (1999b), “Should Central Banks Be More Aggressive?” Working Paper,
Stockholm School of Economics.
[88] Stock, James H. (1998), “Making Policies Robust to Model Uncertainty: Comment on
‘Policy Rules for In‡ation Targeting’ by Glenn Rudebusch and Lars E.O. Svensson,” in
Taylor [105], forthcoming.

46

[89] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1996), ”Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Respond to
Shocks while Maintaining Long-Run Price Stability?—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [39].
[90] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997a), “In‡ation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
In‡ation Targets,” European Economic Review 41, 1111–1146.
[91] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997b), “Price Level Targeting vs. In‡ation Targeting,” Working
Paper version.
[92] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1998a), “In‡ation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” NBER
Working Paper No. 6790.
[93] Svensson, Lars E.O., (1998b), “In‡ation Targeting in an Open Economy: Strict vs. Flexible In‡ation Targeting,” Victoria Economic Commentaries 15-1, Victoria University of
Wellington.
[94] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999a), “Better to Respond to Determinants of Targets than to
Targets Themselves,” in preparation.
[95] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999b), “Does the P ¤ Model Provide Any Rationale for Monetary
Targeting?” Working Paper.
[96] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999c), “In‡ation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
[97] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999d), “In‡ation Targeting: Some Extensions,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[98] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999e), “Monetary Policy Issues for the Eurosystem,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, forthcoming.
[99] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999f), “Open-Economy In‡ation Targeting,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
[100] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999g), “Price Level Targeting vs. In‡ation Targeting,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
[101] Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (1999), “Indicators for Optimal Policy,” in
preparation.
47

[102] Sveriges Riksbank (1997), In‡ation Report, September 1997, Sveriges Riksbank.
[103] Taylor, John B. (1996), “How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Shocks while Maintaining Log-Run Price Stability—Conceptual Issues,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City [39].
[104] Taylor, John B., (1998), “The Robustness and E¢ciency of Monetary Policy Rules as
Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” IIES Seminar Paper
No. 649.
[105] Taylor, John B., ed. (1999), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago University Press, forthcoming.
[106] Tinsley, Peter A. (1975), “On Proximate Exploitation of Intermediate Information in
Macroeconomic Forecasting,” Special Studies Paper No. 59, Federal Reserve Board.
[107] Tödter, Karl-Heinz, and Hans-Eggert Reimers (1994), “P -Star as a Link between Money
and Prices in Germany,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 130, 273–289.
[108] Vickers, John (1998), “In‡ation Targeting in Practice: the UK Experience,” Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin 38, 368–375.
[109] von Hagen, Jürgen (1995), “In‡ation and Monetary Targeting in Germany,” in Leiderman
and Svensson [65].
[110] Wallis, Kenneth F. (1999), “Asymmetric Density Forecasts of In‡ation and Bank of England’s Fan Chart,” National Institute Economic Review 1/99, 106–112.
[111] Wieland, Volker (1996), “Monetary Policy, Parameter Uncertainty and Optimal Learning,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
[112] Wieland, Volker (1998), “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty about the Natural Unemployment Rate,” Finance and Economics Discussion Paper No. 22, Federal Reserve Board.
[113] Williams, John C. (1997), “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy,” Working Paper, Federal
Reserve Board.
[114] Wolman, Alexander L. (1998a), “Staggered Price Setting and the Zero Bound on Nominal
Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 84 (4), 1–24.
48

[115] Wolman, Alexander L. (1998b), “Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest
Rates,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
[116] Woodford, Michael (1994), “Nonstandard Indicators for Monetary Policy: Can Their Usefulness Be Judged from Forecasting Regressions?” in Gregory N. Mankiw, ed., Monetary
Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

49

</ref_section>

