NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENCY EFFECTS ON THE U.S.
ECONOMY FROM WIRELESS TAXATION
Jerry Hausman
Working Paper 7281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7281

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Jerry Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiency Effects on the U.S. Economy
from Wireless Taxation
Jerry Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 7281
August 1999
JEL No. H22, L51
ABSTRACT
This paper measures for the first time the economic efficiency effects of the taxation of wireless
services, which are taxed by federal, state, and local governments at relatively high rates in the range of
14%-25%. The paper concludes such taxes are a much greater drain on the economy than their direct
costs. The taxes identified in this paper cost the economy $2.56 billion more than the $4.79 billion they
raise in tax revenues. These taxes are raised from wireless consumers and thereby suppress demand for
service, imposing an efficiency loss on the economy of $0.53 for every $1 currently raised in taxes.
Prospective taxes will impose an efficiency loss of $0.72-$1.14 per additional dollar of tax revenue raised.
Jerry A. Hausman
Department of Economics
E52-271A MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
jhausman@mit.edu

1

July 16, 1999
Efficiency Effects on the U.S. Economy from Wireless Taxation
Jerry Hausman, MIT1

Summary
Unlike local wireline access services, demand for wireless service is relatively elastic. This
paper measures for the first time the economic efficiency effects of the taxation of wireless services,
which are taxed by federal, state, and local governments at relatively high rates in the range of 14%25%. The paper concludes such taxes are a much greater drain on the economy than their direct costs.
The taxes identified in this paper cost the economy $2.56 billion more than the $4.79 billion they
raise in tax revenues. These taxes are raised from wireless consumers and thereby suppress demand for
service, imposing an efficiency loss on the economy of $0.53 for every $1 currently raised in taxes.
Prospective taxes will impose an efficiency loss of $0.72-$1.14 per additional dollar of tax revenue
raised.

I. Introduction
Federal, state, and local government authorities are now levying a wide range of taxes and fees
on the use of cellular telephone, PCS, and ESMR services (jointly wireless services).2 The sum effect

1.

The approach used in this paper is related to an earlier paper, Hausman (1998). Sandra Chan
provided research assistance.
1

2

of the FCC-imposed fees and other federal taxes is currently 4.52% (including the federal excise tax
and the FCC’s share of current universal service program funding).3 Additional tax increases have been
proposed by the FCC to fund other social programs in telecommunications.4
State and local taxes on wireless vary by jurisdiction, and commonly impose higher tax rates on
wireless than on other businesses. Many localities charge a variety of direct and indirect fees to wireless
providers. Most such taxes and fees are of recent origin. More such taxes and fees are currently being
proposed. The subsequent analysis estimates the efficiency loss to the economy from these additional
proposed taxes and fees.
Mobile wireless telephone is an example of a new product that has significantly affected how
Americans live in a relatively short period of time.5 Since their introduction in 1983, cellular telephones’
adoption has grown at 25-35% per year such that at year end 1998 about 69 million wireless
telephones are in use in the U.S. Thus, approximately 28% of all Americans use wireless telephones,
and there are about 40% as many cellular telephones in the U.S. as regular (landline) telephones. The
average cellular customer spends about $525 per year on cellular service. Thus, consumers and
businesses have found cellular telephone to be a valuable addition to their lifestyles. However, federal,
state, and local governments have seen wireless as a ready source of tax revenue while the FCC has

2.

PCS is a form of digital cellular telephone service. ESMR, enhanced specialized mobile radio, is a
cellular-like service offered by Nextel and other companies. Throughout this paper I will combine these
services into the single term wireless services. They are often referred to as CMRS (consumer mobile
radio services) by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
3.
See Hausman (1998) and Hausman and Shelanski (1999) for a discussion of the FCC taxation
program to provide internet subsidies for schools and libraries.
4
The FCC is only allowed to assess "fees", not taxes. However, the FCC fees have the same
economic effect as a tax.
5
Wireless has led to significant increases in consumer welfare. For estimate of these welfare gains
see Hausman (1997) and (1999).
2

3

used wireless to fund new subsidy programs for wireline telephone usage. No calculation has ever been
done to estimate the cost to consumers and the U.S. economy that arises from the relatively high level of
taxation. Indeed, since separate taxes are levied at all three levels of government, most government
officials seem unaware of the cumulative tax rate levied on wireless. They each see their own tax rate as
being “small” without realizing that the cumulative effect of the three levels of taxes levy a high cost on
consumers and the economy.
The effect of these federal taxes, and the many state and local taxes on wireless, is to raise costs
to consumers, suppress demand, and impose efficiency losses on the economy. For example, the
aggregate New York state tax of 20% imposes a cost of about $11.52 per month or $138 per year on
the average wireless user. The combined federal and state tax burden on a wireless user in New York
is 24.5% or $170 per year. Similar taxes on wireless users in California and Florida average about
21%. The resulting state tax obligation for the average wireless customer in these states exceeds $152
per year.6 When federal taxes are included, the overall tax rate increases to 25.5%, and average
consumers’ tax bills increase to $185 per year.
Even in states where lower taxes are levied on wireless, the median state tax rate is 10%, and
the tax payment for the average wireless customer is about $62. Including current federal taxes, the
median tax rate is 14.5% and the yearly tax bill is about $91.

6.

For instance, a wireless user in California pays the following taxes: FCC taxes for the high cost
fund, universal service and school and library internet subsidy, state, county and city sales taxes, taxes
(fees) levied by the California Public Utilities Commission for universal service (3.2%), emergency
telephone service (0.72%), high cost funds (3.14%), teleconnect fund (0.41%), hearing impaired fund
(0.36%), local utility taxes (7%), and the federal excise tax (3%).
3

4

There are now over 69 million wireless subscribers—about 40% as many as there are landline
telephones in the U.S.7 The average monthly bill for cellular is about $43 per month. Mobile telephone
is most often used by small businesses as a productivity tool and by consumers for personal safety
reasons. Thus, taxation of wireless should be evaluated not as taxation of a luxury good, but in terms of
its distortionary effect on consumer behavior and economic efficiency compared to other revenue
sources for government expenditure.8
Economists have well-developed tools, used for more than 100 years, to assess the
distortionary effect of a tax on consumer welfare and economic efficiency.9 Taxes decrease the
consumption of a good or service and, in this case, also lead to under-utilization of the infrastructure
investment made by wireless providers. In this paper, I calculate the effect on deadweight loss and
economic efficiency from the distortionary effect of taxation on wireless. The change in economic
efficiency accounts for both harm to consumers, from the deadweight loss term, and harm to wireless
providers who have invested tens of billions of dollars in their networks and who have paid over ten
billion dollars to acquire their licenses, often from the federal government.10
I calculate the efficiency cost to the economy of raising the approximately $4.79 billion that is
currently raised from wireless taxation to be about $2.56 billion (in addition to the $4.79 billion of tax
revenue) or the efficiency loss to the economy for every $1 raised is about $0.53. Furthermore, for
7

These are year end 1998 estimates from the Cellular Telephone Industry Association (CTIA) semiannual surveys.
8.
See Posner (1971) for an early discussion of taxation by regulation. Hausman (1998) estimates
the distortionary effects of taxation of landline telephone services.
9.
See e.g., Auerbach (1985) and Hausman (1981).
10.
PCS providers bought their spectrum in auctions conducted by the federal government. The
cellular spectrum and much of the ESMR spectrum was distributed free of charge by the federal
government in an earlier period before auctions were used. But, in many instances, current licensees

4

5

every additional dollar raised, the marginal efficiency loss to the economy varies between $0.72 to
$1.14. This cost to the economy is high compared to other taxes used by the Federal and state
governments to raise revenues.11 Three reasons exist for the high cost to the economy of this tax on
mobile telephone services: (1) the price elasticity of wireless services is relatively high, (2) the taxation of
wireless services is high, and (3) the price to marginal cost ratio of wireless services is high. Thus, the
taxation of wireless imposes high efficiency costs on the U.S. economy.
Other commodities can be taxed to raise the same revenue without creating nearly so large
deadweight losses or losses in economic efficiency as I have discussed in previous papers, Hausman
(1995, 1998). Within telecommunications, a tax on monthly local landline access rates will create
almost no deadweight loss or loss in economic efficiency since the price elasticity for local access has
been estimated to be very near zero, -0.005 (Hausman et. al. 1993, 1998). I conclude that taxation of
wireless cannot be justified on income distribution grounds (e.g., the luxury good approach) nor can it
be justified on economic efficiency grounds.12 Government use of wireless as a taxation source to fund
expenditure in other areas leads to high efficiency costs to the economy.

II. Estimation of Economic Efficiency Losses

obtained their spectrum by buying it at market prices from the original licensees.
11
This paper answers the question raised by Posner (1971) of the cost of subsidy programs arising
from regulation and taxation of wireless telephone which I also considered in Hausman (1998) with
respect to wireline telephone tax and subsidy programs.
12
According to a 1997 survey of approximately 1000 wireless users by Peter Hart Research
Associates, the median (and modal) wireless user’s family income was in the range of $30,000 to

5

6

Taxes (and subsidies) distort economic activity. Taxes increase prices and thus lead to lower
demand. This lower demand has two adverse affects on economic efficiency which is defined
(approximately) as the sum of producer surplus and consumer surplus.13 To the extent that the industry
is imperfectly competitive and price exceeds marginal cost to cover fixed costs, decreased demand
reduces the amount of producer surplus which is the product of quantity demanded times the difference
between price and marginal cost.14 Decreased demand from higher prices also affects consumers
adversely since consumer surplus decreases. Thus, the change in economic efficiency from the
imposition of a tax is given approximately by the formula:

∆Ε ≈ [-∆ qi ( p i - mi ) - .5 ∆ pi ∆ qi ]
2

 ∆ pi 
∆ pi
 pi qi ]
≈ [ ηi
( pi qi - mi qi ) + .5 ηi 
pi
p
 i 

(1)

where the first term is the change in producer surplus and the second term is the change in consumer
surplus, after the amount raised by the tax is subtracted off. 15 Figure 1 provides a graphical
demonstration of this relationship. Equation (1) demonstrates that taxes which cause prices to increase
create losses in economic efficiency with the size of the efficiency loss depending on the price elasticity

$50,000.
13
See e.g. A. Auerbach (1985) for a further discussion of how taxation creates efficiency losses to the
economy.
14.
Even in a free entry imperfectly competitive industry with constant marginal cost and zero
(economic) profits, price will exceed marginal cost.
15.
Thus, as discussed above, the possible distortion created by expenditure of the tax are not
considered. All the quantities in the formulae are assumed to be Hicksian compensated quantities. See
Hausman (1981) for computation of compensated quantities.
6

7

ηi, the magnitude of the price increase (∆pi/pi), the revenue of the good or service being taxed piqi, and
the marginal cost of production, mi.
A more accurate method than equation (1) replaces the second term of equation (1) with a
calculation of the exact deadweight loss to consumers based on the analysis of Hausman (1981a).
Rather than using the Taylor expansion, I use the expenditure function based on the log-linear demand
curve to calculate the compensating variation from the increase in taxes:

 (1 - δ ) -δ

CV = 
y [ p1 x1 - p0 x0 ] + y( 1-δ )
 (1+ α )


1/(1-δ )

-y

(2)

where δ is the income elasticity (0.8) and α is the price elasticity. To calculate the deadweight loss to
consumers, I subtract the compensated revenue raised R* from the compensating variation calculated in
equation (2): DWL = CV - R*. The DWL estimate replaces the second term in equation (1).
Hausman (1981a) demonstrates that this exact calculation can be considerably more accurate than the
approximation contained in equation (1).
For mobile telephone I have estimated the price elasticity ηi to be -0.51, Hausman (1997),
which is relatively high for telecommunications services.16 The magnitude of the price increase (∆pi/pi)
depends on the tax rate in each state with the median tax rate 10% and the high tax rates in the range of
20%-21% in California, New York, and Florida. When current federal taxes are included the median
tax rate is 14.5% and in the high tax states the overall rate is 24.2% to 25.5%. The revenue of wireless
16.

The price elasticity for interstate long distance service exceeds (in magnitude) the cellular price
elasticity, but the cellular price elasticity exceeds the elasticities for most other telecommunications
7

8

service piqi is about $525 per year, excluding taxes. Lastly the marginal cost of production for wireless,
mi, is relatively low, which is expected given the large fixed costs of wireless networks. I estimate the
marginal cost to be about $0.05 per minute. Thus, the expected result from equation (1) or equation (2)
is relatively high efficiency costs to wireless taxation given the relatively high demand elasticity, the
significant tax rates, and the low marginal cost of production.

A. Estimation of the Average Efficiency Loss from Wireless Taxation
Using equation (2), the cellular elasticity estimate considered above, and the fact that the
marginal cost of wireless is about $0.05 per minute while the median tax rate is 14.5% I estimate that
for average revenue raised by the tax on wireless:

∆E = 0.534 * TR

(3)

where TR is total tax revenue raised. This calculation follows from dividing through equation (1) by the
tax revenue raised, ti piqi (i.e. the tax revenue term TR), and using wireless revenue and tax amounts
collected from wireless by the federal, state, and local jurisdictions.
For the high tax states the efficiency loss increases on average for each dollar of tax revenue
raised from wireless customers. For a 21% state tax rate used in California, Florida, and New York,
the estimated efficiency loss increases to approximately $0.70 for each dollar of tax revenue raised,

services.
8

9

similar to the result in equation (2). For lower tax rates, the estimated efficiency loss decreases
accordingly.
The elasticity estimate that I used to calculate equation (2), reported in Hausman (1997), is –
0.51. This estimate was based on data up through 1993. Using more recent data, I have estimated an
elasticity of about –0.71, although the estimate is not statistically significantly different from the earlier
estimate. An increased elasticity estimate might be expected given the rapid penetration of mobile
telephone and the expected results that early adopters place a higher marginal valuation on their usage
while later adopters are affected by decreasing prices. While I would need to collect more data before
changing the elasticity estimate, note from equation (1) that the estimated efficiency loss is homogeneous
of degree one in the elasticity estimate. An approximately similar result holds for equation (2). Thus if
the higher elasticity estimate were used to estimate the average efficiency loss, the amount would
increase from 0.534 for the median tax state to 0.743. The efficiency loss for the high tax states would
also increase accordingly.

B. Estimation of the Marginal Efficiency Loss from Wireless Taxation
Perhaps a more relevant calculation is the marginal efficiency loss to the economy from changes
to the tax rates. The FCC and state and local tax authorities apparently view wireless as a ready tax
revenue source so that they have been increasing the tax rates over time. The FCC has increased tax
rates to provide universal service for landline telephone users and to provide internet subsidies to

9

10

schools and libraries.17 These subsidies and the taxes (fees) to fund them are expected to continue
increasing in the near future. The formula for the marginal efficiency loss of increased taxation is
computed by taking the marginal change in equation (1) with respect to the tax rate, ∂∆E/∂ti, and
dividing by the marginal change in tax revenue with respect to the tax rate, ∂TR/∂ti:

(

∂∆Ε/∂ t i
)≈
∂TR/ ∂ t i

ηi (1 −

2
∂ pi
mi
) +ηi t i + [ ηi t i m2 i - .5 ηi t i 2 ]
pi
pi
pi
pi ∂ t i
∂ pi
1 - ηi t i
pi ∂ t i

(4)

Using equation (4) together with the assumption that ∂pi/∂ti = 1 along with the fact that ti/pi = 0.1452
for the median state when federal taxation is included, I estimate equation (4) to be 0.709.18 When I
calculate the marginal efficiency loss using the exact calculation based on equation (2) using the
approach of equation (4) instead of the traditional approximation, I estimate the marginal efficiency loss
to be 0.724. For all further calculations, I use the exact approach rather than the approximation of
equation (4).

17

Hausman (1998) and Hausman and Shelanski (1999) discuss the internet subsidy program for
schools and libraries.
18.
If instead of the assumption that ∂pi/∂ti = 1, I use a differentiated product oligopoly markup
model assumption along with constant elasticity demand curves, the marginal efficiency loss could be
higher than 0.52. Other oligopoly models, especially models based on linear demand curves could find
∂pi/∂ti < 1. For a further discussion of these matters see e.g. Hausman and Leonard (1999). However,
the introduction of 4-5 new wireless competitors in addition to the two cellular incumbents in each
market will lead to increased competition, leading to the conclusion that the entire tax will be passed on
to customers. When I did a similar analysis for the introduction of the “E-rate” tax on long distance in
Hausman (1988), the chief economist at the FCC at that time claimed that the long distance companies
might not pass on the increased tax to their customers. However, experience demonstrates that the long
distance companies did pass on the entire tax, often using a separate line item on the bill to call customer
10

11

Thus, for increased taxation the efficiency loss to the economy is approximately $0.72 for each
$1 of additional tax revenue. For states such as California and New York with tax rates near 20%
(which rise to 25% when current federal taxation is included), the marginal efficiency loss is about $0.93
for each $1 of tax revenue raised from wireless service. Thus, the marginal efficiency loss is quite high
since for each dollar raised by an increase in wireless taxes, $0.72 to $0.93 of efficiency loss is created
for the economy, beyond the tax revenue raised.19
Three reasons exist for this high amount of efficiency loss to the economy from wireless taxation,
which can be seen by an examination of equations (1) and (3): (1) the elasticity ηi is relatively high, (2)
mi/pi is relatively low since gross margins are high in wireless which is to be expected given the large
fixed costs of wireless networks, and (3) ti/pi is relatively high in the range of 14%-25%. To see how
this efficiency loss compares with other taxes in the U.S. economy, I turn to a review of the literature.

III. Previous Estimates of the Efficiency Loss from Taxation in the U.S. Economy
Rather than taxing telecommunications usage to fund the subsidy for universal service landline
telephone subsidies and internet access subsidies for schools and libraries, Congress could have used
general tax revenue. Similarly, states can levy taxes on incomes or expenditures (sales taxes) to fund
their various social programs. While no generally agreed to number exists for the value of the marginal

attention to the tax.
19
Since the numerator is homogeneous of degree one in the price elasticity and the denominator will
decrease with a higher elasticity, the marginal efficiency loss would increase significantly if the higher
elasticity of –0.71, which I discussed above, were used. Indeed the estimate of $0.724 increases to
$1.14 for the marginal dollar of tax revenue.
11

12

efficiency loss to the economy from increasing overall taxes, the range of estimates is reasonably close.
In Table 1 I present estimates of marginal effects of additional taxes:

Table 1: Marginal Efficiency Effects of Additional Taxes Raised20
Study

Type of taxes

Marginal Effect

1. Ballard, Shoven and Whalley (1985)

US taxes

$0.365

2. Browning (1987)

US taxes

$0.395

3. Bovenberg and Goulder (1996)

US taxes

$0.260

4. Hausman (1981b)

Income taxes

$0.405

All of the estimates in Table 1 are below $0.405 of marginal efficiency loss per dollar of additional
revenue raised. Thus, they are all significantly less than the $0.72 -$1.14 efficiency loss per additional
dollar of tax revenue raised by the FCC and by the state and local authorities. Thus, considerably less
expensive means to raise tax revenues, in terms of economic efficiency losses, exist for the federal
government and for the states in terms of increasing income taxes or other broad-based taxes, rather
than targeting the use of wireless services.

20.

Where a range of estimates is given in the original paper, I use the mid-point of the range.
Feldstein (1995) has estimated significantly higher marginal efficiency losses from the income tax.
12

13

In terms of the FCC tax rate used for universal service subsidies, the marginal efficiency loss for
the median state of $0.72 is significantly less than the marginal efficiency loss for the FCC tax on long
distance service for the E-rate which Hausman (1988) estimates to be $1.25. Thus, to the extent that
some of the universal subsidy is raised from wireless service, instead of all being raised from long
distance service, a lower efficiency loss to the economy results. However, as Hausman (1998) and
Hausman and Shelanski (1999) discuss a far better method exists to fund the universal service subsidy.
The alternative method which the FCC could use to raise the revenue for the universal service
subsidy is to increase the Subscriber Line Charge (SLC). The SLC was established in 1984 and is a
monthly fixed fee of $3.50 per residential line and $6.00 per business line. The FCC has not increased
the SLC for residential households since 1984 despite approximately 56.9% inflation since that time
period. The SLC is used in large part to fund the joint and common costs of the local exchange carriers
networks as well as the cross subsidy for local exchange access (e.g. local telephone service). Note
that in terms of the efficiency effects on the economy the SLC is very attractive since the own price
elasticity of local access with respect to its price is estimated to be -0.005 by Hausman et. al. (1993).
Thus, the SLC acts similarly to a lump sum tax which has "first best" economic efficiency properties
since it does not create an economic distortion, i.e. equation (4) is approximately zero since ηi is very
near zero so that the numerator is approximately zero.
To calculate the efficiency effects of this increase in the SLC, I return to equation (4) but now
compute the marginal change in economic efficiency for a change in the SLC. I first consider the second

13

14

term in equation (4), which is the change in consumer surplus (after subtracting off tax revenue raised).
Since the ratio tj/pj = 0.123 for the SLC approximately, the marginal change in consumer surplus is
about .0006 using the assumption that ∂pj/∂SLC = 1. Thus, for each additional dollar of revenue raised,
the efficiency loss is about 6/100 of a penny, i.e. nearly zero as expected.
Now the first term has a rather surprising outcome. Local access services for residential
customers are priced below marginal (incremental) cost in most states as a policy to subsidize universal
service, to subsidize rural customers, and to subsidize middle class residential customers. The ratio of
mj/pj exceeds 1.0, and a national average is approximately 1.25. Thus, the first term equals -.0013 so
that the sum of the initial two terms in equation (7) yields a change in economic efficiency from
increasing the SLC of -.0007, actually an increase in economic efficiency because the subsidy is
decreased. When the last two terms in equation (7) are estimated and the denominator is computed, I
calculate the marginal efficiency loss to be .0006, or an efficiency loss of about $0.0006 for each $1.00
increase in the SLC. Thus, an increase in the SLC to fund the universal subsidy has only an extremely
small efficiency effect, essentially equal to zero.
IV. Conclusions
The FCC and state regulatory authorities typically do not take into account efficiency effects on
the economy from their regulatory actions. Yet, these regulatory decisions can have large adverse
effects on economic efficiency. In both Hausman (1998), Hausman and Shelanski (1999) and in this
paper, I find that the distortionary effects of taxation of telecommunications services is significantly

14

15

higher than the distortionary effects created by income and sales tax revenue sources. Thus, the
negative effect on the efficiency of the U.S. economy created by these regulatory and sales taxes merits
careful consideration.
Unfortunately, the FCC and state and local entities largely ignore the negative efficiency effects
of their various tax plans levied on wireless. Indeed, the FCC has increased the Internet component of
the universal service subsidy to schools and libraries which has lead to increased taxes. The FCC also
plans to require local number portability for wireless, which has been estimated to lead to an additional
0.5%-2.2% tax on wireless usage.21 Additionally, the FCC has required implementation of an
extraordinary expensive emergency (E911) plan for wireless which is estimated to approximately $1.5
billion, or about 1.5-2 times the estimated cost of the local number portability requirement.22
While the FCC programs will likely have consumer benefits, no economic analysis has been
done with respect to a benefit-cost analysis to see whether the expected benefits outweigh the high
efficiency costs to consumers and the U.S. economy. 23 The FCC and state and local authorities could
estimate the costs to consumers and the economy when they implement tax and subsidy programs and
only implement regulatory requirements that lead to commensurate benefits to consumers. This

21.

The requirement was scheduled to go into effect in June 1999, but it has been delayed. The
lower estimate is from Evolving Systems, "Wireless LNP: An Industry White Paper", Fall 1997. The
higher estimate is from the Yankee Group, "Wireless Number Portability Costs", Exhibit 4a, March
1998.
22.
These quite expensive regulatory requirements have arisen by the extension of regulatory
requirements from local landline providers to wireless. No economic analysis has been undertaken to
decide whether the extension of landline regulation to wireless provides net consumer benefits.
23
State and local taxing authorities have apparently seen wireless as a convenient funding source for
unrelated purposes.
15

16

recommendation is particularly important given the finding of this study that the marginal efficiency loss
of these taxes increases significantly as the overall tax rates increases.

16

17

REFERENCES

Auerbach, A., "The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation", in A. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein, Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam, 1985.

Feldstein, M., "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax", NBER Working Paper
5055, 1995.

Hausman, J., "Exact Consumer's Surplus and Deadweight Loss", American Economic Review, 71,
1981a.

Hausman, J., "Income and Payroll Tax Policy and Labor Supply", L. Meyer, ed., The Supply Side
Effects of Economic Policy, 1981b.

Hausman, J., "Proliferation of Networks in Telecommunications: Technological and Economic
Considerations, D. Alexander and W. Sichel eds., Networks, Infrastructure, and the New Task for
Regulation, Univ. of Michigan Press, 1995.

Hausman, J., "Valuation and the Effect of Regulation on New Services in Telecommunications",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 1997.

17

18

Hausman, J. "Taxation Through Telecommunications Regulation", Tax Policy and the Economy, 1998.

Hausman, J. "Cellular Telephone, New Products and the CPI," Journal of Business and Economics
Statistics, 1999.

Hausman, J. and G. Leonard, “Efficiencies from the Consumer Viewpoint, ” George Mason Law
Review, 1999.

Hausman, J. and H. Shelanski, “Economic Welfare and Telecommunications Welfare: The E-Rate
Policy for Universal Service Subsidies,” Yale Journal on Regulation , 1999

Hausman, J., T. Tardiff, and A. Belinfante, "The Effects of the Breakup of AT&T on Telephone
Penetration in the United States, American Economic Review, 83, 1993.

Posner, R., "Taxation by Regulation", Bell Journal of Economics, 2, 1971.
</ref_section>

18

19

Figure 1

P

p1=p0+t

B

p0

A
MC

∆E=A+B

Q1

Q0

Q

19

20

20

