NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOO MUCH OF A GOOD THING?
THE ECONOMICS OF
INVESTMENT IN R&D
Charles I. Jones
John C. Williams
Working Paper 7283
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7283

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

We would like to thank Roland Benabou, Kenneth Judd, Michael Horvath, Sam Kortum, Ariel Pakes, Nick
Souleles, Scott Stern, Alwyn Young, and participants in numerous seminars and the NBER Summer Institute
and Economic Fluctuations Meeting for helpful conversations and comments. Financial support from the
NationalScience Foundation (SBR-9510916, SBR-9818911) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or other members of its staff.

© 1999 by Charles I. Jones and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Too Much of a Good Thing?
The Economics of Investment in R&D
Charles I. Jones and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 7283
August 1999
JEL No. O31, O41
ABSTRACT
Research and development (R&D) is a key determinant of long run productivity and welfare. A
central issue is whether a decentralized economy undertakes too little or too much R&D. We develop an
endogenous growth model that incorporates parametrically four important distortions to R&D: the surplus
appropriability problem, knowledge spillovers, creative destruction, and congestion externalities. We show
that our model is consistent with the available evidence on R&D, growth, and markups. Calibrating the
model to micro and macro data, we find that the decentralized economy typically underinvests in R&D
relative to what is socially optimal. The only exceptions to this conclusion occur when both the congestion
externality is extremely strong and the equilibrium real interest rate is very high. These results are robust to
reasonable variations in model parameters.
Charles I. Jones
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Chad.Jones@Stanford.edu

John C. Williams
Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve System
Mail Stop 67
Washington, DC 20551
jwilliams@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Research and development (R&D) is a key long-run determinant of productivity
and consumer welfare. But how much R&D is enough? Much of the theoretical
literature has focused on reasons—-such as monopoly pricing and the public good
nature of knowledge—why there is too little private R&D. However, there are equally
compelling reasons, related to the distorted incentives from patent races and the
transfer of rents through creative destruction, to tlnnk that there may be too much
R&D.1 In the end, the question as to the sign and magnitude of the deviation of
R&D investment from its socially optimal level is an empirical one that can be
approached from a number of directions.
Jones and Williams (1998) show how to interpret existing econometric estimates
of returns to R&D in the context of endogenous growth models and find that optimal

R&D investment is at least four times greater than actual spending. This approach
yields a clear answer as to the degree of over- or underinvestment in R&D, but

it does not tell us which factors determine the overall result, the knowledge of
which may have important policy implications. Furthermore, the answer provided
by this method relies on empirical estimates of the return to R&D, which, given
the econometric difficulties associated with this undertaking, make an independent
check on the results particularly valuable.

In this paper, we take a different approach and use a calibrated endogenous
growth model to examine the issue of over- and underinvestment in R&D.2 Existing

models in the new growth literature are inadequate for examining this question,
either because they focus on a limited set of distortions or because they generate results that are contradicted by empirical evidence. We develop an R&D-based growth

model that both incorporates four key distortions to the allocation of resources to
R&D and is broadly consistent with empirical evidence on monopoly pricing power

and the long-run relationship between R&D and productivity gro\vtll.
Two distortions present in the model promote underinvestment in R&D. First
and foremost, innovators in a decentralized economy are not able to appropriate the
entire "consumer surplus" associated with the good that they create. A markup of
'Tirole (1988) provides an overview of the relevant literature in the industrial organization
literature. Romer (t990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and Grossman and I-lelpman (1991) analyze
this issue in the context of endogenous growth models.
'In this, we follow Stokey (1995), who applies the same method using a different endogenous
growth model, as discussed in the text below.

1

price over cost distorts sales downward from the optimum level that would occur if

the good were sold at its marginal cost of productiou. Given the importauce of this
surplus appropriability pro 51cm, we employ a generalized specification of production

that severs the overly restrictive links between the markup, the capital share, and
the cousumer surplus otherwise iuhereut in the standard formulation found iu the
literature. The second distortion promoting underiuvestment is related to the notion
that present researchers "stand on the shoulders" of past researchers; that is, part
of the output of R&D is knowledge that contributes to the capacity to inuovate.
On the other side of the ledger, two distortions in the model promote overinvestment in R&D. One is a negative congestion externality which we refer to as the
stepping on toes effect. This may arise ont of patent races, in which multiple firms
run parallel research programs in the hope of being the first to succeed at creating

and patenting a new good or process. Holding other factors constant, a pick-up in
R&D effort induces increased duplication of research efforts that reduces the average productivity of R&D in the economy. Second is the effect of the redistribution
of rents from past innovators to current innovators through a process of creative

destruction. A new good may functionally replace an existing good, cansing the
current innovator to receive the entire flow of rents while the past innovator gets
cut out. On their own, congestive externalities and creative destruction each raise
the private retnrn to R&D above the social return.
We calibrate the parameters of the model using both macro and micro data to
examine the net effect of the fonr distortions on investment in R&D. Our central

finding, robust to reasonable changes in parameter values, is that in the absence
of taxes and subsidies, the decentralized economy nuderinvests in R&D, with the
primary impetus coming from the surplus appropriability problem. The only exceptions to this conclusion occur when both the congestion externality is extremely
strong and the equilibrium real interest rate is very high. Overall, there appears to
be too little private R&D. Moreover, because we omit other distortions highlighted
by the literature such as imitation and capital market imperfections due to asymmetric information, we believe we have biased the case in favor of overinvestrnent .
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We begin in Section 2

by developing a general R&D-based growth model that incorporates a number of
3Stiglitz (1992) and Hall (1992) argue that capital market imperfections promote underinvestment. Furthermore, iu the United States at least, the net effect of the tax system, which is ignored
in the present paper, likely further reduces the private return to R&D (Williams 1999).

2

distortions to the private incentive to undertake R&D. Section 3 describes the calibration of the model and analyzes the direction and magnitude of the deviation of
the allocation of resources to R&D from the optimal allocation. Sectiou 4 concludes.

2 The Model
The main building block of the model developed in this section is the variety-based

model due to Romer (1990). The basic structure will be familiar from this and
later work, so we will pause only to highlight the key extensions in our setup. The
main modifications pertain to onr incorporation of four determinants of over and
underinvestment in R&D: (1) the degree of surplus appropriability, (2) creative
destruction, (3) knowledge spillovers, and (4) congestion externalities.

2.1 The Final Goods Sector
A final goods sector produces a homogenous output good Y by using a variety of
intermediate capital goods x, where i indexes the capital good and t denotes time,
according to the CES technology
(1)

At any given point in time, production and trade in intermediate goods is limited
to the set of goods that have been successfully designed in the past, measured by
A. Given A, the production function for final goods exhibits constant returns to
scale (to capital and labor inputs). Profit maximization by the final goods sector
then yields a demand curve for intermediate good i defined by

= (1

—

a)L

(

11
1_a))

4°'

(2)

where q is the price of capital good i.4
The area under this demand curve, down to the point where the price is equal to
the marginal cost of production, is a "consumer" surplus that is available to society
for the production of goods when a new design is invented. The inventor of a new
design captures only part of this surplus: the private incentive to innovate is, all else
4We require 0 < p < 1/(1 — a) below, so that demand curves slope duwnward and the desired
gross markup on intermediate goods is greater than unity.

3

equal, less than the gain to society. We refer to this as the surplus appropriability
problem.

2.2 The Intermediate Goods Sector and Innovation Clusters
Capital good rj is produced by an intermediate goods firm that owns an infinitely
lived patent for the design of the good. Once the patent is purchased from the R&D
sector, we assume that units of raw capital can be costlessly transformed one for one
into capital goods. The intermediate goods firm acts as a monopolist and charges a
gross markup ij over marginal cost, so that

qt = rtrt,

(3)

where t is the real interest rate (cost of capital).
First, consider the case where an intermediate goods firm is unconstrained by
competitors offering an equivalent product. In this case, profit-maximizing firms
act as monopolists, taking other prices as given. Assuming the number of firms is
large, firms choose a markup determined by the elasticity of substitution between
intermediate capital goods:

UU_1
In Romer (1990), p is equal to unity so that the monopoly markup is equal
to the inverse of the capital share. Empirically, this implies a gross markup (the
ratio of price to marginal cost) of approximately 3, sharply exceeding empirical
estimates of 1.05—1.4.' For there to be meaningful discussion of the issue of inefficient

allocation of resources to R&D, an R&D-based growth model must conform to
empirically-supported markups. The more general CES production function above
severs the overly restrictive link between the markup and the capital share. In
addition, our modeling of creative destruction relaxes the assumption that firms are
always unconstrained monopolists in setting prices, as described next. This breaks
the link between the equilibrium markup and the "consumer" surplus implied by
the creation of a new good.6
5See Norrbin (1993) and Basu (1996) for empirical evidence on markups.
6The bnk is inherent in models with CES production and unconstrained monopoly pricing. For

example, in Romer (1990), the share of the surplus appropriated by the inventor is equal to the
znverse of the markup. This leads to the somewhat counter-intuitive results that higher markups
are associated with a lower share of the surplus being captured.

4

Now consider the case where firms may face competition from equivalent goods.

Here we depart from existing models b introducing creative destruction into a
variety model. In doing so we not only introduce an additional incentive for overinvestment in R&D into the model, but we also modify the nature of competition for
investment goods. This has the effect of freeing the equilibrium markup from the
elasticity of substitution between capital goods.
To introduce creative destruction, we assume that designs or ideas are linked
together in innovation cinsters. An innovation cluster has two key features. First,
actually increases the variety of inonly a fraction of the cluster, defined as

consists of "upgrades" that replace
termediate goods. The remaining fraction
existing intermediate goods. Second, all of the goods in the innovation cluster must
be used together; the addition to variety cannot be separated from the upgrades.
An analogy may be helpful. Consider the invention of a computer technology
that can control all functions of an automobile engine to optimize performance. Use

of this innovation cluster increases the output of services from the car for given
inputs—it increases productivity. In order for this device to be useful, a subset of
engine parts must be redesigned or modified to allow for computer-control. The end
function of these modified parts is identical to the existing parts; they differ only in
the ability to be computer controlled. In designing an engine system, one has the
choice of using the computer controller with computer-controlled parts ornot using

the computer at all and using existing parts.
The creation of an innovation cluster leads to a choice for final goods producers.
They can either (a) ignore the innovation and continue using the existing technology, or (b) take advantage of the productivity improvement associated with the
innovation by purchasing quantities of all goods in the new innovation cluster. We
focus on the equilibrium in which the final goods sector always chooses to adopt the

new technology. Competition from producers of existing goods, which can at best
price at marginal cost, leads to an upper bound (corresponding to a limit price) on
be tins
the markup that can be charged for goods in an innovation cluster. Let

5

maximum markup.7 Then, the adoption constraint is
nit

= miu(ij},nç).

(5)

As shown in Appendix A, the constrained markup is giveu by
(6)

An increase in the size of innovation clusters (larger i/') reduces the constrained
markup, as does a higher elasticity of substitution between capital goods (higher
sell for the
values of p(l — n)). Whatever the value of the markup, all goods will
same price, and the profit flow to the th intermediate firm is given by
yt

7r7r__)(1)5[.
2.3

(7)

The R&D Sector

R&D constitutes the search for new designs for intermediate goods. A research
firm rents labor services (scientists and engineers) and capital inputs (laboratory
equipment) to search for new designs. It simplifies the model considerably if we
assume that capital goods and labor combine to produce new designs in exactly the
same way that they combine to produce output.8 We also assume the variety of
intermediate goods is large so that the summation in the production function can
be replaced with an integral. We assume that R&D generates new designs according

to

(1 + )A =

= 6RA,

E (0,1],

(8)

where R is the amount of output devoted to R&D and A is the derivative of A
with respect to t; time is continuous. Researchers take the productivity of R&D, 6.
as given. From society's standpoint, however, the productivity of R&D may vary
with the amount of R&D expenditure and the stock of ideas.
7A11 goods in a cluster sell for the same markup. This symmetric price rule is an equilibrium.
If any firm in the innovation cluster were to raise its price, the final goods firm would switch to
purchasing the old capital goods. Other equilibria for this game may well exist. Our purpose here
destruction in a variety model and to see
is to provide a simple mechanism for introducing creative
how it affects the rate of return calculation in the productivity literature.
51n the terminology of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), we employ the "lab equipment" version
of R&D instead of the "knowledge-driven" specification, in which labor is the only internalized
input. The results in this paper are very similar if the "knowledge-driven" specification is employed
instead.

6

Several aspects of the R&D equation deserve mention. In its simplest form where

= 0. A = 1, and = 0, the number of newly discovered designs A is proportional
to the amount of R&D undertaken. We depart from this simple specification in
three ways. First, the presence of the ' terni reflects the existence of innovation
clusters: for each increase in variety of measure one, existing goods of measure
are replaced by "upgrades." From the standpoint of the private inventor, profits are
earned on each good in the innovation cluster. However, as we will see, from society's
that increases variety contributes to welfare.
standpoint, only the fraction
Second, A < 1 captures congestion externalities in R&D, which we refer to as
the stepping on toes effect. At any point in time, an increase in R&D effort induces
duplication that reduces the average productivity of R&D. Notice that this dupli-

cation may be accidental (unbeknownst to the other, two independent researchers
simultaneously discover the same improvement in inkjet printing), or it may be intentional as in a patent race (because of patent protection or first-mover advantages,
researchers race to be the first to discover and produce a more powerful computer
chip). In either case, in equilibrium private costs are equated to the expected payoff
of research which exceeds the marginal social benefits.
0 allows for "standing on shoulders," an intertemporal knowledge
Finally,
spillover, as well as for diminishing technological opportunities. This effect is assumed to be external to the private agents; i.e., firms cannot appropriate the value
of the knowledge spillovers from future researchers. At the same time, it is possible that the advance of science and technology is partially stymied by diminishing

technological opportunities (Evenson (1984). Kortum (1993)). It may simply be
getting harder to make incremental gains in productivity-enhancing technology. In
this case, the "productivity" of R&D is negatively related to the level of technology:

is reduced (and negative if diminishing technological opportunities out\veigh

knowledge spillovers).

From the point of view of atomistic R&D firms, there are constant returns to
R&D, with the firm's perceived marginal product equal to the average product over
all R&D firms. Free entry into R&D drives profits to zero. Letting PAL denote the
market value of a new design, this zero profit condition is

P.4t(1 + )A =

:

PAL =

where gAL denotes the growth rate of A and s
7

gtAt + ')

(9)

One can now see how creative destruction operates. As in Aghion and Howitt
(1992) and Grossman and llelpman (1991), new goods effectively replace old goods,

and the profit stream that previously accrued to the inventor of the old good is
captured by the inventor of the new good. Creative destruction has two effects on
the private incentive to undertake R&D, which we can tlunk of as a "carrot" and a

"stick". The "carrot" is seen in eqnation (9): firms earn profits even on goods that
do not constitute an addition to variety. This "business stealing" effect provides an
incentive for overinvestment.
To see the "stick" associated with creative destruction, notice that the value
of a new design PAt is equal to the present discounted value of the profits that it
commands through the rental of intermediate goods of that type. The arbitrage
equation, equating the real flow cost of a design to the sum of the flow of profits, ire,
capital gains due to an increase in the market value of a design, and the expected
(negative) capital gaiu due to creative destruction, is given by

= itt + PAt —

tPAt.

(10)

The third term on the right hand side of the equation gives the expected capital loss
due to creative destruction---—the "stick" in our previous analogy, which represents
the part of creative destruction that promotes underinvestment. Given the creation

existing goods are replaced among the existing set of A
of A new designs,
goods types. The probability of any existing good being replaced at any given point
in time is thus %, and the expected capital loss is iI5LPAt. As shown below,
the "carrot" effect dominates the "stick" effect, making the net impact of creative
destruction one of overinvestment in R&D.

2.4 Steady State Properties
For the remainder of the paper we focus exclusively on the properties of steady state,

or balanced growth path, of the model. We close the model by assuming that the
labor supply is exogenous and growing at rate n, the market for labor clears with

the wage equal to the marginal product of labor, the demand for capital exhausts
the supply, and consumers allocate consumption according to the usual Euler equation (\vith constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution ) and dynamic budget
constraint. These conditions and the definition of an equilibrium for this economy
are discussed further in Appendix B.
8

As shown in Appendix B, the steady state growth rate of A is constant and
given by
(11)

where a

gy = 9A + ii.

—

(1

—

a).9

The steady state growth rate of outpnt is given by

The steady state R&D share for the decentralized economy, 5DC, is

given by
5DC

(1—a)(1+)g4
r—

gy + (1 + O)g

(12

This equation relates the steady state share of investment in R&D to its steady
state rate of return r. Because physical capital and R&D investment both represent
foregone consumption, the steady state rate of return to R&D is equal to that for
capital and is given by the Euler equation for consumption: r = 9 + it+ -y(gy — it),

9 is the rate of time preference. Recall that the steady state values of r,
gy, and g are determined by model parameters outside this equation, that is by
a, , 9, A, p. and it. Therefore, equation (12) gives the equilibrium R&D share as
a function of model parameters. To ease comparison with the socially optimal
where

allocation of resources to R&D, we do not make the additional substitutions.

The intuition underlying equation (12) is simply the zero profit condition for
the R&D sector, as can be seen by multiplying both sides of the equation by Y.
The numerator is the one-period flow of new profits that results from research. The
denominator is the relevant discount rate that converts this one-period flow into a
present discounted value: private agents discount the future flow at rate r + VgA to
reflect the probability that the profit flow will be curtailed by creative destruction,
and the profit flow itself grows over time at rate gy — g. The equation then states
that the cost of doing R&D, R, is equal to the present discounted value of profits
that will accrue.
In the decentralized equilibrium steady state, the R&D share is increasing in
the markup. A higher equilibrium markup increases the flow of profits to R&D,
raising R&D investment. The steady state share of R&D is also increasing in the
steady state growth rate. Finally, the effect of creative destrnction on private R&D
investment is apparent from equation (12). The O term in the numerator is the
"carrot" and the tO term in the denominator is the 'stick," as discussed earlier.
9We require 0 + Au/a < 1. Otherwise, no balanced growth path exists and the growth rate is
increasing over time. See Jones (1995).

9

Dividing both the numerator and the denominator by 1 +5, one sees that au increase

in the size of innovation clusters raises the R&D share provided that the interest
rate is greater than the growth rate of the economy. 10
2.5

The Social Planner's Problem and the Social Return to R&D

flow does this decentralized solution compare to the socially optimal allocation of
resources? The answer can be obtained by solving the following social planner
problem for the economy:

rnax{c,R} f° u(Ct/Lt)eOtdt

(13)

subject to

Ct+It+Rt=Yt=AKL7,
k=i, ICo>O

1+ R4,
= n, L0 > 0.
Applying standard methods yields the optimal allocation of resources to R&D in
steady state:

=

AUgA

r — (gy

—

gA)

—

gA

,

(14)

where, because the steady state growth rates are the same in the decentralized and
social planner economies, ,' is also the same. The optimal amount of R&D requires
that the marginal cost of doing a unit of R&D equals the marginal benefit, which
includes the effects of the congestion externality and knowledge spillovers.

Comparison of eqnation (14) to equation (12) demonstrates algebraically the
four wedges between the equilibrium and optimal allocations of R&D. The surplus
appropriability problem is reflected in the numerators of these equations: inventors
appropriate the profit flow ir = iL-t(1 — a) while the gain to society is given by
= a-. The ratio of these two terms is less than one, promoting underinvest-

-

ment. The standing on shoulders effect is associated with > 0. The presence of
10The reason for this is straightforward and has been pointed out by Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995). In the steady state of these models, the profit earned from innovating grows at the same
constant growth rate as the economy. In terms of timing, however, an innovator destroys the
incumbent's profits today. while her own profits will not be destroyed until some point in the
future. If the interest rate exceeds the growth rate, the profit destruction effect dominates. This
condition is required hy the transversality condition of the consumer maximization problem.
10

A < 1 represents the stepping on toes effect associated with congestion externalities.

Finally the creative destructio n effect associated with ' promotes overinvestment.
Individual agents nndertake R&D based on the profits they can earn rather than
based on the social surplns created. Note that the social planners allocation of
R&D does not depend on featnres of the market economy snch as the markup or
the creative destrnction parameter.

3 Results from the Calibrated Model
We now attempt to qnantify the degree of nnder- or overinvestment in R&D by
choosing values for model parameters consistent with the micro and macro empirical
evidence. This exercise is in the tradition of Stokey (1995). An important difference

from that work relates to the "stepping on toes" externality associated with A,
which Stokey leaves as a free parameter in her calibration.'1 Stokey argued, and
our results concur, that obtaining estimates of this parameter value is needed to
obtain clear results from the calibration. As shown below, empirical evidence on
the R&D-productivity relationship provides information regarding plausible values
of A.

3.1

Calibration of the Model

Several parameters of the model have close real-world counterparts so that their
calibration is straightforward. Others require a more indirect approach.
The labor share a and the growth rates of total factor productivity (TFP) ag,
R&D expenditure g, and the labor force n are calibrated according to Table 1.
We allow the remaining two parameters, the interest rate r and the parameter p. to
take on a range of values and examine the robustness of the results to this range.
We initially consider interest rates ranging from .04 to .14, representing one-half
and twice the the average real return on the stock market for the last century of .07
(Mehra and Prescott, (1985)). The interest rate here plays two roles. First, it is the
relevant summary statistic that captures preferences in the model. Second, it also
represents the equilibrium rate of return to R&D for the decentralized economy. For
11Two other differences are worth noting. First, Stokey's approach is hased on a quality ladders
model that contains parameters (such as a fixed quality step size) that are empirically difficult
to interpret and calibrate. Second. Stokey's model exhibits intertemporal scale effects of the kind
critiozed by Jones (1995): adding population growth to her model results in accelerating growth
rates.

11

Table 1: "Fundamental" Parameter Values

Labor Share
TFP Growth
R&D Growth
Labor Force Growth

Interest Rate
Substitution Parameter

Parameter

Value/Range

a

.6400
.0125
.0347

9A
gR
ii

.0144

r

.04—. 14

p

.50—2.77

10 years

E(Life of Designs)

Notes: The labor share is taken from Kydland and Prescott (1991). TFP
and labor force growth rates are average growth rates in the private business
sector over 1948—97 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor

1999). R&D growth is the average annual growth rate of real industryconducted R&D for 1957-1997 (National Science Foundation 1998). See
the text for other parameters.

this reason, we were uncomfortable with simply calibrating this interest rate to the
risk free rate on treasury bills, i.e. to some number like .01. However, as will be
clear later, our results are even stronger in the case of a small r.12 The highest value
of p considered is 2.77 which, given a = .64, corresponds to an infinite elasticity of
substitution between intermediate goods. The smallest value of p that we consider
is governed by the equilibrium markup that is implied. A value of .5 yields a gross
markup of 1.37 over marginal cost for intermediate goods pricing. This value is at
the upper end of estimates by Norrbin (1993) and Basn (1996).
The one parameter that requires further discussion is the expected lifetime of
a design, r. The presence of creative destruction means that designs have a finite

useful life, at least in expectation. Recall that the probability that a design is
destroyed at each instant is /'g. Given the assumptions of the model, the expected
lifetime of a design is simply the inverse of this probability.
Estimates of the expected life of a design can be obtained in a number of different
ways. One is to estimate directly the mean rate of decay of rents from patented
12An additional restriction is r > gy. For our parameter values, gy is 033.
12

goods. The inverse is the mean lifetime. The implied depreciation rate of monopoiy
rents from patented goods is estimated to be 0.25 by Pakes and Schankerman (1984),
implying a mean lifetime of fonr years. Mansfield, Schwartz and Wagner (1981) find
that 60% of patented innovations are 'iiuitated' within fonr years, which is equivalent
to a lifespan of five years. Caballero and Jaffe (1993) estimate a mean rate of creative

destrnction of 4% (lifespan of 25 years) nsing patent citation data. Their estimated
rate for electrical eqnipment is 13%, implying a lifespan of 8 years. We assume an
intermediate value of 10 years. The results for other parameter values ranging from
5 years to 20 years are similar, as discnssed below.

As noted, a parameter that tnrns ont to be very important in the results that
follow is A. Stokey (1995) argues that the empirical literature does not provide much
guidance in choosing a value of £13 In contrast, we find that the empirical evidence

on the R&D-productivity relationship does provide information regarding plausible
values of A.

Empirical estimates of returns to R&D often are obtained by regressing total fac-

tor productivity growth at the industry level on R&D-output ratios. Such estimates
are reviewed in detail by Criliches (1992) and Nadiri (1993), among others. Under

an R&D-productivity relationship like that given above in equation (8), Jones and
Williams (1998) show that the rate of return parameter that is typically estimated
in this productivity literature, denoted PL, is equal to

PL = AgTFp
where .s is the steady state ratio of R&D spending to output. This implies that

PL5
PTFP

(15)

While we do not feel confident picking exact values from the literature for these
parameters, plausible lower bounds are somewhat easier to choose. For example,
taking a lower bound for nPL of 30 percent and a lower bound for s of 2.2 percent,
together with our estimate of TFP of 1.25 percent implies a lower bound for A of
'3One exception is Kortum (1992), who finds values for a parameter like A of about 0.2. However,

this estimate can be criticized on two grounds. First, the framework is somewhat different from
ours, so it is not clear that the estimate is valid. Second, the estimate is obtained using patent
data. The puzzling aggregate time series properties for patents (i.e. the lack of a clear trend during
most of the 20th century) also suggest problems interpreting the estimates.

13

about 514 Instead of enforcing this value in our calibrations, we will present results
for values of.\ between zero and one. This allows our calibration to be separate from
our previous results, while allowing for easy evaluation of the results at ,\ = 0.5 or
higher.

An estimate of

can be derived using the fact that TFP growth has been

relatively constant over the post-war period. Log-differentiating the R&D equation

in (8) yields
(16)

9TFP

Given values of A and a, this equation determines

Notice that this relationship

is valid along any growth path with constant growth rates, not just in steady state.
This distinction is somewhat important because the historical growth rate of R&D
expenditure has been higher than the growth rate of manufacturing output.15
Given values for a, A and , the model implies a steady-state growth rate of A,
as in equation (11); this in turn implies a steady-state growth rate of output per
worker. The creative destruction parameter ' is given by 1/(TgA). The constrained
and unconstrained parameter values for the markup are determined by together
with the other fundamental parameter values, and the equilibrium markup is the
smaller of the two. This completes the calibration of all the necessary parameter
values. The decentralized and optimal R&D shares are then calculated according to
equations (12) and (14).

3.2 Equilibrium and Optimal R&D Investment
Table 2 reports the results from a single calibration of the model where r = .07 and
p = 1.8. The implied value of a, the elasticity of output with respect to the level of
knowledge, is about .2. The steady-state growth rates of A and output per worker

are 6.1% and 1.9%, respectively This is associated with a creative destruction
parameter ' of 1.65, which implies that about 40% of each innovation cluster is
accounted for by novel goods. Intermediate goods firnis would like to charge a price

54% over marginal cost, but the adoption constraint limits them to a markup of
'4The number 2.2 percent comes from the average value of the ratio of industry R&D to private
business output for 1957-1997. The corresponding number for total (i.e., including government)
RD is 3.1 percent. It is plausible to think of these numbers as respective lower bounds because
a substantial amount of what economists would call R&D is probably not counted as R&D in the
collected statistics.
15Jones (1998) shows that a rising R&D share can be consistent with a constant growth rate of
the aggregate variables in the intermediate run.

14

Table 2: A Typical Calibration Result, r = .07 and p =

1.8

a

716

17

L3

0.196

1.543

1.294

1.294

1.648

A

6

SDC

8SP

sST/sDC

0.25

0.864
0.729
0.593
0.457

0.066
0.066
0.066
0.066

0.065
0.111
0.144
0.170

0.986
1.668
2.169
2.552

0.50
0.75
1.00

about 30% over marginal cost. Note that these values, together with the steady
state growth rate of output per hour are independent of the value of A.
The value of 5 and the optimal R&D share depend on the particular value of A.

The values of are relatively robust to the value of A in this particular example;
all are positive and greater than .4, suggesting a relatively large positive knowledge
spillover. More generally, for small values of p, can be small and even take negative
values. The R&D share chosen by the decentralized economy is invariant to A, which

is external in the decentralized model. For these parameter values, .sDC is equal to
.066, while s is increasing in A and ranges from .065 to .170. For small values of
A, the decentralized economy slightly overinvests in R&D.
To get an idea of the relative magnitudes of the different effects promoting under-

and overinvestrnent in R&D, we computed the decentralized R&D shares assuming
that individual distortions were internalized in the decentralized economy. To be

precise, for each case, we altered the equilibrium condition for the R&D share in
the decentralized economy so that one distortion was eliminated. For example, in
the case of the kno\vledge spillover, we assumed the research firm was able to internalize the marginal benefits to future R&D productivity resulting from its research
investment. For the case of creative destruction, we assumed firms internalized the
fact that only a subset of new goods are true innovations and the indirect effect on

the expected lifespan of a good, hut did not eliminate the effect on the equilibrium
markup.
15

In the following, the results correspond to values of A over the rauge of .25 to 1.

If the knowledge spillover were internalized, the R&D share would rise hy 16 to 36
percent (.011 to .024) -with the size of the increase larger the larger is (the smaller
is A). Tf the surplus appropriability problem alone were eliminated, the R&D share

would increase by 140%, regardless of the value of A. If the creative destruction effect

alone were internalized, the R&D share would decrease of 24%, again regardless of
A. Finally, if the congestion externality were internalized, the R&D share would fall
by 100 * (1 — A) percent. Therefore, according to this calibration exercise, the main

force promoting underinvestment is the consumer appropriability problem and the
main force promoting overinvestment is the "stepping on toes" effect. These results
hold more generally for other empirically-supported values of the markup and rates
of creative destruction discussed below.

3.3 Refining the Results on Over- and Underinvestment
To provide a broader overview of the calibration results, Figure 1 plots the ratio
3SP/3DC against A for three different values of p. The title for each subpanel reports

the value of p together with the implied values of a, rj, and

the superscript on ij
indicates whether the equilibrium markup ij is unconstrained or constrained. The
four parameter values move together systematically. Each subpanel contains one of
these plots for three different values of the interest rate r = {.04, .07, .10}.
The decentralized economy only overinvests in R&D when A is small and the
interest rate is relatively high. In comparison, for the case of A .5 and r =

the optimal R&D share is from 1-1/2 to over 3 times as large as that in the
decentralized economy. Small values of A promote overinvestment because of the
congestion externality. High values of r weaken the intertemporal effects in the
model that encourage underinvestment (the knowledge spillover and the "stick" of
creative destruction) and therefore indirectly promote overinvestment. Note that
the range of r,' from 1.11 to 1.37 corresponds to the range of estimated markups;
thus, attempts to restrict the parameter space on the basis of prior information ou
.07,

are not particularly helpful here.

The value of p has an ambiguous effect on the sign and magnitude of overor underinvestmeut in R&D. Increasing p reduces a and p driving down both the
social and private rates of return to R&D. On net, the former effect dominates
and an increase in p reduces the surplus appropriability problem's contribution to
16

Figure 1: 8/8Dc for different values of p
SS/sD0

x

x
s/s0c
4—

4

p= 2.5, ,= .04,

TU

= 1.11

i= .34

3
2

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

3SP/8DC16 An increase in p also reduces the value of implied by a given value of
r. The decline in lowers the constrained markup and reduces the direct impetus
toward overinvestment from creative destruction. As shown in the figure, for values

of p between .5 and 2, the effects on s/sD6' of changes in p roughly cancel;
however, for values of p above 2, the effect through the reduction in dominates
and the region of underinvestment in R&D widens considerably.
Figure 2 summarizes the model's implications for over- versus underinvestinent
and illustrates the robustness of the basic result that the decentralized economy
underinvests in R&D unless .\ is small and the equilibrium interest rate is high to
This result can be seen by noting that the partial derivative of the ratio
respect to p, holding b constant, is negative.

17

with

Figure 2: Cutoff values for r at which 8DC =

8SP

Labor Share: a = .7

Baseline Parameters

/

/
1 = 1.27

— 1 =1.11

'C.

11.33

1=127

1=1.41

=1.37

0.50

0.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

1.00

0.75

x

x
0.14

.1

0.14

g9/ OTFP = 375

r

Labor Force Growth: n = .01

I

4.

I,

/

w.
V

-I

I

/'

I'

C."

I.I"

V

7"

f".

C.'

— 11.11
=12

— 11.11

1115

Ti

I _____

=1

0.25

0.0

0.50

1 =1.20

"ô.o

1.00

0.75

0.25

so

0.75

1.00

A

A

Lifetime: t = 20

Lifetime: t= 5
0.14

(A
1,'.
'C.:

0.07

ky'.

— 1 =1.11

— 1 = 1.11

=1,39

p1.15
0.25

0.50

0.75

0.25

1.00

0,50

0.75
A

A

Notes The solid line corresponds to the case of p = 2.5, the dashed line p = 2.0, and the dotted
which s > s for
line p = 0.5. The shaded regions correspond to the values of A and r for
p = 2.5.
18

variations iu key model parameters. For three values of p, 0.5 (dotted hue), 2.0
(dashed hue), aud 2.5 (solid line). we plot the combinations of the real interest rate
r and A which yield the outcome that the R&D share in the decentralized econonìy
is socially optimal, 5D0 = 8SP• The shaded regions indicate the values of A aud r
for which 5DC > 88P for the case of p = 2.5. The upper left panel is computed using
the baseline values of all fundamental model parameters and provides a benchmark

for the other panels. In each of the other panels, one model parameter used iu the
calibration is perturbed, while the others are left at their baseline values.
The basic resnlts on under- and over-investment in R&D are insensitive to reasonable changes in the assumed values of the labor share, labor force growth rate,
and the ratio of the historical growth rates of R&D spending and total factor productivity. Changes in these parameters generate changes in mj, , and other model
parameters that partially offset each other in terms of their effect on the difference
between the private and social returns to R&D. Note that the value of the equilibrium markup r lies between 1.11 and 1.41—again, within the range of empirical
estimates— for these four calibrations of the model.
This insensitivity to the calibration of the model does not, however, extend to
the choice of the lifespan of a design, r, as seen in the lower panels of the figure.
Interestingly, lengthening the lifespan of designs, that is, reducing the rate of creative
destruction, actually expands the region of overinvestment. This outcome owes to
the effect of on the equilibrium markup: The lower is 5, the larger the constrained
markup, and hence the greater is the private return to R&D (when the constraint
is binding, as for the baseline calibration with p > .5). For example, for p = .5,
iucreasing r from 10 to 20 raises the equilibrium markup from 1.37 to 1.85.
An alternative approach to evaluating the robustness of the results to changes

in the rate of creative destruction is to fix the equilibrium markup and compare
outcomes nuder different values of . Such an approach can be justified on the
grounds that we have a prior that the markup does not exceed 1.4, but do not have
strong prior beliefs regarding or r.
Figure 3 shows the results from such an experimuent. For four values of ',
rate r and A which yield
{0, 1, 3, 9}, we plot the combinations of the real interest
the outcome that the R&D share in the decentralized economy is socially optimal.
Recall that y percent of new designs are novel, so that the four values of iJ'
correspond to novel design shares of 100, 50, 25, and 10 percent, respectively. For
19

Figure 3: Cutoff values for r at which 8D0 3SP imposing r

1.39

0.14

w =9

0.07

0.0

0.0

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

x

Note: The shaded region corresponds to the values of A and r for which 5DC > 55P for ?b =0.

this figure, we set p = 2 and impose a markup rj =

This value of the markup
equals the equilibrium markup for the case of = 0 and lies at the upper end of
the range of empirical estimates. Given a fixed markup, an increase in clearly
enlarges the region of overinvestment in R&D. Nevertheless, even if only 10 percent
of new designs truly add to productive efficiency ( = 9, r = 1.3), the decentralized
economy underinvests in R&D when r = .07 and A = .5.
1.39.

4 Conclusion
To what extent does the economy undertake too much or too little research? Jones
and Williams (1998) provide an answer to this question by showing how estimates of
returns to R&D from regressions of productivity growth on R&D as a share of output
can be interpreted in the context of endogenous growth models. This approach has

the advantage that it incorporates the existing policy environment, including the
patent system and subsidies to research. This approach is, however, only as good
as the underlying econometric estimates. Endogeneity and measurement problems
can cause the estimates to be biased.
20

In this paper, we take a different approach. We develop a gro\vth model that
incorporates parametrically fonr distortions to R&D that have received attention
in either the new growth literature or in the micro theory literature on patent
races: the surplus appropriability problem and knowledge spillovers (both of which
promote underinvestinent in R&D) and creative destruction and congestion exter-

nalities (both of which promote overiuvestment in R&D). Moreover, we show that
our model is consistent with the available evidence on R&D, growth, and markups.

Calibrating the model to micro and macro data, we find that our decentralized
economy typically underinvests in R&D relative to what is socially optimal. This is
true unless the equilibrium real interest rate is extremely high and the magnitude
of congestion effects is very large. Finally, we feel that we have biased the case in
favor of overinvestment in this paper. For example, the addition of imitation or
uncertainty with asymmetric information would presumably strengthen the case for
underinvestment.

21

A Appendix — Solving for the Adoption Constraint
In solving for the adoption constraint, we look for an equilibrium path along which
the latest innovation clnster. This
the final goods prodncers always choose to adopt
imposes an upper bound on the markup that can be charged for the goods in the
innovation cluster, and this upper bound is essentially the adoption constraint.
To calculate this upper bound, we compare the profits earned by adopting the
innovation cluster versus the profits earned by purchasing the old intermediate goods
and
at the limit price of marginal cost. Let A be the existing stock of designs,
final
suppose a new design becomes available. The production function for the
goods producer who adopts the new design is
At+t

The production function for the final goods producer who does not adopt the new
design is

(1Q)

Y—L7( >

i=1

and it are intermediate goods purchased at a markup, and ,j denotes
the intermediate goods that are displaced by the innovation cluster and therefore

where

limit priced at marginal cost.
Let rj be the common markup charged on all intermediate goods asymptotically.
The relative demands for intermediate goods by the final goods producer in each of
these cases are given by

it =

and

1. mE

where

= 1- + '
1

p(1—a)
—

1—p(1—n)

Then, the final goods producer will adopt the new design if and only if the profits
from adopting are higher. That is,
L7[(At —

—

+

(A —

< L(A + 1)±[ — (A + 1)ijrju
22

Writing this equation in terms of it and simplifying with tedious algebra reveals
that the final goods producer will adopt if and only if
1

which is satisfied for all A if and only if

r1z77 (1±yTb)_1
which is the adoption constraint reported in the paper.

B Deriving the Steady State Allocation
The additional conditions discussed in the text are given below:

L = Loent

(17)
(18)

f
0

tt

xdi = K

(19)

1

———(rt—n_O), ct—C/L

(20)
(21)

We can now solve for the equilibrium in the decentralized model. For our

purposes, an equilibrium will be defined as a collection of prices and quantities such
that the markets for capital goods, R&D
input, capital, and output clear; the agents
take all prices {PAI. Wt, Tt, qt} as given, except for intermediate goods firms who set
the rental rates for their own capital goods; agents maximize profits in the three
sectors; and consumers choose a consumnpt ion path to maximize utility. The fifteen
unknowns {Y, L, 12t. qt, r, mt, ,
R, PAt, K, Wt, ct} are determined by

, , A,

equations (1) through (10) in the text and the five equations given above.
Two features of the steady state are of particular interest: the steady state

growth rate of the economy and the steady state allocation of resources to R&D.
To solve for the steady state growth rate of the economy, rewrite the R&D equation
(8) as
A

£

C)

r.\
22

23

By definition, A/A will be constant in steady state. so that the numerator and
denominator of the right-hand side of this equation must grow at the sairie rate.
Letting gx denote the steady state growth rate of any variable x, this implies

=

(23)

1 —

In steady state, the share of output going to R&D, s , will be constant, so
that R and Yt will grow at the same rate. To tie down this growth rate, notice
that the A capital goods will be produced in equal quantities so that the aggregate
production function can be rewritten as

=
where a

—

(1

—

(24)

o. The constancy of the capital-output ratio then implies that
gy = —gA + n.

(25)

When combined with the results from the R&D equation, this pins down the steady

state growth rate of knowledge 9A and output gy:
(26)

gy = —gA + n.

(27)

These last two equations show that the steady state growth rate of per capita
output is proportional to the population growth rate in this model, a result emphasized in a similar context by Jones (1995). For the assumption of a constant steady
state growth rate to hold on the balanced growth path we need 1——.X > 0. If this
restriction were violated, a constant R&D output share would imply an increasing
growth rate over time as the labor force grows.
To solve for the share of output going to R&D, .s, we first solve for the market
value of a design, P11, from the arbitrage equation. Differentiating the zero profit
as
condition (9) allows us to solve for

At

=gy —gA

(28)

and substituting into the arbitrage equation reveals

PAt=

7rt

r — (gy

—

24

g) + '9A

(29)

The zero profit condition says that the costs of R&D are equal to the value of R&D,

PA(l + ')A = Re,, which gives

gAAi(1+p)
r — (gy — gA) + gA =sYt.

(30)

Substituting from the equation for profits and simplifying yields the steady state
R&D share for the decentralized economy, s:

s= (1—a)(1+)g
r
+ (1 + )9A
— gy

25

(31)

References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. "A Model of Growth through Creative
Destruction," Econometrica. March 1992, 60, 323—351.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill,
1995.

Basu, Susanto, "Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1996, 111, 709—751.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, "Multifactor Productivity Trends, 1997," February 1999. Bulletin.

Caballero, Ricardo J and Adam B. Jaffe, "How High are the Giants' Shoulders?," in Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993, PP. 15—74.

Evenson, Robert E., "International Invention: Implications for Technology Market Analysis," in Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1984, pp. 89—126.

Griliches, Zvi, "The Search for R&D Spillovers," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1992, 9, 29—47.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the
Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Hall, Bronwyn H., "Investment and Research and Development at the Firm Level:
Does the Source of Financing Matter?." June 1992. NBER Working Paper No.
4096.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political
Economy, August 1995, 103, 759—784.

"Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas," July 1998. Stanford
University mimeo.

and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Social Return to R&D," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November 1998, 113, 1119—1135.
26

Kortum, Samuel S., "Inventions, R&D and Industry Growth," June 1992. Boston
University mimeo.

"Equilibrium R&D and the Patent-R&D Ratio: U.S. Evidence," American
Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, May 1993, 83 (2), 450-457.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, "Hours and Employment Variation
in Business Cycle Theory," Economic Theory, 1991, 1 (1), 63—81.

Mansfield, Edwin, Mark Schwartz, and Samuel Wagner, "Imitation Costs
and Patents: An Empirical Study," Economic Journal, December 1981, 91,
907--918.

Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1985, 15, 145—161.

Nadiri, M. Ishaq, "Innovations and Technological Spillovers," 1993. NBER Working Paper No. 4423.

National Science Foundation, "R&D as a Percent of GDP is Highest in Six
Years," October 1998. Data Brief.

Norrbin, Stefan C., "The Relationship Between Price and IVlarginal Cost in U.S.
Industry: A Contradiction," Journal of Political Economy, December 1993, 101
(6), 1149—1164.

Pakes, Ariel and Mark Schankerman, "The Rate of Obsolescence of Patents,
Research Gestation Lags and the Private Rate of Return to Research Resources," in Zvi Griliches, ed., R6D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984, pp. 73—88.

Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, "Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vIay 1991, 106, 531—555.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy. October 1990, 98, S71—S102.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Endogenous Growth and Cycles," 1992. Stanford University
working paper.

27

Stokey, Nancy L., "R&zD and Economic Growth," Review of Economic Studies,
1995, 62, 469—489.

Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1988.

Williams, John C., "Patent Protection, Taxation and the Supply and Demand for
R&D," 1999. manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

28

</ref_section>

