                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE IN
                                  FRENCH MANUFACTURING:
                                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM FIRM
                                 REPRESENTATIVES AND FROM
                                     THEIR EMPLOYEES?

                                            Nathalie Greenan
                                            Jacques Mairesse

                                           Working Paper 7285
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7285


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




Prepared for the NBER conference on organizational change and performance improvement, 23 and 24 April
1999. We are grateful to David Author, Michel Gollac and the participants at the NBER conference on
organizational change and performance improvement for their useful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Nathalie Greenan and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Organizational Change in French Manufacturing :
What Do We Learn From Firm Representatives and From Their Employees?
Nathalie Greenan and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 7285
August 1999
                                           ABSTRACT

          In this paper, we use a French matched employer-employee survey, the COI survey, conducted
in 1997, to describe the general features of organizational change in manufacturing firms with more than 50
employees. In a first section, we explore the methodological issues associated with the building up of a
statistical measure of organizational change, we describe the COI survey and we present the set of firm
level and employee level variables that we have selected to investigate organizational change. In a second
section, we present the results of two correspondence analysis, one conducted on a sample of 1462 firms
from the COI survey and the other one conducted on the sample of 2049 blue collar workers affiliated to
those firms.
          On one hand, using the firm level section of the survey, we show that all types of new organizational
practices are positively correlated with one another. On the other hand, at the blue collar level, three main
dimensions discriminate between jobs: the intensity of involvement in information processing and decision,
the intensity of constraints weighing on the content and rhythm of work and the orientation of information
and production flows: either pushed by colleagues or pulled by the market. We also find that blue collars
cannot develop a high level of involvement in information processing and decisions and have at the same
time their work rhythm fixed by heavy technical constraints whereas high time pressure imposed on work
rhythm by the market is positively correlated with such an involvement.
          Finally, if we correlate firm level and worker level variables, we find that an increase in the use of
“employee involvement “ and “quality” practices by the firm is positively correlated both with a higher level
of blue collars’ involvement in information processing and decision and with a higher level of technical
constraints, production flows being pushed by colleagues rather than pulled by the market.
          The mapping of firm level responses stemming from our first correspondence analysis has been used
to select 4 firms in different areas of the statistical universe and belonging to the “machine and equipment”
sector. Post-survey interview carried out with executives from these firms and plant visit are used to check
the quality of our statistical data and to better understand our descriptive results.


Nathalie Greenan                                        Jacques Mairesse
Centre d’Etudes de l’Emploi                             INSEE-CREST
Immeuble “Le Descartes I”                               15 boulevard Gabriel Péri
29 Promenade Michel Simon,                 92245 Malakoff Cedex
Noisy-Le-Grand                                          and NBER
93166 Marne-La- Vallée Cedex.                           mairesse@ensae.fr
greenan@cee.enpc.fr
Introduction
Economists tell three different stories about organizational change and performance
improvements. The first story comes from team theory, theories of hierarchy and theories of
information processing. It is close to organizational theory and, more precisely, to theories of
structural contingency. In this story, organizational change is a response to an external shock
on the environment of the firm. The firm has to change the way she works internally in order
to adapt to this new context. Observers have stressed different kinds of macro-shocks that
have altered the global environment in which most of the firms operate. Globalization of
economies and deregulation leads to higher uncertainty and complexity, while the diffusion of
information and communication technologies and the increase in the general level of
education in developed countries generate new technological and organizational opportunities.
If this story is true, the firms that are not in a process of organizational change should be less
efficient than others. Another version of this story focuses on the existence of
complementarities in organizational design (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990). As a result,
organizational features cannot be changed independently from one another and efficient firms
are those that have been able to implement a whole cluster of changes. In other words all sets
of organizational changes are not conducive to performance improvement. A "high
performance organization" has selected the right (unique?) set of new organizational devices.

The first story could be described as "functionalist". We will designate the second one as
"constructivist". According to this story, firms change their strategy in order to gain a
competitive edge on their rivals. In the last two decades, firms have developed new strategies
 based on high quality, short delivery times, new services complementing goods, rapid renewal
 of products. Either these new objectives are carried by market entrants that come in with new
 organizations or existing firms adapt their organization to be in the position to reach them. At
 the same time, new strategies disrupt the current rules of the game, upsetting markets and
 making transactions more uncertain and complex. Another consequence is that as they blur
 the frontier between price and quantities, new strategies make performance difficult to
 measure with traditional indicators like productivity.

 The last story is radical. Over the past two decades, firms have invented new ways to spur
 higher effort from employees. These ways rely on new managerial practices that drag the
 market into internal organization of firms, dismantling the employment systems inherited
 from the past. These new arrangements have transferred adjustment costs on to smaller firms
 and workers. New organizational devices destroy good jobs and are more demanding on
 workers for less counterparts. Their diffusion has been backed up by the slow growth, the
 increased international competition and the development of financial markets. According to
 this story, organizational change should increase productivity and/or financial performances,
 to the detriment of workers' conditions of work and living.

  According to these three stories, organizational change is correlated with performance
  improvements. However, in France, statistical studies on firm level data relating
organizational change and productivity measures (Coutrot, 1996; Greenan, 1 997b; Greenan
and Guellec, 1998) show rather weak evidence of this relation. At the same time, labor force
surveys indicate that between 1984 and 1993, greater pressure has been imposed on
employees leading to deteriorated conditions of work (Cézard, Dussert et Gollac, 1992;
Gollac and Volkoff, 1996). The increased strain imposed on workers has also been underlined
by empirical studies based on data for the US (Cappelli and alii, 1997). But empirical research
on productivity impacts of organizational change in the US leads to results that are more
positive than in France' (Ichniovsky, Shaw and Prennushi, 1997; Blak et Lynch, 1997;
Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 1997; Ashkenazy, 1998). Yet, either data sets are not directly
comparable to the ones used in the French studies, or positive results are conditional (on the
use of IT, on the presence of a union, on implementation characteristics etc.).

Even if the stories we examined tend to favor the thesis of a positive correlation between
organizational change and performance, they give some hints about possible low measured
productivity impacts. According to the first story, there may be some high adjustments costs
to organizational changes, especially if changes are clustering. Thus there is a fixed cost to
pay before gains appear. In addition, the clustering of organizational practices is a source of
biases in estimations. However, productivity remains a good performance indicator if the
production function is estimated jointly with a demand for organizational practices (Athey et
Stern, 1998). If we trust the second story, some adjustment costs may also delay the arrival of
performance improvements. But in this case, productivity is not always the best performance
indicator. Performance indicators, like indicators of organizational change must be thought of
in relation with the strategy of the firm.

Finally, if we focus on the last story, we have to be careful with indicators of organizational
change stemming from the point of view of management. They may not be sufficient to
discriminate among practices. The point of view of employees is complementarity because it
gives better indications on working conditions and effort. Productivity should be a rather good
performance indicator, but it is also important to look at financial performances. Measures of
deteriorated working conditions could be interpreted as pieces of evidence for this third story,
but they can also be interpreted as measures of adjustment costs in the other ones: work
becomes more stressful because organizational changes are brutal in response to the clustering
of practices, or because all the consequences of changes on the workforce have not been
properly anticipated, for instance consequences on aged workers or on workers with low level
of education.

At this stage of our work, we are not able to test one story against the other. More modestly,
we are going to explore a French statistical survey, the COl survey, that allows to go a little
deeper into the rationale of organizational change and complement it with field work. The


 The same kind of difference in French/US empirical results on productivity impacts is obtained when IT
indicators are used.
COl survey is a matched employer I                employee   survey on organizational change and
computerization that has been conducted in France at the end of 1997. As it is experimental,
manufacturing is the only sector where a large and representative sample of firms and workers
have been interviewed, because parts of the questionnaires had been already tested through
preceding surveys. As a result, we limit our investigations to this sector.

The main purpose of this paper is to find out what are the best variables to address the
organizational change and performance issue. We have been working in two steps. First we
use a large set of variables to describe the anatomy of organizational change in French
manufacturing through descriptive analysis. The resulting "mapping" of organizational
changes is used to select four firms in different areas of the statistical universe. Second, we
conducted post-survey interview in those firms, where we checked whether the statistical
differences used for selecting them were discriminant. We also asked for more details about
the sequence of changes and its underlying strategy.

In a first section we explain how we measure organizational change through variables built on
the COT survey. Then we present the main results of our statistical analysis and illustrate them
with our four case studies. In a conclusion we link what we observed in the field with our
three stories about performance.


1 A set of organizational change measures
Organization, and organizational change is hard to measure. This has been widely
acknowledged by structural contingency theory and its multiple attempts to gather statistical,
information on a wide scale2. Moreover, we want to think of measures that do not need the
presence of an expert in the field of organization to be implemented. Surveys we are interested
in are either postal surveys were the respondent fills up a questionnaire on his own, or
telephone or face to face survey conducted by the usual persons involved in government
surveys. One clear cut solution is thus to design a set of questions that uses the vocabulary of
managerial practices to interview some firm representatives about the changes implemented in
their firm. In a first section, we are going to explore this solution and its limits, in a second
section we will present the option chosen in the COT survey, and in the last section, we will go
through the measures that we have chosen for the purpose of this empirical study.

1-1 The new managerial tool-box

Many observers have stressed their impression of an acceleration of technological change
since the oil crisis, while growth was slowing down. It is one expression of the widely debated



2
    See   Miller and Friesen, 1984 for example.
productivity paradox. But as the technologies of information and communication were
diffusing among developed countries, managerial concepts also flourished.

In France, at the beginning of the 1980's people that were not specialized in management had
heard about quality circles and may be matrix organization. During the 1980's and 1990's,
managerial knowledge spread in many directions. New theories were invented by
management scholars and marketed rapidly through books and journals. Firms got into the
habit of "auditing" while confronted with difficult strategic decisions, driving the growth of
the consulting sector. At the same time, new words and acronyms came into the current
language. As a matter of fact, words are a very important dimension of managerial
innovations: like slogans, new managerial concepts are often expressed in a few words that
can be easily memorized in order to influence attitudes and drive action.

These managerial words have a rather high obsolescence rate. In a way, managers became
fashion victims. Like fashion nowadays, managerial practices are pervasive and international:
the managerial tool box looks very much the same across countries and all the more so when
firms are multinationals. It has also a mixed ethnic origin. American engineers have had a
very strong influence on management practices in the western world during the first half of
the 20th1 century. In the second half, the principles laid down by these pioneers have been
revisited and experimentation has been very active in countries like Japan or Sweden. The
new managerial tool-box benefits from all these influences.

Nevertheless, although similar changes seem to take place in different countries, comparisons
have to be cautious. Some practices are very much the same across countries and the
vocabulary used to designate them is either the same or comes from literal translations from
one language to the other, but this is not always true. In Appendix 1, we have listed a set of
practices currently found in the Anglo-Saxon and French managerial literature and translated
them from French to English. The influence of American management is strong in France as
is witnessed by the use of "Reengineering" or "juste-à-temps" (literal translation of "just-in-
time"). However, some differences between France and the US must be stressed.

First, "employee involvement practices" is commonly used in the Anglo-Saxon literature like
a generic expression designating organizational innovations of the past two decades. The
proper translation in French would be "pratiques d'implication de la main d'ccuvre". It is
sometimes used in management books translated from the English to the French, but not on a
wider scale. "Pratiques participatives" would be closer to the American use of "employee
involvement practices". But its connotation is quite different. Instead of stressing a higher
effort of employees, it underlines the sharing of information: "participatif' means that
employees participate in decision making, they are consulted or at least informed when the
firm is changing its strategy. Furthermore, the extensive use of this expression has its origin in
a law taken in 1982 ("Loi Auroux") at the beginning of Mitterrand's mandate, that tried to
encourage information sharing between employers and employees.
Second, French firms seem to use extensively a set of practices that tend to increase
formalization through the implementation of precisely defined procedures: registered quality
systems like ISO or EAQF norms; methods that aim at analyzing the consequences of product
or process choices on the customers utility, process hitches, equipment breakdowns or safety
like value analysis, "analyse fonctionnelle" or "AMDEC"; formal in-house customer suppliers
contacts between different departments in the firm. We do not mean here that these practices
are not used by American firms, but that the managerial literature does not put the same
emphasis on them between the two countries. For example, TQM seems more important in
United States than quality certification when the latter is a big issue in France. Although
connected with one another, these two practices have different implications.

Third English is much richer in describing the characteristics of jobs than French. Job
rotation, multi-tasking and multi-skilling are three expressions that describe increased
complexity of jobs. In French, one word only is used: "polyvalence". This could be so
because jobs are thought of in reference of a "work post" with detailed characteristics more
than in reference with competencies carried by the employee who fulfills the job (Maurice,
Sellier and Silvestre, 1982).

Last, firms do not say that they downsize in France. Rather, journalists and executives talk of
"restructuration" which is an euphemism. The persistence of high unemployment rates makes
it unacceptable to display cutting jobs as an objective. It has to be announced like something
that is inevitable, in order to secure the survival of the firm. As a result, it is seldom thought of
as a choice.

In total, world wide diffusion of the new managerial tool-box allows to design questions using
its vocabulary in order to build up measures of organizational change. However, this strategy
has to be cautious. From one country to the other, firms may develop a specific use of the tool
box, connected with local institutions. Furthermore, practices that often appear bunched
together in the journalistic literature may not follow one unique direction of change.
Depending on the practice, higher involvement, empowerment, higher formalization, cost
reduction or flexibility are favored. Thus, we may guess that these practices do not necessarily
go hand in hand with one another. For example, tight deadlines may interfere negatively with
a thorough management of quality3. Increased formalization may limit empowerment:
employee has full responsibility in a tight framework defined by precise procedures. Increased
formalization may also be an indicator of restructuring and downsizing or of increased
corporate control in ever growing multinational firms (it is used to issue measures of relative
performances of the production units). At last, downsizing and reengineering may aim at
increasing short term profit, an objective that may be in contradiction with the building up of
innovative capabilities.



 See for example, the model of Keren and Levhari (1989), based on information processing theory.
The COl survey that we are going to briefly describe in the next section tries to overcome
these limits by associating a business survey on changes in organizational practices and a
labor force survey.

1.2 The specificity of the COl survey

    Description of the survey

The COT survey ("Changements Organisationnels et Informatisation") has been conducted at
the end of 1997. It is a group of 3 business surveys matched with one labor force survey4. As a
matter of fact, the French government surveys organization and technology use topics since
the middle the 1980s'. Appendix 2 gives the background and some details about the surveys
that preceded the COT survey. The business part of the COI survey in manufacturing is
modeled after the 1993 SESSI survey on "organizational change in production" whereas the
labor force questionnaire takes on the so called TOTTO survey, carried out in 1993 by the
Ministry of labor (DARES). In our empirical work, we focused on the manufacturing sector
where the survey benefited from high response rates both on the firm side (8 8%) and on the
workers side (71%).

The business survey in manufacturing focuses on changes in the internal organization of the
whole firm (not only on the production department). It has been postal. The firm response is
given by a firm representative chosen by the headquarters of firm. In fact the statistical office
of the Ministry of Industry is in contact with an interlocutor in all firms for the annual survey
of manufacture. The COI questionnaire has been sent to this person with a letter saying that
the headquarters, the human resources department, the production department and the IT
department were concerned. The letter also informed the firm that some workers randomly
selected were being interviewed, but of course it did not give their names. The last question of
the survey is about the affiliation of all the persons that participated in building the firm's
response.

Interviewed workers have been randomly sampled in the staff of interviewed firms from a file
of government origin that gave the list of all the workers present in the firms on the 31 St of
December 1996. Workers have been interviewed about one year later. Thus, they are


' One business survey covers manufacturing and food industries. The Ministry of industry (SESSI) conducted
the survey in the former while the Ministry of Agriculture (SCEES) took care of the later, the two others are
exploratory surveys in a branch of commerce (home depots type of stores) and in a branch of business services
(accountants) carried out by INSEE (National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies). The labor force
survey has been conducted by the Ministry of labor (DARES). 8812 workers have been interviewed, belonging
to 4025 firms with more than 50 employees in manufacturing and food industries and with more than 20
employees in the service branches. The conception of the business survey in manufacturing and of the labor
force survey and the coordination of the 4 surveys has been directed by Nathalie Greenan at the Centre d'Etudes
de l'Emploi.
representative of workers with at least one year of seniority within interviewed firms. They
are asked to describe their every day work in 1997. The labor force survey has been carried
out by phone or face to face when the selected person could not be reached by phone. In both
cases workers have been interviewed in the context of their leisure time. Each respondent has
been asked if he or she was willing to meet a researcher later on and 30% accepted the
principle of another interview.

So the main principle of the survey is to interview at the same time firm representatives and
employees on organizational topics and technology use in order to measure at the same time
the workers' point of view and the managerial point of view5. This cross questioning has
many advantages.

    Advantages of the cross questioning offirm representative and workers
Interviews of firm representative and of workers allow to measure the diffusion of the new
managerial tool box in different ways. Firm representatives have a clear picture of strategy
matters and understand the managerial vocabulary. If they have not just arrived in the firm,
they know what kind of organizational devices are being adopted, why, and they also have
their own feeling about obstacles and implementation difficulties. But their answers may be
influenced about what they think a modem corporation is like and this may induce a bias
towards a positive correlation between organizational devices if this picture is one of a firm
with the latest managerial tools.

On the other hand, workers can describe precisely their every day work. While testing
different questions on the two types of interlocutors, it appeared that firm representatives
could answer more easily to questions on organizational change than to questions on the state
of organization, while the reverse was true for workers. Of course, the formulation of the
questions in the labor force survey must take into account the position of the interviewed
person in the firm. Most of the workers that are not part of the managerial staff do not
understand the vocabulary used in the business survey. Thus questions have to be factual and
simple.




 The idea of the survey originated from a seminar on innovation and performance improvements organized by
Dominique Foray and Jacques Mairesse in 1994-1995. A first description of the project was discussed
collectively in a group and written up by Michel Gollac and Nathalie Greenan (Caby and alii in Foray and
Mairesse, 1999). In the 1990's, in response to the labor market situation, the Ministry of Labor (DARES)
became more and more interested in understanding how it related with firm practices. Furthermore, labor force
surveys tended to suggest that an increasing share of workers felt high pressure at work. On the other hand, the
Ministry of industry (SESSI) wanted to improve knowledge on the skill bias of technological change. As a result
both statistical services adopted the project that was to become the COT survey. INSEE got involved because she
was interested in the new methodology of the survey and was sub-contracted by DARES to conduct the labor
force survey.
Moreover, numerous organization studies have pointed out the discrepancy between formal
organization and current practices. Firm representatives generally describe formal
organization, whereas workers can be asked about what they really do and how they adapt
assignments to the context of their work. Topics like empowerment, worker involvement and
greater autonomy on the shop-floor cannot only be investigated through what management
knows about it. It is even more true for considerations about intensification of effort, stress or
all type of adjustment costs caused by organizational change. As far as performance is
concerned, it also appears that the key issue is in the interaction between the efforts spent by
individual workers and the structure of the organization (Harris, 1994). The interview of both
firm representatives and workers allows to go one step further in the understanding and
description of these linkages.

   Methodological issues

As far as the statistical approach is concerned, a matched employer I employee survey raises
methodological issues. The first one is to decide how many workers to interview per firm. It
seems difficult to build up serious measures without a large sample of workers within each
firm. But this is costly, especially when compared with traditional business survey where the
answer of "the firm" is most of the time the answer given by one person allowed to talk in the
name of the organization.

The COl survey took another option: 2 workers per firm have been interviewed in firms with
less than 500 employees, 3 workers in bigger firms. This choice has been backed up by
previous empirical work using the TOTTO survey to measure the impact of computer use on
firm productivity (Greenan, Mairesse, 1996 ; Mairesse and Greenan, 1998). It showed that
although variables measured on the basis of answers of a small number of employees per firm
are subject to important sampling errors, they can be usefully included in a model specified at
the firm level. Biases arising from the sampling errors in the employee-based variables can be
assessed, as long as there is a large enough sample of firms with 2 or more employees selected
at random. Moreover, results about the significance of coefficients are robust.

Another methodological problem is related to the fact that the content of work depends
strongly on the job and on the position occupied by the worker in the organization. Unlike the
indicator on computer use, answers of all types of workers on organization cannot be treated
symmetrically. As we have decided to investigate manufacturing industry, we have also
chosen to focus on the answers of the largest category of employees: blue-collar workers.
With their one year of seniority, they belong the "core" of the shop-floor workforce. The
sample of the survey includes 2049 blue collars working in 1462 manufacturing firms with
more than 50 employees.
1.3 Two sets of organizational change measures

Most of the time, empirical studies in economics concentrate on a small number of
quantitative variables: IT investment, R&D expenditures etc. The difficulty with organization
is that it cannot be summarized with one quantitative variable. Rather, a large set of
qualitative variables are potential candidates. Most econometric studies relating organizational
changes and performance have focused on a small number of variables in this set: TQM, job
rotation, self-managed teams, number of hierarchical layers.

If we measure organizational change through a statistical survey, it does not make sense to
focus on one specific new organizational practice whereas this can be a suitable strategy in
field work. On a large sample of firms, all types of firms coexist and some of them have
adopted multiple new organizational devices. Thus, we must take into account a broad range
of organizational practices because they may all interfere with performance improvements.
They are measured from answers given by firm representatives speaking in the name of the
organization and by employees describing their everyday work. Choices are in the continuity
of preceding work based on the TOTTO survey (Greenan and Guellec, 1998) and on the
survey on "organizational change in production" (Greenan, 1 997a and 1 997b).

    The business section of the COl survey

In the business survey questionnaire, we selected 4 sets of questions (84 "primary" questions
in total), that deal with new organizational devices, with work in groups or teams, with the
allocation of tasks on the shopfloor and with the number of hierarchical layers. All these
questions are reported in box 1 with percentages for each type of answers from the whole
sample of interviewed firms with more than 50 employees.

                                         linsert box 11

The variables stemming from these questions are of a qualitative type, either dichotomous or
with three ordered items. After analyzing their distribution, we decided to build up synthetic
variables in order to deal with a smaller number of them while loosing little information. Most
of the questions are expressed in terms of the existence of a list of practices in 1997 and either
on their existence in 1994 or on the change in their scope within the firm (measured by the
share of concerned workers) between 1994 or 1997. It is then possible to analyze separately
practices in 1997 and their evolution within firms during 3 years (1994-1997). Nevertheless,
statistical analysis shows a strong path dependency during such a short time period. Firms that
abandon or reduce the scope of "high performance" practices or firms that jump from one
extreme to the other are very rare. In other words, firms have about the same relative profile
compared with others, on the basis of information on their situation in 1997 and on the basis
of information on the evolution of this situation. In order to grasp some deeper effects, we
chose to process at the same time the two types of information.
We explain, under each set of questions in box 1 how the corresponding synthetic variables
are constructed. We obtain 16 variables with a varying number of items, summing up to 56.
They are listed in table 1 where we keep the same variables names as in box 1. In table 1, we
break the order of the questiormaire and group the variables into two main categories: devices
that shape the information system of the firm and devices that shape its production system.

   Information system

The information system of the firm is first described through its general structure. We group 4
variables have an influence on how corporate decisions are taken: organization in profit
centers (OPC), formal in house customer I supplier contracts (CSC), number of hierarchical
layers (HL) and change in this number (EVHL). For instance, more profit centers (11% of
firms) indicates a decentralization of decision in the sense used by traditional theories of
hierarchy. This is also the case for an extension in the use of formal in-house customer /
supplier contracts (13%) or for a reduction in the number of hierarchical layers (18%).

                                       llnsert table 1]
Variables measuring involvement of employees in information and processing decision
describe another type of change in the information system of the firm. It indicates how
operational decisions are decentralized towards direct producers. We use three types of
variables: the percentage of production and non production workers participating in problem
solving groups (PSG) and project groups (PRG), the existence and evolution in use of 5S
method or total productive maintenance (TPM) and the way currents tasks are shared on the
shop-floor between the hierarchy (HIE), production workers (PW), and specialists (SPE).
Box 1 shows that involvement in "information processing" groups or teams is measured with
three different intensity items giving the percentage of concerned employees in 1997 (0-10%,
10%-50%, more than 50%). Manufacturing firms with more than 50% of workers involved in
problem solving groups (respectively project groups) are rare: 4% (respectively 2%) of them
declare such a proportion for production workers and 6% (respectively 6%) for non
production workers. Thus, we grouped together the medium and high item. The resulting
variable measures the existence of such groups on a non negligible scale. Moreover, the
correlation between the answers given for the two types of workers is strong. This is why we
built a synthetic variable crossing the two dichotomous variables.

Total productive maintenance and 5S method are also connected with an involvement of
workers in information gathering. 5S method originated in Japan. Like total productive
maintenance, it aims at motivating workers in collecting information about all the small
hitches into the production process. SS method insists on tidiness and order in the working
environment so that problems are more easily detected. Only a small number of firms had
adopted one of these methods in 1997 (17%).
The division of work between production workers, hierarchy and specialist workers is seized
with a set of 60 "primary" questions (see box 1). Each question is about a task that is currently
achieved on the shop floor. These tasks are not direct production ones, they have to do with
the preparation of work (sharing work, setting machines), information processing (controlling
quality, contributing to performance improvement) and with decision (setting machines,
stopping and starting production in case of an hitch). Questions are about how the
responsibility for each task is shared between the production worker, the hierarchy and
specialists in 1994 and in 1997. The information embedded in this series of questions is very
rich. We decided to make up three variables out of it, giving at the same time a measure of the
size of the responsibility sphere of each worker category and of its evolution between 1994
and 1997. Each variable takes 4 items.

Two of them describe situations where responsibilities have remained stable between 1994
and 1997, with a distinction in the number of tasks each category is responsible for. Chosen
bounds are the median number of tasks in 1997 computed on the whole sample. Hierarchy is
in general responsible for more tasks (in the listed range) than production workers or
specialists and her prerogatives are more stable: her responsibilities remained unchanged in
84% of firms whereas this figure amount 77% for specialists and 71% for production workers.

The 2 other items describe situations of changing responsibilities: some tasks appear, others
disappear. Here again, items were chosen for each category according to the distribution of the
variable. In the case of production workers for example, it is only in a very small number of
firms (3%) that some tasks disappear. Thus, when the number or disappearing tasks was
greater or equal to the number of appearing tasks, the situation has been considered as stable.
In the opposite situation, firms have been classified as increasing the responsibilities of
production workers. We distinguish firms where production workers gained 1 to 3 tasks
(18%) and firms where they gained 4 tasks or more (11%). Of course, these gains are strongly
correlated with the numbers of tasks production workers are in charge of in 1997. For the
hierarchy and specialists, we built two categories according to whether the number of
appearing tasks was greater than the number of disappearing ones ("increase" category and
"decrease" in the opposite case). When the tasks of the hierarchy change, it is more often a
reduction in the numbers of tasks (12% of firms against 4% for "increase"). As for the
specialist, his number of tasks increases as often as it decreases (12% and 11%).

   Production system

The remaining variables describe practices that change the production system of the firm. A
first question on autonomous work teams (AWT) has been transformed in the same way as
questions on "information processing groups". This variable indicates if the primary unit of
work in production is the individual or a collective entity.

Two other groups of questions identifies practices that induce increased horizontal
complementarities between workers or units, either because of tight time schedule and
production flows (2 variables) or because of high quality standards (3 variables). Each of them
 implies the formulation and implementation of a new procedure to be followed by workers:
just in time delivery (DJIT) or just in time production (PJIT) for the former, ISO norms or
EAQF (ISO), total quality management (TQM) and value analysis of AMDEC method
(AMD) for the latter. These synthetic variables take 3 items: the firm is not using the device
in 1997, the firm is using it but it has not been extended in terms of concerned workers since
1994, the firm is using it and has increased the number of workers concerned.

    The laborforce section of the GO! survey

Questions asked to workers are less "technical" than those asked to firm representatives, As
we already said, the vocabulary describing the managerial tool box is not understood by all
types of workers and the option taken COT survey, like the TOTTO one, is to work with one
unique questionnaire. Questions are about the way everyday work takes place within the firm.

We kept all the questions that were connected with the selected business survey variables. For
example, blue collar workers are asked they have to meet precise quantifies quality standards
like wastage rates or measurable characteristics of the product. We guess that the answer to
this question should be connected with the answer of the firm representative about quality
registration systems or total quality management practices. Box 2 gives the 41 questions
selected from the labor force survey and the percentages of positive answers from the whole
sample of interviewed blue collars.

                                         (Insert box 2]

Here again, like with the business survey, we decided to make up a smaller number of
synthetic variables. Most of the questions lead to an answer of a "yes or no" type. By
summing up the number of positives answers on precise topics, we are able to build up
variables that give an idea of the intensity of some aspects of the effort spent by blue collars.
For example, 4 questions indicate whether the worker communicates with his colleagues on
different purposes in the course of his work. With the number of positive answers to these
questions, we build up a variable that proxies the intensity of horizontal communication. In
box 2, questions that are grouped together under one heading are used to make up one
synthetic variable which name and number of items is given in between brackets (14 variables
in total). Appendix 3 explains precisely how each synthetic variables is built from the
"primary" variables. In table 1, synthetic variables are grouped together according to the
categories we used for presenting the variables from the business section of the COT survey.

   Information system

The decentralization of the hierarchical structure of the firm is difficult to address through the
interview of blue collar workers. Thus, there is no question to corroborate the answers given
by firm representatives.
Involvement in information processing and decision is seized through a group of 8 variables.
A first set of 5 variables give some indications on communication: vertical and horizontal
communication (CVER and CHOR), communication with other services (CWITH),
communication with outside the firm (CBETW) and contact with the customer (CUS). On the
shop floor, a majority of blue collar workers communicate with their boss and their colleagues
in one way or in another. Communication with other departments in the firm is rarer: nearly
half of blue collar workers attached to the core of firms' workforce do not discuss, nor are
helped, nor exchange indications with other departments. Finally, 81% of blue collar workers
are not involved in information exchanges about their work with persons from outside the
firm and 87% are never in direct contact with the customer. This leaves 19% of them involved
in such exchanges, 6% of them doing it for multiple purposes and 2% being in constant
contact with the customer.

The number of meeting per year attended by blue-collar workers (MEET) measures
institutionalized or formal ways to communicate. In a meeting, communication takes place
between a group of people whereas the other forms of communication that we mentioned are
more bilateral. On the whole, 43% of blue collar workers never participate into meetings in
the context of their work and 28% attend one or more meetings a year.

The synthetic variable on the scope of initiative (SCOPI) sums up different types of
hierarchical constraints. The workers are considered to have no scope of initiative when they
cannot modify the nature or quantity of work they have to carry out, or the way they proceed.
Supervisors give precise instructions about how to do the work, they follow instructions to the
letter and are frequently checked. When unforeseen contingencies occur, they call on other
people to fix the problem. About 19% of interviewed workers have to comply with 3 or more
of these hierarchical constraints. On the other extreme, 35% of blue collar workers have some
scope to adapt assignments to their need or to define themselves the content of their work. The
remaining 46% experiment moderate hierarchical constraint: they have no scope for changing
things, but direct supervision is not very strong.

The last variable measuring involvement of blue collar workers in information processing
activities comes from a question on proposition for process improvement (PPIM). 62% of
blue collar workers declare such propositions, which is rather high.

   Production system

The rest of the questions are more directly linked with what the worker does in the course of
direct production. Does he work in group or collectively (GROU)? Is his work rhythm
constrained by quantitative norms or deadlines (RXX) or by horizontal linkages with his
colleagues or with the customer (RCXXX) ? Is his work rhythm constrained by machines or
by the design of the work process (RTEC)? And has he to respect some precise quality norm
(QUAL) or to participate in product testing (TEST)? We consider that all these variable
measure some sources of complementarities between workers in the work done: due to the
collective nature of work, due to time schedule and production flows, due to equipment or to
the production process itself and due to quality standards.

About half of interviewed blue collar workers never work within a group or collectively, but a
little more than one fourth do it all the time. Very tight time constraints are declared by about
one third of blue collar workers: in this case work rhythm is defined by an external demand
needing an immediate response. This complements information on contacts with customers. If
only 13% of blue collar workers have direct contact with customers, they impose tight work
rhythm on 31% of them. Another 45% of direct producers have production norms or deadlines
to meet between 1 hour and one day. The remaining 25% work with slack deadlines.

The identity of the person who influences the production flow gives another information. It
can either be a colleague or the customer. We have already measured whether customer was
imposing a tight time constraint. But external demand may not always require immediate
response. We find that 36% of interviewed workers do not have their work rhythm imposed
by either customers or colleagues. On the opposite side of the scale, 19% refer both to the
influence of customers and colleagues on their work rhythm. The remaining half is shared
equally between situations where only colleagues are a source of pressure and situations
where only customers are so. We can derive a third information on the influence of customers
on production work from this variable: it concerns 42% of blue collars if we take into account
both tight and slack pressures on work rhythm.

Technology itself is another, more traditional, source of horizontal pressure on work rhythm.
The conveyor belt is the best example. We built a synthetic indicator on technological
constraints summing up a variable on rhythm imposed by automatic moving of a product or a
part, a variable of rhythm imposed by automatic pace of a machine and a variable on
repetitive work. 45% of blue collars are not concerned by those constraints and 31% are
concerned by 2 or all of them. Thus, more traditional ways of constraining direct production
work are not out of date in manufacturing. Contrary to questions on the hierarchical structure,
information on technical constraints is only measured at the worker level. But in this case, our
lack of data is not connected with a measurability problem. The information is not available in
the business section of the COT survey because a preceding SESSI survey focused on
manufacturing technology6.

Finally, two variables indicate whether workers have to be attentive to the quality of
production. 47% of direct producers have to meet precise and quantified quality standards and
52% participates in product testing.




 However, we have not been able to match the two surveys yet.
    What did we learn about the survey infield work

We used the survey to select some firms that we visited. Our first purpose was to check the
quality of the data gathered through our statistical survey. Some firm and worker interviews
had already been carried out in the conception phase of the survey, but they were strongly
oriented around the intelligibility, wording and relevance of the questions. In conducting post-
interviews, we wanted to go through the given answers asking for more details on what the
firm was effectively doing. Apart from these questions around the survey, we focused our new
interviews on the rationale of organization: when had the new practices been implemented,
what was the strategy and the constraints that weighed on the choices? How were the practices
connected with one another and with technological choices? We will come back on those
aspects in another section.

We decided to focus on one industrial sector in order to limit the range of variation in
variables other than organizational like technology or market. We wanted a sector opened on
the global economy and innovative without being too prone to management fashion. We
chose the "machines and equipment sector". It has experienced some restructuring during the
1994-1997 period, firms belonging to this sector often work in small batches and their main
customers are other firms. In our sample, 60 firms and 86 blue collar workers belonged to this
sector. We visited four of them noted respectively A, B, C and D in the following. We met
either the head of the company or top executives responsible for production, organization or
information technologies. In firm B, we conducted 3 interviews7. We will explain, in the next
section how these firms have been selected within their sector.

We were pleased to find out that the business survey questionnaire had been filled up
carefully in the four firms we visited. Respondents had all tried their best to answer to the
questions. Imprecision did not come from their unwillingness to fill up a form from
government origin, but from their lack of knowledge about some of the topics. As a matter of
fact, SESSI maintains some courteous and trustful relations with firms through a network of
people responsible for specific branches. It wasn't too difficult to obtain an appointment once
we had sent a letter with some documentation about the COl survey and the response of the
firm. In firm A and B, we found some errors in the part of the questionnaire about IT use.
They were due either to an interpretation error (A), or to the fact that the respondent was about
to retire and not very interested in new technologies (B). In firm B, that same person had
ticked JIT delivery system and JIT production system, although we verified with the
production manager that only deliveries were just in time. The distinction between the two
types of system was too fine to be seized by the respondent who really thought that the two
systems where used. More generally, it seems that the answers given by "structure" executives
about the organization of direct production are more imprecise. However, new management


  In some further research, we will try and meet the production manager and a manager involved in the
"structure" in each firm, and we will also contact one blue collar worker.
tools that reinforce the communication links between the production sphere and the structure,
and new integrated manufacturing software tend to improve the knowledge of executives.

Finally, we were surprised about what size meant in our field work. We had selected two
small firm (A, 42 employees, C, 116 employees), one medium sized one (B, 320 employees)
and one big firm (D, 1265 employees). However, we did not find any small firm in the field.
First, all four firms belonged to a group, of French nationality for A and C, American for B
and German for C. For A, it appeared that the real firm was the group, connecting three
productive units summing up to 150 employees. C had three subsidiaries in France and
commercial antennas abroad, this broader entity grouping 376 employees. She was owned by
a holding company and had some strong connections with other French firms, this group
representing about a 1000 employees. The structure of B and C was less ambiguous, at least at
the level of France, for C was involved in a European group where some firms shared their
product range while others were competitors on the same markets. We are going to see that
these broader structures have a lot to do in the choices of internal organization, at least for A,
CandD.

2 Statistical anatomy of organizational change in French manufacturing
In this section, we are going to present the results of two correspondence analysis, one
performed with the business survey variables and the other with the variables built on the
answers given by blue collar workers. This statistical analysis is descriptive. Our aim is to
find the best way to measure organizational change and to understand how the effort spent by
blue collar workers is altered by organizational change. Of course, in the back of our mind, we
have the idea of using these measures in some performance regressions.

Why do we choose correspondence analysis to describe organizational change? As we have
already mentioned it, organizational change is a multi faceted shock on the information and
production systems of firms. Thus, it is described by a large number of qualitative variables.
Correspondence analysis is a suitable tool in this case. In France, it is often used in
quantitative sociological research (Kramarz, 1986; Gollac, 1989) and economists sometimes
recourse to it to describe firm behavior (Salais, 1992, Greenan 1997a, Greenan and Guellec
1998). This tool may show that the heart of information is embedded in a small number of
variables highly correlated with all the others. In this case, it helps choosing these variables.
Otherwise, it can be used to build up synthetic indexes that are particularly helpful when the
variables of interest are latent, indirectly measurable through a large number of qualitative
variables.

 We are going to present our correspondence analysis both with figures and with correlation
 tables for the 5 items that contribute the most to the inertia of the axis. On figures, all items
 that have a contribution over the average are displayed, as well as items with contribution
 below average but that are significantly correlated with the axis. We also display the
coordinates of firms (stars) and workers (faces) from the sector we chose for field work. The
shape of the cloud of points for this sector is very much alike the shape for the whole sample.

2.1 In the words of firm representatives, organizational changes cluster

How do organizational practices and devices are arranged and evolve together within firms?
We conducted a first correspondence analysis using information from the business section of
COT on our sample of 1462 firms. Figure 1 gives the mapping originating from the crossing of
the first and second axis of the correspondence analysis. It is complemented by table 2 that
gives the correlation coefficients between the five variables that contribute the most to the
inertia of each axis.

                                  [Insert figure 1 and table 21

Clearly, practices under examination cluster. The figure is organized around three different
groups of items that are very close to one another: firms with no new organizational practices,
firms with a stable use of them between 1993 and 1997 and firms that have either adopted
them for the first time or that have extended their use. This indicates that all types of practices
go hand in hand with one another and they tend to evolve at the same rhythm once they have
been adopted. Although the COT survey is much richer than the survey on "organizational
change in production", the result on the clustering of practices was already observed in 1993
(Greenan, 1 997a). What we find here is in line with the description of the path to "excellency"
that is described in management best sellers. It does not corroborate our feeling that that some
of the practices may be in contradiction with one another. This result is the basis for the
following proposition:

Proposition 1: All types of new organizational practices are positively correlated with one
another.

More precisely, the first axis of the correspondence analysis represents 13% of total inertia. It
opposes the "no" firms with the firms with an increasing use of new organizational practices.
If we look more closely at the contribution of the different items to the inertia of the axis we
find that the items with the strongest contribution to the negative part of the axis are the ones
that measure no employee involvement in intellectual tasks and no implementation of
practices oriented towards a thorough management of quality.

The third group of firms is clustering around the second axis representing 7% of total inertia.
They produce and/or deliver their goods just in time, they have a decentralized hierarchical
structure and they use procedures to guaranty high quality standards, But contrary to the
second group of firms, they have not developed these practices between 1994 and 1997. Firms
with negative coordinates on this axis have extended just-in-time practices and increased the
decentralization of their structure.
Thus, in an indirect way, our first axis is oriented by employee involvement and quality
practices while the second axis is oriented by JIT and practices favoring the development of a
kind of pseudo-market within the firm. The first ones are more often expanding while the
second one are more stable.

This first correspondence analysis tends to show that the main variables are the number of
organizational devices characterized by a stable and increasing use. Within devices, a
distinction could also be made between "employee involvement" and "quality" devices on one
hand, "just-in-time" and "pseudo market" devices on the other hand.

For our field work, we selected firms that were lined up along the first axis. This can be seen
on figure 1: firm A has a negative coordinate on axis 1, then comes firm B with an
intermediate position on the positive portion of axis 1, firm C and firm D that are further up
the axis. All 4 firms make different products, so they do not compete on the same market.
Firm A makes prototypes of moulds for the automobile industry, firm B produces thermostats
for car engines, heating systems and bathroom installations, firm C manufactures pumps to
spray paint or varnish on cars, airplanes, furniture etc. and firm D is specialized in storehouse
and handling equipment. We chose the position on axis 1 as a selection criteria because we
felt that it opposed the most dynamic firms in terms of organizational change with the most
inert own.

As a matter of fact, this feeling was comforted in the field. We accepted the ranking of firms
in terms of intensity of organizational change once we completed our visits. Furthermore, it
appeared that the position on the axis was a good predictor of performance. But not so for the
reasons that we thought in the beginning.

When we contacted firm A, we learned that it had gone bankrupt in 1997 and that it had been
bought over. We managed to organize an interview with the previous owner who had filled up
the COT questionnaire. Firm A was very dependent on one car manufacturer that decided to
internalize part of its development activity in a new technology center near Paris. She
anticipated that her activity would not drop down immediately because the change in location
would take some time. This was confirmed by the car manufacturer, but what happened in the
end was a brutal cut in orders.

Firm B looked quite healthy in our first visit, but when we returned, we felt that its position
was fragile: it had squeezed its margin under the pressure of car manufacturers in the recent
years and was facing some challenges to secure its survival. Internal impediment, lying in
labor relations and culture made organizational change difficult at a moment when it was
needed. We cannot say though that firm B had not been successful in raising its productivity.
It did so partly through organizational change. But if we measure productivity in value rather
than volume (which is always the case on micro-data) this gains are invisible because B had to
lower its price (4% in the last year).
Firm C had gone through some heavy financial difficulties in 1992-1994 and was finally sold
in 1995 to another firm, also specialized in pumps but used in agriculture rather than in
manufacturing. During the six month that followed its take over, firm C implemented heavy
organizational change as its production and commercial activities were restructured. In 1997
when the COT survey was conducted, the organization was brand new and the firm had
growing benefits again.

Finally, firm D, the biggest we visited, had been hit by the 1993 downturn. In 1995, it
changed the location of its headquarters and its strategy: product demand was to cyclical to be
trusted, firm C decided to expand its offer of services in order to smooth demand. Its activity
kept growing and between 1994 and 1997, it was able to expand its workforce, making it
easier to shift from and engineer type of culture focused on the product towards a culture
favoring the relation with the customer. In 1990, the production site had also changed its
location and new organizational practices had been implemented throughout the 90s. We met
the organization and IT manager, responsible for a team 18 persons, 3 of them being
specialized in "organization" matters. In fact firm D tries to motivate transversal projects
involving her headquarters (300 employees), production site (500 employees) and commercial
network (500 employees) and the organization staff is there to do the follow up and give
advice.

2.2 Blue collars: Employee involvement, constraints, customers and colleagues

The sample of blue collar workers affiliated with the 1462 manufacturing firms used in the
firm level correspondence analysis is composed if 2049 respondents. Variables built on the
answers given by blue collar workers are less correlated with one another than firm level
variables: to reach a proportion close to 20% of total inertia, 3 axis have to be considered in
the worker level analysis, whereas 2 where sufficient in the firm level analysis. This happens
even though some of the respondents belong to the same firm. If organizational practices
cluster, profiles of blue collar jobs are quite varied. Mappings originating from the crossing of
axis 1 and 2 and 2 and 3 are respectively displayed in figures 2 and 3. Table 3 gives the
correlation coefficients between the five variables that contribute the most to the inertia of
each of the 3 axis.

Vertical, horizontal, within firm, between firm and group communication come together on
the first axis. Blue collar workers who communicate a lot about work with their colleagues
participate in a larger communication network involving other persons in the firm and
sometimes persons from outside the firm like customers. On the opposite, blue collar workers
who are not involved in horizontal communication experiment very poor on the job
communication.

                                       llnsert figure 21
Two other variables are correlated with communication: scope of initiative and proposition for
process improvements. Workers with low intensity of communication experiment high
hierarchical constraints whereas numerous information exchanges favor some scope of
initiative. This does not imply that horizontal and vertical communication are substitutes:
workers with more initiative also communicate more intensively with their boss. Besides, they
are more prone to proposing process improvements. Of course, these type of activities are
unknown to workers under tight hierarchical supervision. As a matter of fact, nearly all the
variables grouped together under the heading "involvement of employees in information
processing and decision" in our table 1 contribute to the construction of the first axis. This
leads to our second proposition:

Proposition 2: The intensity of involvement in information processing and decision is a
discriminatory feature of work organization.

Communication and low supervision does not mean no constraints on work. The second axis
summarizes the influence of constraints other than hierarchical on the content of work. Like
different kinds of communication, high technical constraints, quality norms and permanent
production work within a group are correlated with one another. Vice versa, some blue collar
workers do not experiment any of those constraints nor tight deadlines. This leads to our third
proposition.

Proposition 3 : The second prominent characteristic of work organization is the intensity of
technical constraints positively associated with quality standards and negatively correlated
with no time constraints.

The banana shaped size of the cloud of points in figure 1 shows however that when
involvement in intellectual tasks is high, the intensity of technical constraints is low. This can
be checked in table 3, through the crossing of variables from the first and from the second
axis. No technical constraints is positively correlated with a high scope of initiative and a high
level of communication with other departments the firm. And strong technical constraints are
negatively correlated with the variables of the first axis denoting a high level of involvement
in intellectual tasks. This calls on to our forth proposition.

Proposition 4: Workers cannot develop a high involvement in information processing and
decision and have at the same time their work rhythm fixed by heavy technical constraints.

                                        llnsert table 3]
These results are in line with the ones obtained in a similar analysis using the 1987 TOTTO
survey (Greenan and Guellec, 1998). Intensity of communication and intensity of constraints
appeared to be two strong dimensions structuring blue collar jobs. However hierarchical
constraints were correlated with both axis whereas here, they are clearly isolated from the
other types of constraints. This can be interpreted as a piece of evidence showing that
constraints tend to shift in time with the diffusion of organizational changes.

The third axis separates jobs that are "pushed" or influenced by colleagues from jobs that are
"pulled" or close to the market. On one side, workers are in contact with the customer or have
their work rhythm constrained by them within very tight deadlines, on the other one workers
communicate with colleagues or have their work rhythm influenced by immediate dependence
on them in the work done. Our fifth proposition focuses on this result.

Proposition 5: Whether production and information flows are pushed by colleagues or pulled
by the customer is a third discriminatory feature of work organization.

                                        llnsert figure 3]
When production flows are pushed by colleagues and technical constraints are high, then
colleagues impose a time constraint on work. If, on the contrary, technical constraints are low,
time constraints are also weak and information exchanges are dense between colleagues. The
same kind of association is observed with the influence of the market. When production flows
are pulled by the market and technical constraints are high, then the customer imposes time
pressure on production flows. On the opposite, with low technical constraints the proximity of
the market does not mean increased time pressure for the worker, but rather information
exchanges and direct contact with the customer.

The mapping of figure 3 determines four different types of working environment. Two of
them have already been described with other surveys (Kramarz, 1986; Gollac 1989): the
"industrial" environment and the "craft" environment. They are found in the north west and
south east parts of figure 3.

An industrial type of environment has strong technical constraints and quantitative norms.
Here we find it enriched with quality standards. A craft environment has low technical
constraints and time pressure, production work is more isolated than collective and direct
contacts with the customer are frequent to define the characteristics of the products. None of
the firms that we have visited are clearly of an "industrial" type in the words of their blue
collars. Firm C is the closest to this king of work environment, but it is at the frontier of it. In
fact, the interviewed worker is a storekeeper who prepares parts for shopfloor production
work. This is why his work rhythm is not determined by technical constraints and his
communication network is large. But he makes propositions for process improvement and has
to follow some quality norms.

Firm A is classified in this analysis as a "craft" firm and it was verified in the field. Firm A
makes prototypes of body moulds for a car manufacturer. Thus products are made upon orders
and manufactured only once. Worekrs in firm A are highly skilled. They are recruited with a
diploma equivalent to two years of study after high school. On average, they earned 50%
more than employees in the three other firms whose earnings were close in 1997. The COl
respondent in firm A is a highly skilled worker who participates in the production of
prototypes and controls shapes and dimensions using a personal computer. He seems to
communicate more with the customer, who influences his work rhythm, than with his
colleagues or other persons if the firm.

The two others types of working environment are less easily identifiable. In the south west
part of the mapping we find workers that experiment low technical constraints, high scope of
initiative and high horizontal communication. We may think of an industrial type of working
environment with highly skilled workers. The interviewed blue collars in firm D is in between
this "industrial" situation and the "craft" situation: he has some close connection to the
customer, but he is also part of an industrial type of organization where links with colleagues
are important. In fact, the examination of the questionnaire filled up by this worker had made
us thought that services were important in firm D. Specialized in electromechanics, this
employee works within a small maintenance team that he manages at the customer's place.
The two other employees interviewed in this firm are technicians. This is why they are not in
our sample for this study. However, one of them manages storehouses and the other does after
sale services. The two of them have some direct contact with customers and have deadlines
imposed by external demand needing an immediate response.

In the north east part of the mapping, technical constraints are high and the market puts high
time pressure on the work. The two interviewed blue collars from firm B are precisely located
in this area of the mapping. They have low skills and work as direct producers. Firm B has the
highest capital intensity compared with the three other firms we visited. Some of the machines
are entirely automatic, but others need manual operations and some of them are located in
refrigerated premises so that the wax that is used in the thermostat is at the right temperature.
One of the worker uses an entirely automatic machine and the other a semi automatic one.
Both workers are never in direct contact with the customer, but their work rhythm is fixed by
external demand that always require an immediate response. They also have to respect
deadlines to meet in a day or an hour and their work consists in repeating the same series of
operations. In fact, firm B is on three different markets: thermostat for car engines, spare parts
and thermostat for heating system and bathroom installation. The first market is the more
demanding: firm A is dominated by the car manufacturers she works for, and it is their
influence that has entered the firm to a stage where they are able to pull the work rhythm of
blue collars.

Table 3 also gives some information on correlations between variables from axis 1 and 38• It is
interesting to check the relation between high involvement in intellectual tasks and tight time

8
 The crossing between the items of the first and the third axis may suggest that high involvement is positively
correlated with production flows pulled by the customer. However, this conclusion is wrong and due to our
selection of variables. To see this, note that the items CVER4, CHOR3 and CWITH3 contribute to the
construction of the "colleague" part of the third axis.
constraints. We observe that the correlations of RIMM with the items that contribute the most
to the first axis are all significant and positive. Vice versa, the absence of time pressure on the
work rhythm (RNOP), that play a part in the construction of the second axis, is negatively
correlated with those items. This leads to a sixth proposition.

Proposition 6: High time pressure imposed on work rhythm by the market is positively
correlated with involvement in information processing and decision.

If the response to the market has to be immediate, the best thing is to let the worker react as
quickly as he can and so hierarchical constraints need to be low or medium to leave space to a
flexible response. Blue collars from firm B are in this situation. They make proposition for
process improvement, participate in product testing and when a problem occurs in the course
of production, they try to manage it with colleagues around them. The role of superiors is to
help and give advice rather than to enforce permanent checks. However, in the case of firm B,
workers communication network is limited to the boss and to close colleagues.

What field work has showed us here is that the labor force section of the COT survey gave
useful information to better understand the nature of organizational change. Firm A did not
seem very innovative in our business survey, but firm A is a craft firm and organizational
change does not have the same meaning in that case than in the three others. Firm B had an
intermediate position in terms of organizational change and it is also a firm dominated in a
network of sub-contracting relations. Firm D is the most advanced in terms of organizational
and it has focused its organizational strategy on services in order to escape the constraints of
the economic cycle.

2.3 Organizational innovation and workers' effort

Is there a relation between organizational changes measured at the firm level and
organizational characteristics of blue collar jobs? To give a first answer to this question, we
simply correlated firms' coordinates on the two first axis of the firm level correspondence
analysis and blue collars' coordinates on the three first axis of the worker level
correspondence analysis, after choosing randomly one blue collar within each firm. Results
are displayed in table 4.

                                         llnsert table 4]
We find that firms with an increasing use of "employee involvement" and "quality" practices
have their blue collar workers more involved in information processing and decision and / or
more constrained by technology and standards. Furthermore, work is influenced by colleagues
rather than by the customer. Symmetrically this result means that in firms with no
organizational changes blue collar workers communicate less with other people in or outside
the firm and they work under hierarchical pressure rather than formalized quantitative or
qualitative pressure. Thus, an increasing use of "high performance practices" is correlated
both with higher autonomy or more decentralized information processing and with higher
constraints on work due to automated technology, repetitive tasks and quality standards. The
two following proposition summarizes these results:

Proposition 7: An increase in the use of "employee involvement" and "quality" practices
declared by the firm is positively correlated with a higher intensity of blue collar workers'
involvement in information processing and decision.

Proposition 8: An increase in the use of "employee involvement" and "quality" practices
declared by the firm is also positively correlated with a higher intensity of tecimical constraint
and with production flows that are pushed by colleagues rather than pulled by the market.

Furthermore, the second axis of the firm level correspondence analysis, which measures a
stable use of new organizational practices, is not significantly correlated with any of the axis
from the worker level correspondence analysis.

The linkage we find here between a high intensity of communication, which is part of the first
axis of the worker level correspondence analysis, and organizational change is consistent with
what Shaw, Gant and Iclmiowki (1999) found in the steel industry in their paper for the
conference. They argue that "a move to a high-performance workplace requires a
reconfiguration of the entire system of inter-personal interactions in the workplace" (p.2). We
can look a little closer at the workers' items that are the more correlated to the firms' items in
our empirical analysis. Table 5 gives the correlations between the 5 items that we have
selected on each of the 5 axis of the two correspondence analysis.

                                              [Insert table 5]
We observe that an increase by 4 tasks and more in the number of tasks production workers
are responsible for (PWI4 M) is positively correlated with a high level of communication
both between workers from the same unit (CHOR3) and with other people in the firm
(CWITI-13) and with a large scope of initiative (SCOPI4). We also find that the 5 items
associated with the first axis of the firm level correspondence analysis are positively
correlated with blue collars' propositions for performance improvement (PPIMY). If we check
the other worker level items that participate into the construction of the "intensity of
involvement" axis, we find that the number of meetings attended by the worker has the same
correlation profiles crossed with firm level items as propositions for process improvement: the
attendance at more than one meeting a year in the context of work (MEET4) is positively
correlated with the 5 firm level items of the first axis9. It is also noticeable that a stable use of
new organizational practices between 1994 and 1997 is not correlated with our worker level
items. This could be a sign that higher inter-personal interactions on the work place are more


'Correlations are very significant and range between 0.10 (increasing use of value analysis, functional analysis
or "AMDEC" method) and 0.13 (increasing use of a system ofjust-in-time production).
correlated to the context of change itself than to the practices used. This could be checked in
some further field work.

The correlation of organizational change with the intensity of constraints and with the
influence of colleagues (though weaker) tends to show that it takes place more frequently in
"industrial" types of environment. In table 5, we observe that a high level in the intensity of
technical constraints (CTECH3) is positively correlated with and increasing use of "employee
involvement" and "quality practices" (AMDM, TPMM and PWI4 M). Tables 5 also shows
that precise quantified quality norms imposed on blue collars (QUALY) are positively
correlated with the S firm level items denoting increasing use of new organizational practices.
We checked that the same kind of correlation profile is associated quality testing of products
(TESTY). Furthermore, tight time constraints (RIMM) are not significantly correlated with
the firm level items.

We have seen (proposition 3) that at the level of the worker, high involvement in information
processing and decision was negatively correlated with high technical constraint. Thus, firms
that implement organizational change have to deal with this internal contradiction. In some
further work, we will check if intensity of involvement in information processing and decision
and intensity of constraints correspond to different type of firms or to a specialization of jobs
within firms.

Size could explain part of the observed correlation between firm and worker level variables.
Firm level variables are all strongly correlated with size. Bigger firms have a more dynamic
organization than smaller ones. In the firm level correspondence analysis, we checked, using
size as a supplementary variable that the "no firms" were smaller than those with an
increasing use of new organizational practices. However, worker level variables are much less
sensitive to the size of the firm. It seems that the variables that structure the most strongly the
space of blue collar job characteristics are independent from size. But looking more closely,
we find that the worker level items that are significantly correlated with size are also
correlated with organizational change: technical constraints, number of meetings, propositions
for process improvement, quality norms and product testing. Furthermore "industrial" type of
environments correspond to bigger firms that environment where work if pulled by the market
or influenced by it.

What are the different explanations for the strong correlation with size in our firm level
variables? A first one is mechanical: the probability of adopting a new organizational device
is larger in a bigger firm as it would be larger in a firm made out of a collection of smaller
ones. If this was true, it would be sounder to interview the plant rather than the firm. Second
managerial vocabulary is better understood in bigger first where managers have more often
been educated in schools where management research was going on. Third, organizational
changes are responses to increased complexity either originating from inside the firm
(introduction of new technologies, product differentiation, higher quality standards, etc.) or
from outside (distant markets, customer with changing tastes etc.). In both cases, size makes
increased complexity more complex, because coordination problems are bigger to solve.

To check if our firm / worker correlation may be explained by a pure size effect, we computed
the correlation in table 4 again using data centered on the size/sector mean crossing 4 size
categories and 15 sector ones. Results are still significant with the same sign, but they are a
little weaker. Thus size and sector explains part of the observed correlation between firm and
workers coordinates, but not all of it.


Conclusion
Using the COT survey, we have been able to measure different dimensions of organizational
change both with firm level variables and with worker level variables. Our firm visits and
post-survey interview gave us the feeling that although imprecise on a lot of points of view,
we could trust our statistical data. We also found that the labor force section of the COI
survey gave some useful information to better characterize the firm's activity and the
consequences of organizational change on the content of work. Finally, we found that the
firms that were more prone to organizational change had a bigger size, were "industrial" in the
traditional sense of it (repetitive work, high capital intensity) and had developed dense
internal communication network. These firms seem to search a way of better mastering
quality rather than a way to give quicker response market demand.

We plan to pursue this analysis towards testing the performance impact of organizational
change using micro-data that allows building up a production function. At the firm level, we
found that new organizational practices were clustering. As underlined by Athey and Stern
(1998), if we want to correctly assess the performance impact of organizational changes, it is
important to understand why the firm has decided to adopt several practices and how this
adoption process sequenced in time.
In the four firms that we visited, what appeared important in change adoption were macro
shocks, the firm's own history and outside constraints weighing on her. During the period
surveyed (1994-1997), firms B, C and D had suffered from a common shock'°: the 1993
recession. Observed organizational changes were partly a response to this shock because it
brought about greater requirements from car manufacturers in firm B, because it lead to a
change in owners in firm C and because it nurtured a new strategy to lower the effects of the
macro cycle in firm D. In firm A, the shock came later on, originating from a change of




'° As
     we visited the firms, we saw that they were adapting to three certain shocks lying ahead: the bug of the
millenium and the transition to Euro, driving IT investments and the law on the 35 hours, leading to some
changes in the organization of working times.
strategy of its main customer leading to bankruptcy'1. If organizational change is a response to
difficult times, then it should be followed by performance improvement if the firm survives.

If we consider now the content of organizational choices, firm D seems to be the only firm in
the four that really chose what changes she was going to implement. Leader in her market,
backed up by a powerful group firm D had a lot of scope for choices. Changes were
implemented progressively through an organization in projects. The only obstacle lied in the
lack of "project" competencies, that is people bringing new ideas and able to lead a group and
to get involved in network activities. This bottleneck determined the pace of organizational
change. Thus firm D comforts at the same time the "functionalist" story and the
"constructivist" story.

The internal organization of firm C changed within a very short time period: 6 month
according to the financial director we interviewed. Organization in islets, just-in-time
production and changes in the commercial network were implemented at the same time. Three
years later, the firm obtained an ISO 9002 quality registration. This was decided by the new
owner, an engineer who had taken up and expanded his father's firm where he had already
implemented with success these changes. He imposed his views with charismatic authority
through weekly meetings at firm C but he did not try to break the culture by changing the
team of executives. This was gratefully acknowledged by our interlocutor. The new entity that
absorbed firm C will be less sensitive to the cycle, because of its presence on two very
different markets: manufacturing industry and agriculture. We could cormect this case with
the "functionalist" story.

We do not know what kind of changes were implemented in firm A once it was taken over.
But like firm B, firm A relied heavily on one customer. This is why, the flavor of their story is
more "radical". The development of the foundry activity could have helped firm A in being
less dependant, but the shock that hurt her had not been anticipated. On the other hand, we
cannot say that firm A wasn't efficient in its productive activities and her know-how was
widely recognized in the profession. After the bankruptcy, the firm recovered quickly and the
new owner did not have to layoff any workers. In fact, the car manufacturer at the origin of
the shock changed its strategy shortly afterwards because he found out that he did not have the
competencies necessary to pursue the prototyping activity in house.

In firm B, organizational changes have been imposed by car manufacturers. She is owned by
an engineer who insisted on having good equipment. Quality had always been an important
competitive advantage and seemed to the mastered (except for one small part of the process).
So when quality registration was imposed, it was not a big deal. Organization in islets and just
in time delivery were also imposed a few years earlier. At the same time, car manufacturers


"   We   will try to follow up this firm to check if the new owners decided to implement some organizational
change.
required cuts in prices, and lately, these cuts had to be justified by planned productivity gains
through new changes in organization or process. Firm B relies on three different markets, so
pressure on one of them could favor improvements benefiting to the two others were margins
are bigger. But this did not seem to happen. The pressure imposed by car manufacturers
focuses all the attention on one market where margins are shrinking. One of our interlocutors
confessed that work rhythm would have to increase at the same time as higher involvement in
intellectuals task and this was going to be a problem. As we already stressed it, performance
improvements in firm B does not secure its survival and will not be noticeable in firm level
data where production prices are not measured, but it increases the profit of order givers.

To sum up, it seems that constraints weighing on firms have to be properly measured in
assessing the organizational design function of the firm. Moreover, employer / employee data
sets of the type of the COT survey are useful to go deeper into the nature of organizational
change as it allows to relate the worker's effort with the type of practice implemented by the
firm. This linkage is important both because it defines the size of potential productivity gains
and because it is a source of tensions that may impede performance.



REFERENCES:

Athey S. and Stern S. (1998): <<An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories about
  Complementarity in Organizationa Design >>, NBER Working Paper, N°6600, June.

Askenazy P. (1998) : <<The néo-stakhanovism >, Communication to the conference on
  <<Information and Communication Technologies, Employment and Earnings '>, Nice, 22 et
  23juin 1998.

Cézard M., Dussert F., Gollac M. (1992): "Taylor va au marché: organisation du travail et
  informatique", Travail et Emploi, N°54, pp. 4-19.

Beckmann M. J. (1977): <<Management Production Functions and the Theory of the Firm >,
  Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 14, pp. 1-18.

Black S. E. Lynch L. M. (1997): <<How to Compete: the Impact of Workplace Practices and
  Information Technology on Productivity >>, NBER Working Paper, N°6 120, August.

Brynjolfsson E. and L. M. Hilt (1997): <<Information Technology and Productivity: Micro
  Evidence >, Mimeo, January.

Cappelli P., Bassi L., Katz H., Knoke D. Osterman P. and Useem M. (1997): Change at Work,
  New York, Oxford University Press.
Coutrot T. (1996): <<Relations sociales et performances économiques, une premiere analyse
  empirique du cas francais >>, Travail et Emploi, N°66, Vol.1.

European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (1998): <<Les
   nouvelles formes d'organisation du travail : l'Europe peut-elle réaliser son potentiel?
   Résultats d'une enquête sur la participation directe en Europe>>

Foray and Mairesse (Eds) (1999): Innovation et Performances: approches interdisciplinaires,
  Paris, Editions de 1'EHESS.

Gollac M. (1989): (<Les dimensions de l'organisation du travail: communications, autonomie
  et pouvoir hiérarchique >>, Economie et Statistique, N° 224, septembre, pp. 27-44.

Gollac M. et Volkoff S. (1996): <<Citius, altius, fortius: l'intensification du travail >>, Actes de
  la Recherche en Sciences Sociales, N° 114, septembre, pp. 54-67.

Greenan N. (1997a): <<Innovation technologique, changements organisationnels et evolution
  des compétences >>, Economie et Statistique, N°298, pp. 15-29, 1996 - 8.

Greenan N. (1997b): <Progres technologique et changements organisationnels: leur impact
  sur l'emploi et les qualifications >>, Economie et Statistique, N°298, pp. 35-44, 1996 - 8.

Greenan N. and Guellec D. (1998): <<Firm Organization, Technology and Performance: An
  Empirical Study >>, Economic of Information and New Technologies, Vol. 6, pp. 3 13-347.

Greenan N. and Mairesse J. (1996): <<Computers and Productivity in France: Some
  Evidence >>, NBER Working Paper, N°5836, November 1996, to be published in
   Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1998.

Harris D. (Ed) (1994): Organizational Linkages: Understanding the Productivity Paradox,
   Washington D. C., National Academy Press.

Ichniowski C., Shaw K. and Prennushi G. (1997): <<The Effects of Human Resource
   Management Practices on Productivity: a Study of Steel Finishing Lines >>, American
   Economic Review, Vol. 87, N°3, June, pp. 291-3 13.

Keren M. and Levhari D. (1989): <<Decentralization, Aggregation, control Loss and Costs in
  a Hierarchical Model of the Firm >>, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
  N°11, pp. 213-236.

Kramarz F. (1986): <<Conditions de travail et gestion de la main d'ceuvre ouvrière >>,
   Economic et Statistique, N° 186, mars, pp. 3 1-45.
Kremer M. (1993) : <(The 0-Ring Theory Of Economic development >', Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, Vol. CVIII, N°3, August, pp. 55 1-575.

Mairesse J. and Greenan N. (1998): <<Using Information Collected from Employees in an
  Econometric Study of Firms : Is One Employee Enough? '> Preliminary paper to be
  presented at The International Symposium on Employer-Employee Matched Data
  (Washington, May 22-23 1998).

Maurice, Sellier and Silvestre (1982): Politique d'éducation et organisation industrielle en
 France et en Allemagne, Paris, PUF.

Miller D. and Friesen P. H. (1984): Organization: A Quantum view, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
  Cliffs, New Jersey.

Milgrom P. et Roberts J. (1990): <<The Economic of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
  Strategy, and Organization >>, American Economic Review, Vol. 80, N°3, June, pp. 511-
  528.

OECD (1999): <<Flexible Working Practices: Where are they Found and What are their
  Labour Market Implication >, Draft for the working party on employment, 6-7 April 1999.

Salais R. (1992) : << Modernisation des entreprises et Fonds National de l'Emploi : une analyse
   en terme de mondes de production >>, Travail et Emploi, N°5 1, pp. 49-68.

Shaw K., Gant J. and Ichniowki C. (1999): <<The Evolution Towards High-Involvement
  Organization: Distinguishing Differences in Workers' Networks >>, prepared for the NBER
  conference on organizational change and performance improvement, Santa Rosa, April 23-
  24.
                      BOX 1 : Questions from the business section of the COl survey
For the purpose of our study, we selected the following four sets of questions. We present them using the order chosen in the
questionnaire:

                                                                                                Change in the percentage
1. Does your company use the following organizational device?                      In 1997       of employees affected
                                                                                                       since 1994
 (XXX)*    Name of the organizational device                                    Yes     No         +        =        -
 (ISO)      1S09001,1S09002,EAQFcertification                                 50.3** 49.7         31.3    37.9      0.8
 (TQM) Other certification or total quality management                          32.7 67.3       17.9      81.2      0.8
 (AMD) Value analysis, functional analysis or "AMDEC" method                    28.1   71.9     14.1      85.3      0.6
 (TPM)      5S method   or TPM  (Total Productive  Maintenance)                 16.6   83.4      9.9      89.5      0.6
 (OPC) Organization in profit centers                                           31.4   68.6     10.8      88.7      0.5
 (CSC)      Formalin-housecustomer/suppliercontracts                            28.6   71.4     13.1      86.5      0.4
 (DJIT) System of just in time delivery                                         38.9 61.1       18.6      80.9      0.5
 (PJIT) System of just in time production                                       37.8 62.2       18.3      81.3      0.4
The 8 variables constructed from each line take three items (noted XXXN, XXXS, XXXM): the organizational device is not
used by the firm in 1997 and the percentage of employees affected has remained stable or has decreased since 1994, the device
is used in 1997 and the percentage of employees affected remained stable or has decreased, the device concerns a greater share
of workers in 1997 than in 1994. The way this question has been formulated has a draw back as we cannot distinguish firms
that have implemented a device for the first time between 1994 and 1997 and firms that had it already in 1994 and that
extended its use.
2. In 1997, what percentage of company employees took part in the following types of teams or groups of
                                               Production workers                        Other workers
 (XXX) Name of the type of group         0%-10% 10%-50% + de 50% O%-I0% I0%-50% + de 50 %
 (AWT) Autonomousworkteams                      71.5         18.1         10.3        74.3         18.6          7.1
 (PSG)     Problem solving groups              72.7          23.8         3.6         68.2         25.9          5.9
 (PRG) Project teams                           82.7          15.0         2.3         68.8         25.3          5.9
The variables (3 variables) constructed from each line take four modalities (noted XXXLL, XXXML, XXXLM, XXXMM):
less than 10% of the production workers and of the other workers participate in the group in 1997, more than 10% of the
production workers and less than 10% of the other workers participate in the group, less than 10% of the production workers
and more than 10% of the other workers participate in the group in 1997, more the 10% of the two types of workers participate
in the group.
3. In general, who is/was authorized to do the following in                    In 1997                               In 1994
your company workshops?                                           Hierarchy    Production   Specialist   Hierarchy    Production   Specialist
(more than one answer possible)                                    (HIE)      worker (PW)    (SPE)        (HIE)      worker (PW)    (SPE)
Adjust installations                                               23.3          56.8        49.3
                                                                                               25.5      48.8      50.0
Perform 1 level maintenance                                         11.1         64.6          13.2
                                                                                             41.1        51.5      48.0
Allocate tasks to production workers                              85.0      9.6       7.5      86.2       6.2       7.1
Inspectqualityofsupplies                                          37.5     35.4      42.6      39.4      30.7      41.7
Inspect quality of production                                     46.6     53.5      40.5      49.2      41.3      41.7
Participate in performance improvements                           78.6     54.2      36.6      80.2      40.2      33.6
Participate in projects teams                                     70.5     39.1      37.3      70.9      28.6      33.7
Stop production in case of an incident                            73.1     45.6      26.1      75.2      37.3      23.8
Troubleshoot in case of an incident                               54.8     45.4      42.3      57.8      36.3      40.6
Start production again in case of an incident                     75.6     23.8      28.2      77.5      18.7      25.2
Three variables have been constructed from this set of questions. Each variable takes four items designed according to the
distribution of the numbers of tasks each type of worker is responsible for and to the distribution of the evolution in this
number of tasks between 1994 and 1997. The variable for the hierarchy (HIE) takes the following items: increase in the
number of tasks (HIEI), decrease (HIED), stability around 0 to 5 tasks (HIESO_5) and stability around 6 to 10 tasks
(HIES6_M). For production workers (PW), items are: increase of 4 tasks and more (PWI4 M), increase of 1 to 3 tasks
(PWI1_3), stability around 0 to 3 tasks (PWSO_3) and stability around 6 to 10 tasks (PWS4_M). At last, for specialists (SPE),
items are: increase (5PM), decrease (SPED), stability around 0 to 3 tasks (SPESO 3) and stability around 4 to 10 tasks
(SPES4_1 0).
4. How many hierarchical layers are /were there between production workers (level 0) and the head of the company
(level N) ? (HL) and (EVHL
       In 1997, N =1                     7.2                   In 1994, N =1                      7.8
                N=2                     21.4                           N=2                        19.0
                N=3                     29.5                            N=3                      27.4
                N=4                     24.6                           N=4                       23.9
                 N=5                        11.8                                    N=5                                13.7
                 N=6and+                     s.s                                    N=6and+                            8.1
Two variables have been constructed from these questions. The first one gives the number of hierarchical layers in 1997
(ilL), grouped in four items 0 to 2 noted HL2, 3 noted HL3, 4 noted HL4 and 5 and more noted HL5. The second one gives
a measure of the change in the number of hierarchical layers between 1994 and 1997 (EVHL) in four items: increase
(EVHLI), stability (EVHLS), loss of 1 layer (EVHLDI) and loss of 2 and more layers (EVHLD2).

(*) Between brackets and in capital letters are the names of the variables that are reported in tables and figures. An
explanation of the items taken by each variable constructed for the purpose of our study is given after the displayed sets of
questions.
(**)For each set of questions, we give the percentage of manufacturing firms with more than 50 employees that ticked each
cell computed from the sample of respondents (2758 firms) and using weights to adjust for sampling rates and non response.
Frequency counts from the business part of the COl survey are published in Favre, François and Greenan (1998). The whole
questionnaire and some descriptive results have been translated in English. They are available upon request.
                       BOX 2 : Questions from the labor force of the COl survey
In this box, we give all the "primary" questions from the labor force questionnaire that we used for the purpose of this
study. They are grouped together according to the different topics we want to measure. Thus, we do not follow the
order of the questionnaire, but all the questions starting with the same letter come together in the questionnaire.
Appendix 2 explains precisely how the synthetic variables have been constructed from the "primary" variables. In
capital letters we give the names of the synthetic variables that are reported in tables and figures and the corresponding
number of items. Most of the variables lead to a yes/no type of answer. When it is different, we mention it and "(if it
applies)" indicates that there is also an item "does not apply". In between brackets, we give the percentage of blue
collars belonging to manufacturing firms with more than 50 employees that gave a positive answer, using weights to
adjust for sampling rates and non response (sample of2 157 workers).
1) Intensity of vertical communication (CVER, 5 items)
(a) Do you have occasion to modify the nature and quantity of the work which you will have to do, or the manner of
proceeding? If yes, is it...
    (a1) while discussing with your superiors alone (if it applies)? (27.1%)
    (a2) while discussing with your superiors in the presence of your colleagues (if it applies)? (24.7%)
(b) If you have a temporary excess workload or if you are uneasy with a difficult or tricky task are you helped by...
    (b1) your superiors? (if it applies) (44.1%)
(c) In general, does your superior intervene...
    (c1) to show you how to do the work? (30.7%)
    (c2) to share the work between you and your colleagues? (if it applies) (64.0%)
    (c3) when you have a problem with a customer? (if it applies) (10.0%)
    (c4) when you have a technical problem? (if it applies) (74.4%)
    (c5) when you have relations problem with colleagues from the same department? (if it applies) (56.0%)
    (c6) when you have relation problem with other departments (if it applies) (50.0%)
2) Intensity of horizontal communication (CHOR, 4 items)
(a) Do you have occasion to modify the nature and quantity of the work which you will have to do, or the manner of
proceeding ? If yes, is it...
    (a3) while discussing between colleagues, without your superiors being present (if it applies) ? (22.9%)
(b) If you have a temporary excess workload or if you are uneasy with a difficult or tricky task are you helped by...
    (b2) colleagues you usually work with? (if it applies) (77.5%)
(d) Do you give indications to other persons on what they have to do...
    (d1) to colleagues you usually work with? (if it applies) (73.8%)
(e) Apart from your superiors, are there other persons that give you indications on what you have to do:
    (e1) colleagues you usually work with? (if it applies) (54.5%)
3) Intensity of communication with other departments (CWITH, 4 items)
(a) Do you have occasion to modify the nature and quantity of the work which you will have to do, or the manner of
proceeding? If yes, is it...
    (a4) while discussing with colleagues from other departments? (if it applies) (6.7%)
(b) If you have a temporary excess workload or if you are uneasy with a difficult or tricky task are you helped by...
    (b3) persons in the firm other than the colleagues you usually work with? (if it applies) (19.5%)
(d) Do you give indications to other persons on what they have to do...
    (d2) other persons or departments in the firm? (if it applies) (32.8%)
(e) Apart from your superiors, are there other persons that give you indications on what you have to do...
    (e2) other persons or departments in the firm? (if it applies) (32.5%)
4) Intensity communication with outside the firm (CBETW, 3 items)
(b) If you have a temporary excess workload or if you are uneasy with a difficult or tricky task are you helped by...
    (b4) persons from outside the firm? (if it applies) (8.9%)
(d) Do you give indications to other persons on what they have to do...
    (d3) persons from outside the firm (customers, suppliers, order-givers...)? (11.8%)
(e) Apart from your superiors, are there other persons that give you indications on what you have to do...
    (e3) persons from outside the firm (customers, suppliers, order-givers...)? (6.8%)

5) Intensity of contact with the customer (CUS, 3 items)
(m) Are you in direct contact (face to face or by phone) with customers? All the time (2.0%), regularly (2.9%),
occasionally (8.1%) or never (87.0%).
6) Number of meetings per year (MEET, 5 items)
(f) How frequently do you participate into meetings in the context of your work? (at least once a year: 57.3%)
7) Scope of initiative left by hierarchy (SCOPI, 5 items)
(a) Do you have occasion to modify the nature and quantity of the work which you will have to do, or the manner of
proceeding? (41.4%)
(g) Instructions given by your superiors in the company tell you what must be done. In general do they also tell you
how to do the work? (30.2%) or do they tell you the objective of your work, but leave you to decide how to achieve this
objective? (69.8%)
(h) You receive orders, assignments, instructions. In order to perform your work correctly, which of the following
applies (if it applies) ? You carry the assignments to the letter (63.8%). In certain cases, you act differently (31.0%).
You act differently most of the time (2.5%).
(i) In general, when in the course of your work, something unforeseen occurs, what happens? You fix the problem on
your own (42.7%). You manage it with the colleagues around you (27.2%). You call on other people (a superior, a
colleague, a specialist department) (30.1%).
(j) Is your work rhythm imposed by the following?
  (j1) Permanent (or at least daily) checks or supervision by the hierarchy? (41.8%)
8) Propositions for process improvement (PPIM, 2 items)
(k) In the context of your work, do you make propositions in order to improve your post, processes or equipment?
(6 1.7%)
9) Intensity of production work within a group (GROU, 4 items)
(I) Do you sometimes do your work in group or collectively? (5 3.7%)
  (li) If yes, how much of your working time does it take? Almost all the time (27.2%), more than '/4of your time
  (10.5%), less than ¼ of your time (16.0%).
10) Work rhythm fixed by prescribed times (RXXX, 4 items)
(j) Is your work rhythm imposed by the following?
     (J2) Production norms or deadline to meet in an hour at most? (36.7%)
     (j3) Production norms or deadlines to meet in a day at most? (61.4%)
     04) External demand (customers) needing an immediate response? (31.1%)
     06) Immediate dependence of one or more colleagues in the work done? (41.5%)
11) Work rhythm fixed by horizontal linkages (RCXXX, 4 items)
(j) Is your work rhythm imposed by the following?
     (j4) External demand (customers) needing an immediate response? (31.1%)
     05) External demand (customers) not needing an immediate response? (31.1%)
     (j6) Immediate dependence of one or more colleagues in the work done? (4 1.5%)
12) Work rhythm fixed by technical constraints (RTEC, 3 items))
(j) Is your work rhythm imposed by the following?
  07) Automatic moving of a product or a part? (33.6%)
  (j8) Automatic pace of a machine (42.4%)
(n) Do your work consist in continually repeating the same series of actions or operations?
  (n,) If yes, does each series last for lest than a minute? (18.6%)
13) Precise quality norms prescribed (QUAL, 2 items)
(o) Do you personally have to meet precise quantified quality standards (for example: wastage rates, measurable
characteristics of the product) ? (47.9%)
14) Participation in product testing (TEST, 2 items)
(p) In the context of your work, do you sometimes get to test the quality of products or try them? (50.4%)
               Table 1: What is measured through the answers of firm representatives and
                                           blue-collar workers?
              Firm representative
                          •
    Situation of the firm in 1997 and change                      Blue-collar worker
                                                                .
                                   .                      Description of work content en 1997
            over_the_1994-1997_period
                      Information system: Decentralization of the hierarchical structure
       Existence and evolution in use of
           • organization in profit centers
                  (OPC 3 items)               .
                                                                                    .
                                                   Cannot be measured through questions addressed to blue
         formal in house customer I supplier
                                .
             contracts (CSC, 3 items)
                                                                       collar workers
    Number of hierarchical layers (ilL, 5 items)
          Change_in_HL_(EVHL,_4_items)
           Information system : Involvement of employees in information processing and decision
               Extent in the use of...                                       Intensity of...
     .of problem solving groups (PSG, 3 items)               .. .vertical communication (CVER, 5 items)
          .of project groups (PRG, 3 items)               • . .horizontal communication (CHOR, 4 items)

       Existence and evolution in use of...         .. . communication with other departments (C WITH, 4
         5S method or TPM (TPM, 3 items)                                          items)
    Change in the number of operating tasks the ... communication with outside the firm (CBETW, 3 items)
     hierarchy (lIE, 4 items), the production               ... contact with the customer (CUS, 3 items)
     workers (PW, 4 items) and the specialists                   Number of meetings (MEET, 5 items)
    (SPE, 4 items) are respectively responsible                   Scope of initiative (SCOPI, 5 items)
                         for                      Propositions for process improvements (PPIM, 2 items)
                       Production system: individual or group as the primary work unit
    Extent in the use of autonomous work teams                 Intensity of production work
                   (AWT, 3 items)                             within a group (GROU, 4 items)
               Production system: complementarities due to time schedule and production flows
        Existence and evolution in use of...
             a just in time delivery system      Work rhythm fixed by prescribed times (RXXX, 4 items)
                   (DJIT, 3 items)                Work rhythm fixed by horizontal linkages (RCXXX, 4
           a just in time production system                                items)
                   (PJIT,_3_items)
                    Production system: complementarities due to equipment or work process
                 No question in COT                Intensity of technical constraints on the work rhythm
      should be available from another survey                        (RTEC, 3 items)
                       Production system: complementarities due to quality standards
        Existence an evolution in use of...
•   . .ISO 9001, ISO 9002, EAQF (ISO, 3 items)
          • .TQM or other quality norms            Prescription of precise quality norms (QUAL, 2 items)
                (TQM, 3 items)                                Product testing (TEST, 2 items)
         Value analysis or AMDEC method
                 (AMD,_3_items)
         Table 2: Correlation between the 5 items of the variables that contribute the most to the
             inertia of the first and the second axis of the firm level correspondence analysis
  Number of                 First axis                                                 Second axis
  firms: 1462    AMDM TPMM DJITM PJTTM PWI4M                         PJITS    DJITS     TPMS         CSCS     AMDS
                  (+)   (+)   (+)      (+) (+)                         (+)      (+)       (+)         (+)      (+)
       AMDS        -0.22                                   0.09       0.20     0.20      0.26        0.15
                              ns        ns        ns
         (+)      (0.00)                                  (0.00)     (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)
        CSCS       -0.07     -0.04     -0.08    -0.01                 0.25     0.26       0.21
                                                            ns
         (+)      (0.01)    (0.14)    (0.00)    (0.00)               (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
       TPMS                  -0.14     -0.05     -0.07     0.07       0.23     0.21
                    ns
         (+)                (0.00)    (0.06)    (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.00)   (0.00)
 (ID   DJIITS      -0.09     -0.06     -0.30     -0.26                0.68
                                                            ns
        (+)       (0.00)    (0.02)    (0.00)    (0.00)               (0.00)
       PJITS       -0.07     -0.06     -0.22     -0.28
                                                            ns
         (+)      (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.00)    (0.00)
       PWI4_M      0.28       0.30      0.16      0.18
         (+)      (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)
       PJITM       0.34       0.32      0.76
         (+)      (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)
       DJITM       0.37      0.35
         (+)      (0.00)    (0.00)
       TPMM        0.49
        (+)       (0.00)
       AMDM
        (+)

AMD: value analysis, functional analysis or "AMDEC" methods
TPM: 5S method or TPM (Total Productive Maintenance)
DJtT: system ofjust in time delivery
PJIT: system of just in time production
CSC: formal in-house customer / supplier contracts
An M at the end of the item indicates an increase between 1994 and 1997 in the percentage of employees
affected by the organizational device, whereas an S indicates a stable between use between these two dates.
PWI4M: Increase between 1994 and 1997, by 4 tasks or more, in the number of tasks production workers are
authorized to do.
Under the names items and in between brackets, we give the signs of coordinates in figure 1.
Pearson correlation coefficients, in between brackets critical probabilities, ns indicates that the coefficient is
non significant at a 15% level.
                 Table 3: Correlation between the 5 items of the variables that contribute the most to the
                    inertia of the first, second and the third axis of the worker level correspondence
                                                          analysis?
   Number of                      First axis                                           Second axis
  blue collars:      CVER4 CHOR3 CWITH3 SCOPI4              PPIMY    CTEC3    QUALY      CTECO       CUS2      RNOP
     2157
—                               (+)       (+)       (+)       (+)      (+)      (+)        (-.)        (—)       (—)

      RCUCO           0.07      0.05     0.07      0.05      0.08     -0.13    -0.13      -0.07      -0.07      0.30
         (-i-)        (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.00)     (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)   (0.00)
        RCUS          0.06                          0.09     0.08     -0.10     0.06       0.08       0.15     -0.16
         (+)          (0.00)                       (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.00)   (0.00)
       RIMM             0.14     0.08    0.11      0.11      0.11      0.03     0.10      -0.04       0.12     -0.39
         (+)          (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.12)   (0.00)     (0.11)      (0.00)   (0.00)
       RCUCN           -0.09    -0.04    -0.06     -0.05     -0.07    0.11      0.06       0.10                -0.20
         (-)          (0.00)   (0.09)   (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)               (0.00)
       RCOL                                        -0.08     -0.07     0.14               -0.12       -0.09
                       ns        ns       ns
—        ()                                       (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)              (0.00)      (0.00)
       RNOP            -0.05             -0.03               -0.07    -0.12    -0.09       0.15
                                 ns                 ns                                                ns
         (—)          (0.03)            (0.14)              (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
        CUS2            0.08   0.05      0.11      0.15               -0.10    -0.08       0.15
                                                              ns                                       1
         (—)          (0.00)   (0.02)   (0.00)    (0.00)             (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
       CTECO                             0.07      0.11               -0.58    -0.15
                       ns       ns                            ns
         (—)
                                        (0.00)    (0.00)             (0.00)   (0.00)
      QUALY            0.06     0.04                         0.17      0.09
                                          ns        ns                           I
         (+)          (0.00)   (0.07)                       (0.00)   (0.00)
       CTEC3           -0.04    -0.03    -0.05     -0.09
         (+)
                                                              ns
                      (0.06)   (0.15)   (0.03)    (0.00)
       PPIMY            0.15    0.13      0.14      0.13                                                      RCOL
         (+)          (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)                                                         (—)


      SCOPI4            0.28    0.28      0.18                                                        -0.38   RCUCN
         (+)          (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)                                                       (0.00)      (—)


      CWITH3            0.25   0.31                                                       0.43        -0.36   RIMM
         (+)          (0.00)   (0.00)                                                    (0.00)      (0.00)      (+)
       CHOR3            0.40                                                   0.51       -0.42       -0.30    RCUS
         (+)          (0.00)                                                  (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (+)
       CVER4                                                          -0.28    -0.50      -0.35       -0.25   RCUCO
         (+)                                                         (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (+)
                                                            RCUCO     RCUS    RIMM       RCUCN       RCOL     Number of
                                                              (+)      (+)      (+)        (-)        (-)     Blue collars:
                                                                           Third axis                            2157
Explanations about the variables and their items are given in box 2 and in appendix 2.
Under the names items and in between brackets, we give the signs of coordinates in figure 2 and 3.
Pearson correlation coefficients, in between brackets critical probabilities, ns indicates that the
coefficient is not significant at a 15% level.
         Table 4 : Blue collar workers and firm representatives: how do answers correlate?
                 N = 1462                             Coordinates of blue-collar workers 1 blue-collar
     Coordinates of firm representatives                    worker randomly chosen by firm
                                                      Intensity of               .
                                                                          Intensity. of   Customers and
                                  .
         Correlations on coordinates                  . employee          constraints
                                                      involvement
                                                                                            colleagues

Increasing use of "employee involvement" and              0.16                0.13            -0.08
   "quality" practices vs. no practice in 1997           (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.00)
Innovative practices in 1997, stable in time vs.         -0.03               -0.016           -0,02
      increasing use of "JIT" practices                  (0.23)              (0.53)           (0.53)
        Same with coordinate centered                 Intensity of               .
                  •                                                       Intensity. of   Customers and
          on the size x sector mean
                                                      . employee          constraints      colleagues
                                                      involvement

Increasing use of "employee involvement" and              0.11                0.10            -0.04
   "quality" practices vs. no practice in 1997           (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.11)
 Innovative practices in 1997, stable in time vs.          -0.01              -0.00           -0.00
       increasing use of "fIT" practices                   (0.77)             (0.97)          (0.86)
Pearson correlation coefficients, in between brackets critical probabilities.
                 Table 5 : Blue collar workers and firm representatives: how do answers correlate?
                Correlations between items that contribute the most to the inertia of the axis in the two
                                              correspondence analysis
          N=1 462                                       Firm level correspondence analysis
 One worker chosen                         First axis                                         Second axis
 at random in each AMDM           TPMM     DJITM         PJITM     PWI4 M     PJITS    DJITS     TPMS       CSCS     AMDS
        firm
                          (+)      (+)       (+)           (+)       (+)       (+)      (+)       (+)        (+)       (+)
               CVER4                                                                                                  0.05
                          ns       ns        ns            ns         ns        ns       ns
                 ()                                                                                ns        ns
                                                                                                                     (0.07)
               CHOR3              0.06                               0.05                                   0.06
                          ns                 ns            ns                   ns       ns        ns                  ns
                  (+)             (0.03)                            (0.05)                                  (0.01)
          c    CWITH3                                                0.04                                   0.05
          z                ns      ns        ns            ns                   ns       ns        ns                  ns
                  (+)                                               (0.13)                                  (0.06)
               SCOPI4                        0.07          0.05      0.07                         0.06
                          ns       ns                                           us       ns                  ns        ns
                  (+)                       (0.01)        (0.06)    (0.00)                       (0.02)
                PPIMY      0.12    0.17      0.08          0.08      0.11                                   0.05
                                                                                ns       ns        ns                  ns
 b—              (+)
               CTEC3
                         (0.00)
                           0.06
                                  (0.00)
                                   0.04
                                            (0.00)        (0.00)    (0.00)
                                                                     0.05      0.05     0.08      0.07
                                                                                                            (0.06)
                                             ns            ns                                                          ns
                 (+)     (0.02)   (0.13)                            (0.04)    (0.03)   (0.00)    (0.00)
 cJ
 n             QUALY       0.05    0.07      0.05          0.07      0.08                                             0.04
                                                                                ns       ns        ns        ns
                         (0.05)   (0.01)
      .          (+)
               CTECO
                 (-)
                          -0.04
                         (0.12)
                                  -0.05
                                  (0.08)
                                            (0.03)
                                             ns
                                                          (0.00)
                                                           ns
                                                                    (0.00)
                                                                      ns
                                                                               -0.05
                                                                              (0.06)
                                                                                        -0.06
                                                                                       (0.02)
                                                                                                 -0.06
                                                                                                 (0.01)
                                                                                                                     (0.15)
                                                                                                                       ns
 o
 —
                CUS2                         0.01                              -0.07    -0.04     0.04       0.05     0.06
 ..              (-)                        (0.07)                            (0.01)   (0.13)    (0.09)     (0.07)   (0.03)

 .
 .e

 0
                RNOP
                 (-)
                          -0.05
                         (0.04)
                                   ns
                                            -0.04
                                            (0.14)
                                                           -0.05
                                                          (0.04)
                                                                      ns        ns       ns        ns        ns        us
               RCUCO
                 (+)

      .         RCUS
                 (+)
                          ns       ns        ns            ns         ns
                                                                               -0.06
                                                                              (0.01)
                                                                                         ns        ns        ns        ns

      .   ..
               RIMM
                 (+)
                         0.05
                         (0.05)
                                   ns        ns            ns         ns
                                                                               -0.06
                                                                              (0.02)
                                                                                         ns        ns        ns        ns
      E        RCUCN                                                           -0.00
                          ns       ns        ns            ns         ns                 ns        ns        ns        ns
                 (-)                                                          (0.89)
               RCOL                                                            0.06     0.05                          -0.04
                          ns       ns        ns            ns         us                           us        ns
                 (-)                                                          (0.03)   (0.05)                        (0.12)
AMD: value analysis, functional analysis or "AMDEC" methods
TPM: 5S method or TPM (Total Productive Maintenance)
DJIT: system ofjust in time delivery
PJIT: system ofjust in time production
CSC: formal in-house customer / supplier contracts
An M at the end of the item indicates an increase between 1994 and 1997 in the percentage of employees
affected by the organizational device, whereas an S indicates a stable between use between these two dates.
PWI4M: Increase between 1994 and 1997, by 4 tasks or more, in the number of tasks production workers are
authorized to do.
Explanations about the worker level variables are given in box 2 and in appendix 2.
Pearson correlation coefficients, in between brackets critical probabilities, ns indicates that the coefficient is not
significant at a 15% level
                                                   42


                                  Figure 1: Clustering of Work Organization Practices


                                                         TPMS                    N=1462 manufacturing firms over 50 employees,
                                                                                                16 variables, 56 items
 1,6                                                                        Horizontal axis: 13% of inertia, vertical axis: 7% of inertia
                                                                           • : Position of items that contribute significantly to the inertia
                                                                                ofthe axis, see box 1 for an explanation of their names.
                                                                               Position of firms belonging to the "machines and
                         0           cscs
                                      0                                      equipment" sector where field work has been conducted
                                                   AMDS
                                                    0                                                 :
 1,I                                                                             •s' A, B, C and D Firms that have been visited
                          **
                       TQMS                       oPcs
                                                    0
                                                                                                 Increasing use of "employee involvement"
                                                                                                          and "quality" practices
 0,6
                                                        *                      *
                * *                                                                        C              D
                                                                                                                          SPED
                                                                                                                                   PWI4_M
                                                        *         *                     EVHLDI
                                                                                                 AWMM     PRGMM

 0,1                          *                                   *
                                                                  PWII_3
                                                                           'PRGLM

                                                                                                                      EVHLD2
                                                                 **              ISOM
                          A                                                                               TQMM
-0,4                                                                                                                                        AMDM
                                                                                                                           DJITM
                                                                                                                  PJIm1
                                                                                                                          OPCM

                                                                                                                   CSCM

-0,9
       -0,65   -0,15                                      0,35                                     0,85
                                                                                                               43


                                           Figure 2: Blue Collar Workers' Answers: Employee involvement and productive constraints

                                                               RTEC3
                                                                                   Jntensity of conslramts
                                                                              lJ                                          B
                                                                                                                                           CO
                                      RCOL                                             ©              QUALY    ©
                                  RHOI..                                                GIU3           )   ©   TESTY
              Scoplo                                                                                                —
 0,4      -
                                        c                      0                                      ©CHOR2
                                CVERI
                                                                                   ©
                                                             ©                                         ©
                                                                        ..                                                                       RIMM                                                   -
                                                      CBETW1      CUS              © (\                         irpv                                          MEET4            Intensity ofinvolvement in
                                              0            -                                    ©                                          ©                              information processing and decision

                                                                                                                        ©          ©                    CBETW2
-0,1                                                                                                   A                SCOPI3                            0
                                                                                            ©                                     RCUS
                                        GROUO                             ©
                                                                         0                                                                       ©                    ©
                                           MEETO                                   ©                  ©©                         GR&P
                          CVERO   ©                                                                                                                                    CVER4
          CHORO                                                                                                ©
                       PIMPIP              TESTI'L
                                                          QUALN                    ©
                                 ©
                                  RCUCN                                                                         ©                                                     C1s1©
                                                                                       RTECO                                ,,                                                             CHOR3
                                                                                                                                                                                            —      CWITH3
-0,6                                                                                    —
                                               RNOP                                0                                                                                  SCOPI4
                                                                                                                    ©                  ©
                                                                                                                                                                                      0D
                                                                                                                         ©                                                                          ©
                          ©                                                                                           N=2049 blue collar workers affiliated with 1462 manufacturing firms,
                                                                                                ©                                               14 variables, 50 items
                                                                                                                             Horizontal axis: 9% of inertia, vertical axis: 5% of inertia
—1,1                                                                                                                   Position of items that contribute significantly to the inertia ofthe axis, see
                                                                                                                    •:
                                                                                                                     box 2 and appendix 2 for an explanation of their names and construction
                                                                                                                    ©: Position of blue collar workers belonging to the selected firms for field
                                                                                                                     work (from the "machines and equipment sector")
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CBEW3
                                                                                                                          ©A, B, C and D: workers from firms that have been visited

-1.6
       -0.8                                        -0,3                                         0,2                                             0,7                                1,2
                                                                                                                                 44


                                                       Figure 3: Blue Collar Workers' Answers: Constraints, customers and colleagues

                                                                       Intensity   ofconstramts                  1C3
                                                                                                                                                  B
                       RCOL                                              0                   QUALY              GROU3                       0     ©    0                          RCUCO
                                     R}U           0                                    TESTY                                                     ©
 0,4     --                                                                    0                                                                   ©
                                                               ©              ©©                       dIR2
                                                                   ©        (;)
                                                                                   ©        I'IMPY                                                     B                                                   RIMM
                                                                        0               ©            CUSO                                              ©                  ©
                    Colleagues                      ©RDAY                                                                                                          ©                                                  Customers
                                                                                   ©©©                                                        ©
                           ©               ©                                                                                                  0                               ©
-0,1                                                                                                                                           ©                     A
                                                               0                                                                                                                                RCUS
                      ..                                                           ©                                   ©
                      ¼&
                                                                                                                                                                 ,,©©©
                                                                                                                                              ©
                                                   CVER4
                                                               0                                                             MEETO
                                                                                                                                      PIMPN       CVERO
                                                                                                                                                       l.)
                                                                                                                                        —            CHORO
                                                                                                                           TESTN
                                           RCUCN                                                                UALN         —
                                                                                                                                                       © ©
         (   10R3                                                                                           1

-0,6                           CWITH3                                                                                                                        ©
                                 —                              RNO1'     SCOPI4
                           O                                                                                           D                                           0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                   ©                                                                                                          0
                                                                   ©                                             0                                  N=2049 blue collar workers affiliated with 1462 manufacturing firms,
                                                                                                                                                                             14 variables, 50 items
                                                                                                                                                          Horizontal axis: 9% of inertia, vertical axis: 5% of inertia
—1,1    .    -                                                                      ©                                                               Position of items that contribute significantly to the inertia of the axis, see
                                                                                                                                                  •:
                                                                                                                                                   box 2 and appendix 2 for an explanation of their names and construction
                                                                                                                                                    Position of blue collar workers belonging to the selected firms for field
                                            CBETW3
                                                                                                                                                   work (from the "machines and equipment sector")
                                               —
                                                                                                                                                       © A, B, C and D: workers from firms that have been visited
                                                                                                                                                                       CUS2
- 1,6                                                      I                        •                              I                                               I    —                                  I                   I

        -0,95                                          -0,45                                                     0,05                                             0.55                                    1,05
                   Appendix I : French and Anglo-saxon managerial practices: vocabulary

            English term                              French term              Use of the term in France
             Just-in-time
                          .
       in production / delivery                          .,,..,,
                                          "juste-à-temps", "flux tendus"
                                              production / livratson
                                                                                                .
                                                                                 management / industry

                  .                          "implication des salaries"
       Employee involvement                                           ,,      government ( Auroux laws )
                                              pratiques participatives
      Total quality management             "démarche de qualité totale"               management
           ISO certification                      .
                          .                   certification ISO EAQF                  management
      Registered quality systems

                                          "analyse de la valeur", "analyse
 Value analysis, value engineering                                                    management
                                            fonctionnelle", "AMDEC"
    Total productive maintenance              "méthode 5S", "TPM"                     management
             Job rotation                             "polyvalence"              scholars / management
            Multi-tasking                             "polyvalence"              scholars / management
            Multi-skilling                            'polyvalence"              scholars / management
       Autonomous work group              "equipes de travail autonomes"              management
                      .                      "groupes de resolution de
       Problem solving groups                               .                         management
                                                       problemes

            Project groups                      "équipes de projet"                   management
    Business process reengineering               "Reengineering"                management i'joumalists
             Downsizing                          "restructuration"               journalists I euphemism
         Core competencies                   "recentrage sur le métier"          scholars / management
           Lean production                      "production maigre"               scholars /journalists
         Multidivisional form           "organisation en centres de profit"      scholars / management
     Formal in house customer /           "contrats clients I foumisseurs
            .                                                     ,,                  management
       suppliers contracts (?)                          mternes

             outsourcing                              "externaliser"             scholars I management

           sub-contracting                            "sous-traiter"             scholars / management

White areas correspond to practices that can be easily translated. For some of them, like "reengineering" or
"TPM", the English term is directly used, for others, like "just-in-time" the translation is literal. Grey areas
underline terms for which translation is not easy'2.




2
    This uneasiness may be a measure of our ignorance. Nevertheless, these translation problems are found in
international comparison made by institutions like OECD or the European Foundation for the Improvement of
Living and Working Conditions. Papers or questionnaires translated in French from the English are often
difficult to understand (see for example OECD, 1999, EF, 1998).
          Appendix 2 : French government surveys on technological and organizational change:
                                     ancestors the COt survey

1) Background

The French government surveys organization topics since the middle of the l980s'. Traditionally, the Ministry
of labor has two domains of competence : work ("travail") and employment ("emploi"). The first has to do with
industrial legislation, the second with labor market regulations. Surveys on organization originated from the
"work" department. Interest in work organization came from the need to complement the information gathered
through the national surveys on working conditions.
A first labor force survey was designed in 1987, under the acronym TOTTO ("enquëte sur les Techniques et
l'Organisation du Travail auprès des Travailleurs Occupds"), by a team under the direction of Michel Gollac. Its
aim was to better understand how working conditions were related with work (task and technology) and worker
(gender, age, social origin) characteristics. The TOTTO survey has been conducted again in 1993.
At the same time, the Ministry of labor launched a new business survey inspired by the British Workplace and
Industrial Relations Survey (REPONSE survey), in order to improve knowledge about industrial relations in
French firms. The conception of the REPONSE survey has been coordinated by Thomas Coutrot and Anna
Malan.
At the end of the 1980's, the Ministry of industry designed, a system of annual surveys aiming at measuring the
innovative behavior of firms. This took place in the context of the public debate on the productivity paradox. At
the beginning of the 90s, most OECD countries had data bases on R&D expenditures built according to the
Frascati manual and they were implementing their innovation surveys along the lines of the OSLO manual. In
1991, Ministry of Industry conducted a first innovation survey. In 1993, a smaller survey on organizational
change (the survey on "organizational change in production") was conducted to better understand the relations
between technological innovation and organizational innovation. The design of this survey has been directed by
Nathalie Greenan and Dominique Guellec.
1) The "TOTTO" surveys (INSEE, 1987; DARES 1993)
The "TOTTO" ("enquéte sur les Techniques et l'Organisation du Travail auprès des Travailleurs Occupés")
survey has been financed and conducted by the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) in
1987, financed by the Ministry of labor (DARES) and conducted by INSEE in 1993. Researchers from the fields
of ergonomic, industrial medicine, psychology, sociology and economics contributed to the design of the
questionnaire. Both in 1987 and in 1993, the survey was a supplement to the annual labor force survey and a
sample of about 20 000 occupied workers from all industries were interviewed.
Workers were asked about their perception of the way they work. The main topics of the questionnaire are the
nature of tasks performed, timetables, hierarchical relation, autonomy, communication, work rhythm, deadlines
and technology use. Information was gathered through face-to-face interviews of about 45 minutes, completed at
the workers' home.
Workers also gave the name and address of their establishment, which allows to trace the firm identification
number. This number is used in all the official surveys conducted at the firm level and in data files of
government origin. Thus, matched employer/employee data sets can be generated from this type of surveys.
2) The "REPONSE" survey (DARES, 1993)
Financed by the Ministry of labor (DARES), this survey aims at measuring the social climate and the state of
industrial relations. Researchers in economics and industrial relations, statisticians and firm representatives
participated in the design of the questionnaire. Firm and trade union representatives of about 3000
establishments of firms over 50 employees from all industries were interviewed.
The employer was asked about social climate within the firms and about participatory devices ("pratiques
participatives"): negotiation with trade union representatives, incentive strategy, conflicts, employee
involvement schemes, technological and organizational innovations. Questions on technology and organization
were asked to better understand the context of information sharing and to measure whether these topics were
discussed directly or indirectly (through trade unions) with employees. A set of questions on the same topics
(sometimes the same questions) were asked to trade union representatives, allowing to measure some the
convergence or divergence in points of view.
3) The survey on organizational change in production (SESSI, 1993)
Financed by the Ministry of industry (SESSI), the aim of this survey was to measure aspects of the firm's
behavior that could influence its capacity to innovate and its competitivity. The group of experts that
participated in the design of the questionnaire, was mainly composed of economists. 2600 manufacturing firms
over 50 employees were interviewed.
The focus of the questionnaire is on the organization of the production department of the firm and on the use of
advanced manufacturing technologies. The main topics are the objectives of organizational change, technology
use, sharing of responsibilities for operating activities on the shopflor between operators, the supervisors and
specialists, timetables, teamwork, change in competencies, quality norms, changes in formal relations between
departments, impacts of organizational change on various indicators. As this survey was a postal survey, this
questionnaire is a very short one (two pages), with mainly qualitative questions addressed to the production
manager of the firm.
Whereas in the TOTTO survey, questions aim at measuring the main characteristics of jobs in terms of
organization and technology use, in this firm level survey, most questions are on changes on a 5 years period. As
a matter of fact, this is an output of the discussions about the design of both questionnaires. For the TOTTO
survey, the group of experts felt that workers had to be asked some very simple questions about their everyday
work, trying to formulate questions in the most "objective way". At the firm level, the interviewed person is
expected to give an answer concerning the whole firm or part of it. Here, the "pilot" group felt that it was easier
to respond about the change that occurred within the firm during a given period of time than about the state at a
given date. In a way, it is assumed that their is much more heterogeneity within the firm in the state of
organization than in organizational changes.
  Appendix 3 : Synthetic variables constructed from the questions of the labor force section of the COt survey

Our synthetic variables aggregate questions from different areas of the questionnaire in order to build up measures on a
chosen topics like communication, autonomy and work rhythm. We proceed by topic, the set of primary questions used
is presented in box 2. We explain how the variables are built from the questions keeping in line with the notations in
box 2. In between brackets, we give the percentage of blue collar workers from manufacturing firms with more than 50
employees in each category, using weights to adjust for sampling rates and non response (sample of 2 157 workers)
1) Intensity of vertical communication (CVER, 5 items)
With (c), a synthetic variable, taking its values between 0 and 1 indicates the size of the intervention sphere of the
                                                  -
superiors:
ISPHERE = (number of answers "yes" at questions c1 to c6)/(l+number of questions that apply)
The intensity of vertical communication is measured by the following variable:
CVER=[ISPHERE+(a1 =yes)+(a2yes)+(b =yes)]/( 1 +number of questions that apply)
From which a variable with 5 items representing each about 20% of the sample, is constructed:
CVERO=(CVER0. 125), CVER1=(0. I
CVER3=(0.43 75<CVER0.625), CVER4=(CVER>0.625)
2) Intensity of horizontal (CHOR, 4 items)
The intensity of horizontal communication is measured by the following variable (varying from 0 to 1):
CHOR=(number of answers "yes" to questions a3, b2, d1 and e)/(number of questions that apply)
From which a variable taking 4 items (representing respectively 26%, 29%, 34% and 12% of the sample) is
constructed: CHORO=(CHOR0.25),                                      CHOR2=(CHOR=0.75 1), CHOR3(CHOR 1)
3) Intensity of communication with other departments (CWITH, 4 items)
The intensity of communication with other departments is measured by the following variable (varying from 0 to 1):
CWITH=(number of answers "yes" to questions a4, b3, d2 and e2)/(number of questions that apply)
From which a variable taking 4 items (representing respectively 47%, 27%, 17% and 10% of the sample) is
constructed: CWITHO=(CWITH=0), CWITHI (CWITHO.25), CWITH2(0 .25<CWITH<0,75),
CWITH3=(CWITH0 .75)
4) Intensity of communication with outside the firm (CBETW, 3 items)
The intensity of communication with outside the firm is measured by the following variable (varying from 0 to 1):
CBETW=(number of answers "yes" to questions b4, d3 and e3)/(number of questions that apply)
From which a variable taking 3 items (representing respectively 81%, 13% and 6% of the sample) is constructed:
CBETWQ=(CBETW=0), CBETWI=(0'ZCBETW0.5), CBETW2=(0.5<CBETW< 1)
5) Intensity of contact with the customer (CUS, 2 items)
A variable with 3 items (representing respectively 87%, 8% and 5% of the sample) is built from the answers to question
I: CUSO=((m)=never)), CUSI =((m)=occasionally, CUS2((m)=regularly or all the time)
6) Number of meetings per year (MEET, 5 items)
A variable measuring the number of meetings per year with 5 items is constructed from this question (representing
respectively 43%, 14%, 15%, 15 % and 13% ofthe sample):
MEETO=((f)=0), MEETI=((f)=1 or 2),
MEET3=( 1         16), MEET4=((f) 17)
7) Scope of initiative left by hierarchy (SCOPI, 5 items)
To compute the scope of initiative left by the hierarchy, we codify the answers with —l if the worker has no scope of
initiative, 0.5 if the scope of initiative is bounded and 1 if it is unbounded. A missing response or a response "does not
apply" is coded with a 0. The overall scope of initiative is thus given by: SCOPI=(a)+(g)+(h)+(i)+(j), which varies
between—S and 4. From this variable, we build a variable with 5 items (representing respectively 19%, 24%, 22%, 21%
and 14% of the sample): SCOPIO=(SCOPI-3),
SCOPI3=(0.5<SCOPI2), SCOPI4=(SCOPI>2)
8) Propositions for process improvement (PPIM, 2 items)
A variable with two items (representing respectively 59% and 41% of the sample) has been constructed:
PPIMY((k)=yes) and PPIMN((k)no).


9) Intensity of production work within a group (GROU, 4 items)
A variable with 4 items (representing respectively 46%, 16%, 11% and 27% of the sample) is built from the answers to
questions I and I,: GROUO=((I)=no), GROU1=((I)=yes and (11)=less than 1/4), GROU2=((I)=yes and (I,)=more than
1/4), GROU3((1)=yes and (I,)=almost all the time).
10) Work rhythm fixed by prescribed times (RXXX, 4 items)
A variable with 4 items has been computed to measure the tightness of quantitative norms and deadlines (representing
respectively 25%, 22%, 23% and 31% of the sample):
RNOP'=(negative answers to j2, j3 andj4), RDAY=((j3)=yes and (j2)=no and (j4)=no), RHOU=((j2)yes and (j4)=no),
RIMM((j4)yes).
11) Work rhythm fixed by horizontal linkages (RCXXX, 4 items)
A variable with 4 items (representing respectively 36%, 23%, 22% and 19% of the sample) measures if work rhythm is
fixed by horizontal linkages:
RCUCN=(negative answers to j4, j5 and j6), RCUS((j4)yes or (j5)=yes and (j6)=no), RCOL=((j6)=yes and (j4)=no and
(j5)=no), RCUCO=((j4)=yes or (j5)=yes and j6=yes).
12) Work rhythm fixed by technical constraints (RTEC, 3 items)
A variable with 3 items (representing respectively 45%, 24% and 31%) measures the intensity of technical constraints:
RTECO=(negative answers to j7, Jg and n1), RTEC1(one positive answer), RTEC2=(more than one positive answers).
13) Precise quality norms prescribed (QUAL, 2 items)
A variable with two items (representing respectively 47% and 53% of the sample) has been constructed:
QUALY=((o)=yes) and QUALN=((o)=no).
14) Participation in product testing (TEST, 2 items)
A variable with two items (representing respectively 48% and 52% of the sample) has been constructed:
TESTY=((p)=yes) and TESTN=((p)=no).
