                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ARE THERE RETURNS TO THE WAGES
                                OF YOUNG MEN FROM WORKING
                                     WHILE IN SCHOOL?

                                               V. Joseph Hotz
                                                  Lixin Xu
                                                Marta Tienda
                                                Avner Ahituv

                                            Working Paper 7289
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7289


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 1999




This research was funded, in part, by the Russell Sage and Rockefeller Foundations. We wish to thank Rebecca
Kilburn, Kenneth Couch, Janet Currie, Jay Dixon, Kevin M. Murphy, seminar participants at Johns Hopkins
University, New York University, University of Pennsylvania, UCLA, RAND, Yale University and participants
in The Taipei International Conference on Labor Market Transition and Labor Migration in East Asia,
Academia Sinica, for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper and Jorge Menèndez for his research
assistance. We especially wish to thank James Heckman for providing us with a version of the statistical
software used in some of the empirical analyses conducted for this paper and Steve Cameron and George Yates
for their assistance in adapting it to our context. Obviously, we remain responsible for all errors in this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by V. Joseph Hotz, Lixin Xu, Marta Tienda, and Avner Ahituv. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are There Returns to the Wages of Young Men
from Working While in School?
V. Joseph Hotz, Lixin Xu, Marta Tienda, and Avner Ahituv
NBER Working Paper No. 7289
August 1999
                                        ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the impacts of work experience acquired while youth were in high school
(and college) on young men’s wage rates during the 1980s and 1990s. Previous studies have found
evidence of sizeable and persistent rates of return to working while enrolled in school, especially high
school, on subsequent wage growth. Such findings may represent causal effects of having acquired
work experience while still enrolled in school, but they may also be the result of failure to fully
account for individual differences in young adults’ capacities to acquire such skills and be productive
in the work force later in life. We re-examine the robustness of previous attempts to control for
unobserved heterogeneity and selectivity. We explore more general methods for dealing with dynamic
forms of selection by explicitly modeling the educational and work choices of young men from age
13 through their late twenties. Using data on young men from the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth, (NLSY79), we find that the estimated returns to working while in high school or college
are dramatically diminished in magnitude and statistical significance when one uses these dynamic
selection methods. As such, our results indicate a decided lack of robustness to the inference about
the effects of working while in school that has been drawn from previous work.

V. Joseph Hotz                                         Lixin Xu
Department of Economics                                DECRG
BO 951477                                              World Bank
UCLA                                                   1818 H Street, N.W.
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                             Washington, DC 20433
and NBER                                               lxu1@worldbank.org
hotz@ucla.edu

Marta Tienda                                           Avner Ahituv
Office of Population Research                          Department of Economics
Princeton University                                   Hebrew University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                    Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, 91905
tienda@Princeton.edu                                   ISRAEL
                                                       msahituv@pluto.mscc.huji.ac.il
1.   Introduction

        The transition from school to work for youth in the U.S. has been the focus of a great deal

of academic research and the subject of educational and training policy over the last three dec-

ades. A key issue in this transition is the value to youth of acquiring work experience even before

they leave high school. Proponents of having youth work while enrolled in school argue that

such jobs serve to familiarize them with the world of work, foster the development of personal

responsibility, good work habits and attitudes, and knowing how to deal with authority−traits

that are essential for successful adult work careers. Furthermore, these early work experiences

may provide students opportunities to apply what they have learned in school and learn what it

takes to be successful in the world of work. Alternatively, critics of adolescent employment ar-

gue that maintaining heavy work schedules during the school year interferes with learning and

academic performance and even may encourage students to drop out of school (see review in

Schoenhals, Tienda and Schneider, 1998).

        The consistency of the empirical evidence on the “returns” to working while in high

school varies by the outcome considered. For example, there does not appear to be a consensus

about whether working while in school adversely affects a youth’s subsequent educational at-

tainment, as measured by school performance (grades), grade completion and persistence in

school. However, several studies agree that if there are harmful effects, they result from working

substantial numbers of hours per week during the school year.1

        In contrast, there appears to be an amazing consistency across numerous studies with re-

spect to the effects of working while in (high) school on subsequent labor market success. First, a

number of studies based on several different data sets find that working while in high school is


1
  See Greenberger and Steinberg (1986), Mortimer and Finch (1986), Barone (1993), Gade and Peterson (1980),
Lillydahl (1990), Turner (1994), Eckstein and Wolpin (1998), Schoenhals, Tienda and Schneider (1998), and Tienda
and Ahituv (1996). See Donahoe and Tienda (1999) for a review of this literature.


                                                       1
associated with higher employment rates and higher wages later in life.2 For example, using lon-

gitudinal data on individuals who were high school seniors in 1972, Meyer and Wise (1982) find

“a strong [positive] relationship between hours of work while in high school and weeks worked

per year upon graduation” and that “persons who work while in high school also receive higher

hourly wage rates than those who don’t” (pp. 278-9). Furthermore, Ruhm (1997) finds “no evi-

dence of detrimental effects of low to moderate amounts of student employment. To the contrary,

job-holding in the senior year [of high school] is associated with substantially elevated future

economic attainment, whether the latter is measured by earnings, wages, total compensation, oc-

cupational status, or the receipt of fringe benefits” (p. 738).

          Second, the estimated returns to subsequent employment, wage rates and/or earnings

from working while in school appear to be sizeable—between 5-10 percent per year for wage

rates—and larger than the returns to either part-time or full-time work experience acquired dur-

ing early adulthood. Meyer and Wise (1982), for example, estimate returns to wages from a year

of post-high school work experience at 3-5 percent, measured four years after graduation,

whereas the returns to working while in high school are 6-9 percent.3

          Third, several studies find that the labor market “gains” for working while in high school

persist well after leaving high school.4 For example, Carr, Wright and Brody (1996) find that the

levels of employment and wage rates remain higher among those who worked in high school

compared to those who did not as many as 12 years after leaving high school.




2
  See Stevenson (1978), Stephenson (1981), Meyer and Wise (1982), Ehrenberg and Serman (1987), Stern and Na-
kata (1989), D’Amico (1984), Mortimer and Finch (1986), Marsh (1991), Carr, Wright and Brody (1996), Ruhm
(1997), and Chaplin and Hannaway (1997) and Ahituv, Tienda and Hotz (1998).
3
 These effects are net of any differential effects of working while in high school relative to post-graduate work ex-
perience have on subsequent employment rates as Meyer and Wise (1982) adjust for the former effects in their
analysis. Meyer and Wise also find that the impacts of working while in school have stronger positive effects on the
probability of working and hours of work four years after graduation than does post-graduation work experience.
4
    See Carr, Wright and Brody (1996), Ruhm (1997) and Chaplin and Hannaway (1997).


                                                         2
        Taken together, these findings give credence to claims that acquiring work experience at

early ages is essential for instilling the attitudes and habits that comprise the “work ethic” and

that such experiences permanently affect a youth’s subsequent success in the world of work.

From a policy perspective, such findings provide support for state and local governmental efforts

to develop work-based learning and cooperative education programs and for recent federal ef-

forts, under the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994, to encourage such programs.5

        It is important, however, to ask whether these estimated effects of working while in

school on subsequent labor market outcomes are causal or simply spurious correlations. Acqui-

sition of work experience by youth may increase human capital that, in turn, supports higher

wage rates and more stable employment later in life. This is the conclusion drawn by Ruhm

(1997) in his recent study of the effects of work experience gained while in high school on sub-

sequent wages and employment. He notes that his “investigation indicates that student employ-

ment raises future productivity through skills, knowledge, work habits, and experience provided

on-the-job by far more than it detracts from educational human capital investments” (p. 770).

        It is also conceivable that the estimated relationship between early work experience ac-

quired during high school and subsequent labor market success is spurious. These estimated ef-

fects may reflect the persistent role of unobserved (or hard-to-measure) differences in initial

skills, ability, and/or familial “connections” that influence both the likelihood that youth acquire

early work experience and the degree of labor market success later in life. The potential for such

an unobserved heterogeneity explanation is noted by Meyer and Wise (1982):

        Working in high school may be an indication of personal characteristics not gained

        through work, but associated with work in high school as well as greater labor force par-



5
 The School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994 provides “venture capital” to states and communities to encourage
programs that provide work-based learning opportunities that engage “employers as partners with educators in pro-
viding opportunities for all students to participate in high-quality work experiences.”


                                                       3
        ticipation following graduation. It is not that the demand is greater for persons who work

        in high school, but that these persons have a greater propensity to work (p. 306).

This argument might explain why several studies have found that the returns to working while in

school do not seem to diminish even 10 years after leaving school—a result that seems some-

what inconsistent with plausible models of human capital investment.6

        In this paper we reconsider the evidence on the positive returns to working while in high

school (and college) on the subsequent wages of young men.7 We seek to ascertain the robust-

ness of previous findings to controls for unobserved heterogeneity and the selectivity of experi-

ence acquisition. Some of the previous studies have attempted to account for this selectivity and

the potential correlation between early work experience and subsequent wages due to unobserved

persistent factors, such as ability or family background. Commonly instrumental variables (IV)

estimators are used to purge the latter relationship of the influence of such selectivity and/or

omitted variables. As we discuss below, there are serious questions about the likelihood of find-

ing an adequate set of instruments in this context.

        Herein, we employ an alternative strategy for dealing with heterogeneity that has previ-

ously not used in this particular literature.8 Our approach to dealing with heterogeneity is distinct

from earlier work on the returns to in-school work in three ways. First, we explicitly model the

full range of life cycle school and work choices, the human capital accumulation of youth, and

the effects of the latter on subsequent wages from adolescence through early adulthood. More

6
  If higher wages are simply the result of acquiring more work experience (i.e., human capital) and the skills ac-
quired from such experience depreciate over time, one would expect the returns from high school work experience
to diminish with age as well as become less important than those from post-graduation work experience, all other
things equal.
7
  We restrict our attention to the returns of early work experience for youth’s wage growth since wage rates consti-
tute the most commonly measure of an individual’s labor market productivity used in labor economics. Ahituv,
Tienda and Hotz (1998) examine the consequences of early work experience for employment rates.
8
 The econometric approach we employ has been used by Heckman (1982) to analyze the impacts of work experi-
ence on the labor supply of women, by Cameron and Heckman (1994) in analyzing the returns to wages of a GED
and by Cameron and Heckman (1996, 1997) in estimating the effects of family background in the grade progression
of youth.

                                                         4
precisely, we model the participation decisions of young men with respect to a full set of educa-

tional, work and military activities and we model them jointly with the observed wage patterns of

those who work.

        Second, we attempt to control for unobserved, person-specific heterogeneity by using a

factor-analytic, random effects specification adapted from the work of Heckman and Singer

(1984). A key issue in the estimation of the effects of earlier events on subsequent choices is the

“initial conditions” problem. When estimating parameters generating a stochastic process with

dependence among time-ordered outcomes, the process should be initialized at a relevant starting

point. The initial conditions problem arises when the sequence of the process has not been mod-

eled. In our application this problem arises if we fail to model the determinants of the entire se-

quence of initial educational and work choices made by youth.9 To address this problem, we ex-

ploit a particularly rich longitudinal data set—the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,

(NLSY79)—that contains sufficient information to model virtually all young men’s labor market

and schooling choices that are likely to be at the discretion of young men. Using this data and the

econometric methods noted above and elaborated below allows us to generate relatively robust

estimates of the true (as opposed to spurious) effects of past work and schooling decisions on

subsequent employment and wage outcomes.10

        The third and final distinguishing feature of our analysis is the use of temporal and geo-

graphical variation in local labor market conditions, and thus the demand for labor, facing young

men to help identify the effects of early work experience on subsequent labor market outcomes.




9
  See Heckman (1981a, 1981b), Heckman (1982), Flinn and Heckman (1982a, 1982b), and Heckman and Singer
(1984) for more on the initial conditions problem in economic contexts and estimation strategies for accounting for
this problem in dynamic models of individual-level behavior.
10
   In the terminology of dynamic models, the methods we employ are particularly well-suited to distinguish between
structural lagged occurrence dependence and unobserved heterogeneity.


                                                        5
Previous studies have found these sources of variation to be crucial in identifying of structural

effects of past decisions on subsequent labor market success.11

           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the struc-

ture of the longitudinal data taken from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79)

and definitions of variables used in the analysis. Section 3 describes the life cycle patterns of

work and schooling experiences of young men from age 13 through age 28. We also examine the

life cycle patterns for wages over early adulthood. Consistent with previous studies, our raw data

suggests a positive relationship between wage rates and accumulated experience of working

while in school. However, we also find that the young men who acquire substantial amounts of

such work experience tend to come from more advantaged backgrounds and ultimately tend to

achieve higher levels of education. The latter finding indicates potential for the types of endoge-

neity, or selection bias in attributing the observed correlations between work while in school and

subsequent wages noted above.

       Section 4 outlines our adaptation of the Cameron-Heckman model for dealing with such

forms of selection bias in dynamic settings. Therein, we discuss how our econometric approach

and the data we use provide estimates of the effects of lagged choices, such as working while in

school, on wages that are robust to certain forms of persistent unobserved heterogeneity. In Sec-

tion 5, we present the results of our estimation of the returns to early work experience on the

wage growth of young men. We find that including a relatively rich set of background conditions

and indicators of labor market conditions in wage equations reproduces the positive effects of

working while in school on subsequent wages found in previous studies. However, such effects

are dramatically diminished in magnitude and statistical significance once we control for unob-

served heterogeneity via our random effects specification. As such, our results indicate a decided


11
     See, for example, Cameron and Heckman (1994) and Sanders (1995).


                                                       6
lack of robustness to the inferences about the benefits of working while in school that have been

drawn from previous work. We summarize our conclusions from this analysis and their implica-

tions in Section 6.

2.   Data

       In this study, we use data on young men from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

1979 (NLSY79). The NLSY79 follows a sample of U.S. youth between the ages of 14 to 21 as of

1 January 1979. The original sample consisted of a national probability sample of men and

women, and oversamples of several targeted groups−namely blacks, Hispanics, poor whites and

military enrollees−from these age cohorts. For most of the sample members interviews were

conducted (or attempted) in each subsequent year; we make use of the longitudinal data gathered

from the 1979-1990 interviews. Over this 12-year period, the NLSY79 exhibits a low attrition

rate of just over 10 percent of the original sample.

       These annual interviews gathered detailed information on the respondent’s schooling,

training and military experiences as well as week-by-week histories of jobs held and their attrib-

utes—including occupation, industry, typical hours worked and hourly wage rates. During the

initial interview in 1979 an attempt was made to gather some retrospective information on these

outcomes, although this information is inevitably incomplete.

       In this paper, we use data for men drawn from the national probability sample and the

black and Hispanic oversamples. The inclusion of these two oversamples enhances our ability to

draw reliable inferences for the black and Hispanic subgroups. We also restrict our analysis to

those respondents who were between the ages of 13-16 in 1978 and who would be between 24-

28 at the 1990 interview. This restriction was made to ensure that we obtained as complete a set

of information as possible on all early employment experiences for these young men. By focus-

ing on these younger cohorts, we avoid heavy reliance on retrospective information about the la-


                                                  7
bor force activities gathered in the initial 1979 interview as would be required for the older co-

horts in the NLSY79. Except for individuals who participate in informal, remunerated work prior

to the legal age for work (i.e., 14), this sample selection enables us to obtain prospective infor-

mation on the entire process of school departure and labor market entry. Given these sample re-

strictions, our analysis sample consists of 2,570 young men, including 1,265 whites, 797 blacks,

and 511 Hispanics.

       Given our interest in a young men’s accumulation of work, schooling and military expe-

riences, we constructed a year-by-year classification of respondents’ primary activity at each age,

from 13 to 28. Using information form the NLSY79 Work and Schooling Histories and from

other parts of its annual surveys, we classified respondents in one of the following six, mutually

exclusive, activity categories:

     (1)   School Only;
     (2)   School and Part-Time Work;
     (3)   Part-Time Employment (and no School Attendance);
     (4)   Full-Time Employment;
     (5)   Enlisted in Military;
     (6)   Other (Non-School, Non-Work) Activities.

In assigning these categories for each person-year, we ascertained if a young man was enlisted in

the military during the calendar year when he was age t; if so, we classified him as being enlisted

in the Military [activity (5)]. We then examined a youth’s school attendance and reported hours

and weeks worked at age t. If the youth reported going to school but not working during the year,

they were assigned to either activity (3) or (4). The part-time employment category [activity (3)]

was defined to include those young men who, at age t: (i) were not enrolled in school and

worked less than 35 hours per week, on average and/or (ii) did not start an employment spell that

lasted at least 50 weeks of a consecutive 52-week period. Young men at age t were classified in

activity (4), full-time employment, if they were employed in one or more jobs for 50 weeks out


                                                8
of a consecutive 52 week period and averaged at least 35 hours per week of work during the cal-

endar year in which they reached age t. Of the remaining respondents who reported attending

school during the year, they were assigned to activity (1) or (2), depending on whether they re-

ported doing any work activity during the year. A youth of age t that was not assigned to one of

the first six activities, was, by default, assigned to activity (6), which served as the residual cate-

gory.

          The assignment of activities at each age for NLSY79 male respondents form the out-

comes in the dynamic, discrete-choice model used in our econometric analysis below. We also

used these assignments over time to construct age-specific measures of each of the following

types of experience:

        (i)    years of work experience while attending high school;
        (ii)   years of work experience while attending college;
        (iii) years of part-time, non-school-related, work experience
        (iv) years of full-time work experience
        (v)    years of attending school and not working,
        (vi) years enlisted in the military;

as well as the

        (vii) number of grades of schooling completed.

          We used these activity definitions to construct, at each age, the accumulated number of

years since age 13 of the following work “experience” variables: work while attending high

school; work while attending college; part-time, non-school-related work; and full-time work.

We also constructed the accumulated number of years spent in school while not working (i.e.,

years of only schooling) and number of grades completed to distinguish between the effects of

school attendance and grade completion. Finally, we included measures of the accumulated

number of years enlisted in the military and those spent in the residual category of other activi-

ties.


                                                   9
        An important consideration for one of the estimation strategies we employ in Section 4 is

the availability of data for the entire histories of work and schooling experiences of young men.

Such comprehensive histories are needed to deal with the “initial conditions” problem noted in

the Introduction and discussed further in Section 4. Our strategy for measuring a youth’s accu-

mulated experiences—and, thus, past choices—at each age exploits the richness of the longitudi-

nal data available in the NLSY79.12

        As noted in the Introduction, a key feature of the econometric strategy we use for esti-

mating the causal effects of work experience gathered while in school is explicitly modeling the

temporal correlation of all of the activity choices youth make through early adulthood. There-

fore, to explicitly characterize all choices, including the initial ones, we model the annual choices

for each youth from age 13 on. While the choice of 13 as the age to initialize the activity-choice

process is arbitrary, we think starting at age 13 captures most, if not all, of the “choices” youth

make about work, schooling and military activities. As of age 13, 97 percent of all young men in

our sample were classified as being in the full-time school activity, Activity (1), with the re-

maining 3 percent distributed among the school and work activity [Activity (2)]. Thus, we are

confident that by starting at age 13, we capture all of the work and military choices that these

youth made during their early life course.

        In Table 1, we provide descriptive statistics on the work, schooling and military experi-

ences of the men in our sample at various ages. Use of the black and Hispanic oversamples from

the NLSY79 allows us to present all tabulations separately by ethnic and racial groups as well as

for the full sample. As can be seen from Table 1, among young men the incidence and extent of


12
   We note that several previous studies of the labor market activities of young men—e.g., Wolpin (1989), Lynch
(1989), Gritz and MaCurdy (1992)—use accumulated work experience after the respondent had left school. As
documented in Ahituv, Tienda, Xu and Hotz (1994) and in evidence presented below, a non-trivial proportion of
young men accumulate significant amounts of work experience prior to leaving school. Moreover, these differences
vary markedly by race and ethnicity. Thus, our attempt to include all work experience, starting at an early age (such
as 13) seems further justified.


                                                        10
working while enrolled in high school and college is relatively high: 92 percent of the full sam-

ple worked at some time while enrolled in high school. There are, however, noticeable differ-

ences by race and ethnicity. White men were much more likely to work during high school (93

percent) relative to Hispanics (88 percent) or blacks (85 percent). Overall, the young men in our

sample spent an average of 2.55 of their years in high school working; as with incidence, whites

spent more time working while in high school (2.61 years) as compared to Hispanics (2.43 years)

or blacks (2.25 years). Among those who attended college, 42 percent of our sample, work was

quite common.13 For the overall sample, 88 percent worked while in college, with some variation

in that incidence across racial and ethnic groups.

           Table 1 also provides information about the incidence and extent of other work, school,

and military activities for the young men in our sample. As has been well-documented, white

men attain substantially more education (an average of 13.36 grades completed) than do black

(12.47) or Hispanic men (12.09) and these discrepancies are quite sizable. White men are much

more likely to have worked at least one year on a full-time basis than Hispanics or blacks and are

less likely to work on a part-time basis while not in school than either minority group14.

           Finally, it worth examining the racial and ethnic differences in the types of work experi-

ence acquired by young men. First, white and Hispanic men spent about the same number of

years between the ages of 13 and 28 in some sort of work-related activity—9.47 years for whites

and 9.42 years for Hispanics—and black men averaged 1 year less in the workforce than either

whites or Hispanics (see Table 1). Second, while whites and Hispanics spend about the same

amount of their early adulthood working in the civilian labor force, the nature of that experience

is quite different. Hispanic men gain much less work experience while attending school and are

13
  As has been well-documented, the incidence of college attendance varies substantially by race and ethnicity, with
whites (45 percent) attending college as much higher rates than blacks (31 percent) or Hispanics (28 percent). See
Table 1.
14
     Recall that an individual is classified as having worked full-time during a given year if they had worked at least 50


                                                            11
more likely to work at a part-time job (and not attend school) compared to white men. Blacks ac-

quire less full-time and work-while-in-school experience than either whites or Hispanics. Finally,

as has been noted by others, black males are more likely to enlist in the military than is the case

for white or Hispanic males.15

3.     Simple Relationships between Working while in School and the Differences in Labor
       Market Wages and other Characteristics

           We next examine the raw correlations between working while in high school (and col-

lege) and the subsequent wages of young men using the data from the NLSY79. Table 2, pres-

ents average wages by employment-enrollment status and the differences in these means for all

workers (labeled “Mean Differences in Levels”) and in the log of wage rates for individuals who

worked at various ages (labeled “Mean Differences in Logs”). The former measure characterizes

differences in the levels of wages while the latter characterizes percentage differences. Estimates

are provided for blacks, whites and Hispanics at ages 17, 22, and 27. Both sets of estimates used

data for the men in our sample who reported working and had a valid wage rate at the various

ages recorded in the Table 2. As the sample sizes recorded in the table indicate, the number of

men working—for which we observe a wage rate—vary by age and across race and ethnicity in

our sample. Furthermore, these working samples may not be representative of all young men in

these age and race/ethnic groups. We defer, until later, any attempt to account for the selectivity

of observed wages. Estimates based on econometric methods that account for the potential selec-

tivity of employment (and schooling) choices are presented in Section 5.

           As revealed in Table 2, the differences in wages between young men who worked while

in high school and those who do not are almost always positive and are typically statistically sig-

nificant, whether measured in levels or logs. In particular, wages are between 6 to 19 percent


weeks in the year for an average of at least 35 hours per week.
15
     See Mare and Winship (1984) and Kilburn (1993).


                                                         12
higher among those who worked in high school compared to those who did not at ages 22 and

27—roughly 5 and 10 years after high school graduation. Among those who attended college, the

differences in wages between those who worked while in college and those who did not are al-

most always positive and are statistically significant at age 27 for all groups but blacks.

           These estimates are consistent with the literature on the effects of working while in

school noted in the Introduction. As found in previous studies, the size of the wage advantages of

those who worked while in school do not appear to decline with age. In fact, the wage gap ap-

pears to increase from age 22 to 27. These patterns hold for both white and Hispanic men; they

do not hold for black men. In fact, wage differences by in-school work status for blacks are not

always positive and are seldom significantly different at the ages displayed in the table.

           As noted above, the wage data used in Table 2 is for men who worked and had valid

wage measures. It is worthwhile to examine how the subsequent employment and enrollment

outcomes of young men vary by in-school work experience. In Table 3, we present average dif-

ferences in mean employment rates according to whether young men worked in school. (Table 3

has much the same format as does Table 2.) Youth who acquired work experience while enrolled

in high school or college achieved significantly higher employment rates than their counterparts

who did not work. Again, this finding is entirely consistent with the apparent labor market “ad-

vantages” of in-school work experiences found in previous studies.16

           We also provide, in Table 3, estimates of the mean differences in (a) years of non-school

related part-time work experience, (b) years of full-time work experience (c) grades completed,

and (d) years of school attended since age 13 according to employment-enrollment status. Con-

sistent with the view that acquiring work experience while in school alters a young man’s learn-

ing and labor force trajectories, these results show that young men who work while enrolled in


16
     See both Meyer and Wise (1982) and Ruhm (1997), for example.


                                                       13
high school or college have acquired significantly more formal education by any age. By age 28,

young men who worked while in high school accumulated one more year of full-time work expe-

rience, on average, than young men who did not. These differences are statistically significant

for all groups compared. By a similar age, youth who attended college and also worked accu-

mulated 0.68 more years of experience than students who did not work while in college. The

latter differences are larger (1.16 years) and statistically significant for blacks. In contrast, young

men who worked while in high school accumulated 0.79 fewer years of non-school related, part-

time work experience by age 28 relative to those who did not work in high school, and these dif-

ferences were statistically significant for all groups except blacks. (A similar pattern obtains by

whether or not college attendees worked during college.) To the extent that young men are as-

sumed to enhance their skills by acquiring more education or by working full-time (and fewer

skills by working in part-time employment situations), these findings about subsequent experi-

ences also are consistent with the view that working while in school is associated with higher

rates of skill acquisition.

        In summary, the data presented in Tables 2 and 3 are entirely consistent with findings of

previous studies which conclude that working while enrolled in school or college represents a

productive investment in terms of its subsequent impact on market wages and, possibly, em-

ployment. However, it is also possible that these differences in wages simply reflect pre-existing

differences and an age-related sorting process rather than real returns from educational invest-

ments and/or early work experiences. Stated differently, it is conceivable that more able or “bet-

ter connected” youth acquire jobs during their high school and/or college years and that these

same youth have better subsequent employment and schooling opportunities. Such a scenario is

also consistent with the patterns shown in Table 3. As important, such advantages would also

contribute to the wage differences by high school and college work status displayed in Table 2.



                                                  14
         A systematic attempt to untangle the influence of various sources of heterogeneity, espe-

cially those that we cannot measure, is taken up later. For now, we examine the prima facie case

for the “heterogeneity in ability and family background” explanation for the patterns found in

Tables 2 and 3. Accordingly, Table 4 presents differences in an indicator of young men’s apti-

tudes,17 and a set of family background measures18 according to high school and college work

status. Consider, for example, the mean differences in the Armed Forces Qualifying Test

(AFQT) by work status in high school. With the exception of blacks, young men who worked

while in high school had higher AFQT scores than men who did not and these differences are

statistically significant. Moreover, these differences (which average 11.72 points) are sizeable for

all except black men, averaging around one-half of a standard deviation for the AFQT score.19

Among those who attended college, average differences in AFQT scores are sizeable (11.57 on

average) and statistically significant for all demographic groups.

         A similar pattern emerges for differences in the educational attainment of these young

men’s mothers and their 1979 family incomes. Young men who worked during high school sys-

tematically came from wealthier and more educated households than youth who did not gain any

work experience while enrolled in high school. Similar patterns obtain among college attendees.

(In contrast to the evidence for maternal education and family income, we find small and statisti-




17
  As a part of a U.S. Department of Defense initiative, all respondents in the NLSY79 were administered the Armed
Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) in 1980. This battery tested a range of aptitudes, including reading
comprehension, word knowledge, mathematical knowledge and numerical operations, as well as a number of other
skills. The sum of the scores on the work knowledge, arithmetic reasoning, paragraph comprehension and (one-half
of the) numeric operations batteries comprise the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) which is used to assess
the eligibility of individuals seeking to enlist in the U.S. armed services. This test has been found to be not only a
good predictor of the likelihood that enlistees are successful in the military but also a good predictor of initial suc-
cess in the civilian labor force.
18
  The family background variables were obtained from the 1979 wave of the NLSY79 in which both respondents
and their parents were interviewed.
19
  The standard deviations for the AFQT test scores are 28.6, 18.3, 19.4, and 21.5 for the Hispanic, Black, White
subsamples and for the full sample, respectively.


                                                          15
cally insignificant differences by employment-enrollment status in the incidence of young men

coming from female-headed households.)

           Thus, based on observed indicators of ability and family background, it appears that

youth who worked while enrolled in high school or while attending college were more “advan-

taged” than the young men who did not acquire work experience while in school. We can control

for these observable factors in a more refined statistical analysis of the returns to in-school work

experience on subsequent labor market attainment. However, the evidence in Table 4 strongly

suggests that the personal and family factors, including possibly unmeasured characteristics such

as motivation or innate talents, could account for the positive correlations between in-school

work status and subsequent wages gains displayed in Table 2. We argue that there is a strong

prima facie case that both observed and unobserved sources of heterogeneity across youth are re-

sponsible for the causal link between working while in school and subsequent wages. As such,

failure to account for this possibility may lead to spurious influences. In the remainder of the pa-

per, therefore, we assess the robustness of previous findings about the apparent returns to in-

school work experience using an econometric strategy that accounts for person- (and family-)

specific sources of unobserved heterogeneity.

4.     Econometric Specifications for Modeling Wages and Selection

           This section describes the econometric specifications used to analyze the effects of early

work experience, especially that acquired while attending high school and college, on subsequent

wage rates of youth. We investigate three approaches. The first, which we label as the Selection

on Observables strategy,20 controls for observable personal and background characteristics of

young men that affect the likelihood of acquiring in-school work experience, as well as subse-

quent work experience, additional schooling, and the wage rates they achieve. This methodology

20
     See Heckman and Hotz (1989).


                                                  16
corresponds closely to that used by Meyer and Wise (1982), Ruhm (1997), and Chaplin and

Hannaway (1997) in their assessments of the returns to education and experience. As a second

strategy, we apply a variant of the maximum likelihood, selection-correction estimator first pro-

posed by Heckman (1974, 1976) to account for contemporaneous sources of selectivity bias

when wage rate offers are only observed for those who work. We denote this approach Contem-

poraneous Selection Control. Meyer and Wise (1982), Ruhm (1997), and Chaplin and Hannaway

(1997) use this estimator in their work. Finally, we adapt the econometric framework developed

by Cameron and Heckman (1992) for estimating dynamic, discrete-choice models and the wage

processes associated with such choices while controlling for a person-specific random effect us-

ing the semi-parametric estimation strategy first outlined by Heckman and Singer (1984). The

latter econometric model—denoted Dynamic Selection Control—accounts for more dynamic

forms of selection bias and has not been utilized in previous studies of the causal effects of in-

school work experience on subsequent wage rates. We describe each in turn.21

        We begin by presenting the specification of the wage equation that is common to all three

of the econometric approaches. Our conceptual formulation distinguishes three types of em-

ployment: part-time work, which takes place while attending school (activity 2); non-school re-

lated part-time work (activity 3); and full-time employment (activity 4). To allow for differences

in the wage processes associated with these types of work experiences and the returns to differ-

ent types of experiences and personal characteristics in each type of employment, we specify



21
   We note that several previous studies of the effects of working while in school on subsequent labor market suc-
cess have relied on instrumental variable (IV) methods to instrument the in-school work experience variables in the
estimation of wage equations. For example, Ruhm (1997) relies on family background and aggregate, location-
specific variables as instruments for the work-while-in-school variables in his wage regressions. In preliminary
analyses, not reported herein, we attempted to replicate this approach as well. We found that using the types of in-
struments advocated by Ruhm were particularly weak predictors of in-school work experience. As is well known,
weak instruments can result in unreliable and biased parameter estimates. See Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995) for a
discussion of the potential problems with using weak instruments. We also were concerned about the fact that these
instruments were not plausibly able to deal with dynamic forms of selection bias. Accordingly, we do not employ IV
estimators in the empirical analysis reported on below.


                                                        17
separate wage equations for each. In particular, we adopt the following Mincerian wage equa-

tion:

                    ln Witj′ = β ′j′ Z itw− s + δ Sj′ ′ Sit + δ Ej′ ′ Eit + δ Pj′ ′ Pi + δ Mj
                                                                                           ′ ′ M it + uitj′
                                                                                                              ,   (4.1)
                              = β ′j′ Z itw− s + δ ′j′ X 1it + uitj′

for employment types, j′ = 2, 3, or 4, where Witj′ denotes the hourly wage rate that individual i

would obtain in employment state j′ at age t, Z itw− s is a vector of variables that measure the inci-

dence and amount of in-school work experience acquired by age t; Sit is a vector of measures of

accumulated experience (grades completed, years in school) as of age t; Eit is a vector of meas-

ures of accumulated (part-time, full-time and military) work experience as of age t; Pi is a vector

of observable personal characteristics (test scores, demographic characteristics, etc.) for the ith

individual; Mit is a vector of measures of local labor market conditions facing the individual at

age t; and uitj′ is the (unobserved) disturbance term. Our interest is in the estimation of the βj′’s,

the returns to work while enrolled in school. The inclusion of the other characteristics, denoted

by the vector X1it ≡ ( Sit′ , Eit′ , Pi′, M it′ )′ , represent the observable factors that are traditionally con-

trolled for in the estimation of wage equations. Under certain conditions, controlling for X1it also

may account for the potential bias that arises when Z itw− s is, itself, a function of unobservable

factors represented by uitj. In particular if

                                                   E (uitj Z itw− s ) ≠ 0                                         (4.2)

but

                                                E (uitj Z itw− s , X 1it ) = 0                                    (4.3)

holds, then controlling X1it constitutes a Selection on Observables strategy for eliminating the

selection bias characterized by condition (4.2). As noted by Barnow, Cain and Goldberger (1980)

and Heckman and Robb (1985), if condition (4.3) holds, then ordinary least squares methods,



                                                                       18
applied to (4.1) for the j = 2, 3, and 4, will produce unbiased estimates of the βj′’s.

        An obvious criticism of the Selection on Observables estimation methodology is that it

fails to account for the potential selection bias associated with the fact that the wage data used to

estimate (4.1) is only for observed wage rates, i.e., wages for individuals who are working in one

of the three types of employment activities noted above. To account for this potential source of

selectivity, it is useful to characterize a model of activity choice where the activities were defined

in Section 2 above. We assume that for each activity there is a subjective payoff, or utility, to the

ith youth engaging in activity j at age t that is denoted by Vitj and that the associated utility index

function is given by the following linear function:

                   Vitj = γ j′ Z itw− s + λSj′ Sit + λEj′ Eit + λPi′ Pi + λMj
                                                                           ′ M it + λFj′ Fi + ε itj
                                                                                                      ,   (4.4)
                        = γ j′ Z itw− s + λ ′j X 1it + ε itj

for all j ∈ J, where the vectors Z itw− s , Sit, Eit, Pi, and Mit are defined above, Fi is a vector of family

background variables that influence a young man’s activity choices, and εitj is a state-specific

unobservable variable. The ith individual at age t, is assumed to choose that activity k—from the

set of J (= 6) feasible activities—so as to maximize his utility. That is:

                                 Choose k such that Vitk = max j∈J {Vitj } .

The problem of selection bias in the estimation of the parameters of (4.1) can arise when εitj and

uitj are correlated for choices involving work, i.e., choices j = 2, 3, 5 in our context. The extent to

which

            Cov(ε itj , uit ′j′ ) ≠ 0 for t = t′ and j = j′ but Cov(ε itj , uit ′j′ ) = 0 otherwise,      (4.5)

where j, j′ = 2, 3, or 4, we say that the estimation of the parameters of the wage equation in (4.1)

are subject to contemporaneous selection bias. This form of selection represents a slightly gener-

alized form of the source of bias considered by Heckman (1974, 1976). As noted above, several

of the studies of the returns to in-school work experience, e.g., Meyer and Wise (1984) and


                                                               19
Ruhm (1997), deal with this form of selection in their empirical analyses. In the empirical results

presented below, we present estimates that account for this form of contemporaneous selection

by invoking distributional assumptions for εitj and uitj (bivariate normality) and use maximum

likelihood estimation methods that allow Cov(εt2,ut2), Cov(εt3,ut3), and Cov(εt4,ut4) to be un-

known constants that are estimated.

        The above specification deals with contemporaneous forms of selectivity associated with

the estimation of wage equations when wages are observed only if an individual works (i.e., a

work-related activity is optimally chosen). However, this approach does not account for the po-

tential endogeneity of Z itw−s —or Sit and Eit for that matter—in wage equations like (4.1). This en-

dogeneity arises if the unobservables, εitj and uitj, are not only contemporaneously correlated, but

are also correlated over time. More generally, if

                             Cov(ε itj , uit ′j′ ) ≠ 0 for all t, t′ and j, j′,                      (4.6)

for all j, j′ = 2, 3, or 4, we say that the estimation of the parameters of the wage equation in (4.1)

are subject to dynamic selection bias.22 Theoretically, such non-zero correlations of εitj and uitj at

different ages arise because young men’s decisions about whether or not to work while enrolled

in school are likely affected by unobserved factors, e.g., unmeasured ability and family back-

ground factors, that also influence their wage offers at later ages. To our knowledge, previous re-

search on the returns to subsequent wages of working while enrolled in school has not dealt with

this dynamic form of selectivity.

        To account for the potential influence of dynamic selection bias in estimating the pa-

rameters of the activity-specific wage equations given in (4.1), we proceed by assuming error

structure is characterized by the following common random effects factor structure:


22
  See Cameron and Heckman (1992, 1998) for a more complete treatment of models subject to dynamic selection
bias.


                                                         20
                                     uitj′ = κ j′ξi + ωitj′ , for j′ = 2, 3, 4,                             (4.7)

and

                                       ε itj = α jξi + ν itj , for j = 1,...,6,                             (4.8)

where ξi denotes a person-specific disturbance, or factor, αj and κj′ are choice- and wage-specific

factor loadings; νitj and ωitj′ denote idiosyncratic disturbance terms that are assumed to be uncor-

related with ξi. It follows that:

              Cov(uitk ′ , uit ′j′ ) = κ k ′κ j′ Var(ξi ), for t ≠ t ′, and k ′, j ′ = 2,3,4, k ′ ≠ j ′ ,
              Cov(ε itj , uit′j′ ) = α jκ j′ Var(ξi ), for t ≠ t ′, and for all j , j ′ = 2, 3, 4,
              Cov(ε itj , ε it ′k ) = α jαk Var(ξi ), for t ≠ t ′, j ≠ k .

The estimation of the multi-state, discrete choice model specified in equations (4.1) and (4.4)

through (4.8) is accomplished using the non-parametric maximum likelihood (NPML) strategy

proposed by Heckman and Singer (1984) in which we use a discrete approximation to the distri-

bution of ξi. In particular, we allow the number of discrete values for the distribution, K, the lo-

cations of the random variable (the ξk’s, k = 1,...,K) and the associated probabilities (pk ≡

Pr(ξi=ξk)) to be free parameters that are estimated in conjunction with θ and π. (See Appendix A

for details on the form of the non-parametric likelihood function used in our analysis.)

5.    Estimates for Alternative Selection Control Methods

        In this section we present estimates for the econometric models of the choices made and

wages received by young men during their transitions from school to work and examine the ef-

fects of in-school work experience on these outcomes. We first present the estimates for the

models outlined in the previous section, paying particular attention to the impacts that family

background, initial skills and local labor market conditions have on the acquisition of alternative

types of work experience and on the wages young men command when they work. We then pre-

sent estimates of the “net” returns to wages from in-school work experience at various ages and


                                                               21
for white, black and Hispanic men in order to assess the robustness of previous findings for this

form of work experience.

            Table 5 presents sample means for the variables used to measure personal and family

background characteristics used as control variables in the empirical analyses. (These variables

were defined in Section 2.) We exploited information available on the county and state in which

the respondent resided at the time of each annual interview to develop several indicators of local

labor market conditions for each respondent at each age (year) they were interviewed. The fol-

lowing indicators were measured based on respondents’ county of residence: (a) the annual un-

employment rate; (b) the average annual income per worker for those employed;23 (c) the aver-

age annual income per worker for those employed in manufacturing jobs; (d) the average annual

income per worker for those employed in service-sector jobs; (e) the annual percentage rate of

growth in employment; (f) the employment-share-weighted annual percentage growth rate of

manufacturing sector employment;24 and (g) the employment-share-weighted annual percentage

growth rate of service-sector employment.25 Sample means for these variables are also included

in Table 5.26




23
     The income-per-worker variables are expressed in 1000’s of 1982 dollars.
24
  The employment share-weighted variables were constructed as follows. Let Ejkt denote the total number of work-
ers employed in industrial sector j in county k in year t and let Ekt denote total annual employment in the county in
                                                                           E jkt
year t. Then the share of employment in the jth sector in year t is sjkt =       and the sector-specific growth rates are
                                                                           Ekt
                            E jkt − E jk ,t −1 
given by gjkt = s jk , t −1                    .
                            E jk ,t −1 
25
   The unemployment rate data was obtained from the GEOCODE supplement to the NLSY79 while the remaining
variables were constructed from annual, county-level data on industry-specific employment and average earnings
that is distributed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The measures
on industry-specific employment and wage income per worker are drawn primarily from information obtained from
state unemployment insurance programs for all major industries at both county and state levels of aggregation.
26
  We filled all missing values for these control variables with zeros. We constructed dummy variables to character-
ize missing values of these control variables and included these dummies as regressors both the wage and utility in-
dex functions in all of our analyses.


                                                          22
         The parameter estimates (and associated asymptotic standard errors) for the wage equa-

tions estimated for the Selection on Observables, the Contemporaneous Selection Control and

the Dynamic Selection Control models are provided in Appendix B.27 That table contains the es-

timates for the parameters of the valuation functions associated with 5 of the 6 activity states—

the “School Only” state is the omitted category—for the (log) wage functions, and of the

locations and points of support associated with the person-specific, common random factor, ξ.28

         Our primary interest is in whether the returns to wages of working while enrolled in high

school (or college) are robust to attempted controls for selection bias, especially dynamic forms

of selection bias. In this context other statistical indicators of the “fit” of the three econometric

models are also noteworthy. For example, with the exception of that associated with the “Other”

activity, the factor loadings for the Dynamic Selection Control model are all significantly differ-

ent from zero. Because the products of factor loadings characterize the covariances between uitj

and εit′j′ in (4.1) and (4.4), the statistical significance of these loadings indicates that these distur-

bances are contemporaneously and serially correlated. Recall that correlation between the uitj’s

and εit′j′’s gives rise to the endogeneity of in-school work experience (as well as the schooling

and other work experience variables) in (4.1) and (4.4) when estimating wage returns of work

experience acquired while enrolled in school. In contrast, the contemporaneous correlations be-

tween uitj and εitj in (4.1) and (4.4) in the Contemporaneous Selection Control model are statisti-

cally significant only for the full-time work activity index and its associated wage equation.

While not conclusive, this evidence suggests that the serial correlation of activity choice and

wage disturbances is important in characterizing the data.



27
 The parameter estimates for the activity choice index functions for the Contemporaneous and Dynamic Selection
models are available upon request.
28
  Since the locations of the points of support for the distribution of ξ is arbitrary, we restricted these values to lie in
the interval [0,1].


                                                           23
             While the parameter estimates in Appendix B provide a relatively rich characterization of

the returns to wages of work experience acquired during school enrollment (as well as the returns

to schooling and other forms of work experiences) for young men, the estimates themselves are

difficult to interpret. Therefore Table 6 presents estimates (and standard errors) of the marginal

impacts of having one additional year of various types of work and schooling experiences on

wages of young men for the three econometric models implemented.29 More precisely, we ex-

amine the effect of an additional year spent in:

       (i)   Full-Time School (and an extra grade is completed);
      (ii)   High School & Work (and an extra grade is completed);
     (iii)   College & Work (and an extra grade is completed);
     (iv)    Part-Time Work Only [Activity (3)];
      (v)    Full-Time Work Only [Activity (4)];

In addition, we calculate the following “net” return estimates,

  (vi) Net Return to Work while in High School;
 (vii) Net Return to Work while in College;

where the latter two entries are defined as the differences between entries (ii) and (i) and between

(iii) and (i), respectively. All of the marginal effects yield the percentage change in wages due to

a one year change in a particular form of experience. These effects are evaluated at three differ-

ent ages—17, 22, and 27—to capture the effects at the ages that youth would typically graduate

from high school or college, respectively, and in early adulthood.30 Panels, A, B and C in Table 6

display the results for black, Hispanic and white men, respectively. These calculations were de-

rived using the coefficients on the racial and ethnicity interactions with the various experience

variables.



29
  The estimated returns presented in all three panels of Table 6 are evaluated at the age-specific (weighted) means
of the variables included in the specifications of (4.1) and (4.4) and these means were calculated over the data for all
young men.
30
 These effects are evaluated at the appropriate age-specific means of variables used in these calculations, given that
work, schooling and the other experience variables enter the Contemporaneous and Dynamic Selection Control
models nonlinearly.


                                                          24
       First consider the estimated returns to wages from working while in school (high school

and college) for the Selection on Observables and Contemporaneous Selection models. Focusing

on the “net returns” of work experience while enrolled in high school or college to wages in full-

time work, these estimates for both econometric models appear to be consistent with the findings

of previous studies based on young men (e.g., Ruhm, 1997, who also uses data from the

NLSY79).

       For black men (Panel A) across the various ages, an extra year spent working while in

high school results in a 2.1 to 2.9 percent higher hourly wage rate when working in full-time em-

ployment compared to not working while attending high school. These net returns for black men

are very precisely estimated. The corresponding net returns to full-time wages for Hispanic men

(Panel B) are between 1.7 to 2.5 percent, depending on the econometric specification and age at

which the effect was evaluated. The estimates for Hispanics are less precisely estimated. For

white men (Panel C), the estimates for returns to working in high school are between 2.2 and 3.0

percent, and, as for blacks, are precisely estimated. (The magnitudes of these net returns are

roughly consistent with those found in the studies cited in the Introduction.)

       Based on the first two econometric models and consistent with the findings in previous

studies, the estimated net returns to full-time wage rates from spending an extra year working

while enrolled in high school show little evidence of declining with age. For example, among

black men (Panel A) the net return to an extra year of working while in high school only declines

by between 0.3 to 0.6 percentage points from age 17 to 27. (The declines with age are similarly

small for Hispanic and white young men.) Finally, there is little evidence of any wage returns to

high school employment associated either with working while in high school or with part-time

employment. For black and Hispanic men, these returns are frequently small, especially at older

ages, and almost never estimated precisely. For white men, the corresponding net returns for



                                                25
high school work are more sizeable and estimated with greater precision, at least at ages 22 and

27.

       The Selection on Observables and Contemporaneous Selection Control models yield very

similar patterns with respect to the net returns to wages of spending an extra year at work while

in college. The estimated returns are almost always positive and statistically significant for the

wages associated with full-time employment at various ages. Moreover, the estimated returns to

working while in college tend to be substantially higher than returns for working while in high

school. For black men, returns to college employment range from 4.9 to 5.6 percent (Panel A)

and 4.6 to 5.1 percent for whites (Panel C). Hispanic men are the exception to this pattern, but

relatively few are college-goers because large numbers withdraw from high school prematurely

(Tienda and Ahituv, 1996). For this group the estimated full-time wage returns of spending an

extra year working while enrolled in college are noticeably smaller, ranging between 1.1 and 1.7

percent, and are not statistically significant. For them the estimated net return to working while

in college by age 27 are virtually identical to those achieved at age 22 for both the Selection on

Observables and Contemporaneous Selection Control models. Finally, the net returns to wages

associated with the “school and work” activity from an extra year of working while in high

school or college are relatively small in magnitude and are imprecisely estimated for both His-

panics and whites. In contrast, the corresponding estimates are sizeable and statistically signifi-

cant for black men and tend to be comparable in magnitude to the return from spending an extra

year in full-time employment.

       The conclusions about the benefits of working while enrolled in high school or college on

young men’s wages change markedly when dynamic forms of selection (and endogeneity) bias

are taken into account. (These results are reported in the three panels of Table 6 under the head-

ing Dynamic Selection Control.) Consider the returns to wages associated with full-time em-

ployment in the three panels. Based on the dynamic specification of person-specific unobserved

                                                26
heterogeneity that underlies the Dynamic Selection Control model, the estimated returns to either

working while enrolled in high school or college are substantially smaller than the corresponding

estimates based on the first two methods of dealing with selection and endogeneity. Moreover,

the estimates are almost never statistically significant. For black men, the estimated net return to

wages from spending an extra year working while in high school ranges from .01 to 1.7 percent

and is not statistically significant. The corresponding ranges of estimates for Hispanic and white

men are –2.6 to –0.9 and –0.4 to 1.2 percent, respectively. In addition, while small, the estimated

net returns decline for all three demographic groups, at least compared to the age 17 estimates.

Finally, the returns to wages in school and work and part-time employment from an extra year

working while attending college are markedly reduced and imprecisely estimated when imple-

menting an econometric strategy that deals with the dynamic aspects of selection and endogene-

ity.

       Using a model that accounts for dynamic selection also results in substantially different

conclusions about the returns to wages associated with college employment. For black men the

net returns are very small and almost always statistically insignificant. (The exception are the es-

timated net returns to wages associated with school and work.) For Hispanic and white men, the

estimated net returns are actually negative and precisely estimated. The meaning of these nega-

tive returns is unclear. As noted above and revealed in the estimates presented in Appendix B,

the net returns presented in Table 6 are calculated from specifications for the equations in (4.1)

and (4.4) where polynomials in the work experience and schooling variables are used to allow

for nonlinear effects of these variables. Based on some experimentation with these specifications,

it appears that the negative estimates of net returns to college work experience for Hispanic and

white men, when evaluated at older ages, result from using quadratic forms for the work and




                                                27
schooling experience variables.31 Thus, we caution against drawing strong conclusions based on

the negative signs of the estimated returns to working while in school (high school or college)

displayed in Table 6.

        In sum, the apparently high returns to working while in high school or college that have

been noted in the previous literature, at the very least, are not robust to dynamic selection bias

controls of the type we have employed. Whether we can conclude that the returns to this form of

work experience are, in fact, non-existent hinges on the appropriateness of our econometric

methodology for dealing with dynamic forms of selection bias. To be sure, our use of a person-

specific random effects (or factor structure) specification for characterizing the correlations of

the errors in our wage and activity choice equations is limiting in that it does impose restrictions

on the across-age covariance matrix for these disturbances. Furthermore, the robustness of this

procedure is potentially susceptible to the initial conditions problem noted by Heckman and his

collaborators. However, as we have noted above, we have attempted to minimize the latter issue

by accounting for all of the educational and work choices made by young men from age 13 on in

our empirical model. Moreover, we have used the relatively robust, non-parametric methods for

characterizing the mixing distribution for the random effects. These two features of our

econometric approach provide a relatively general framework within which to assess the returns

to early work experience on subsequent wages. Thus, we would conclude that our estimates of

these returns are likely to provide a more accurate picture of the net returns to experience ac-

quired while enrolled in school than previous studies.

        As a final note about the plausibility of the Dynamic Selection Control specification, con-

sider the differences in the estimated returns to going to school full-time (and not working)

31
   When we omitted the quadratic terms for the in-school and other work experience variables, the resulting net re-
turns estimates for Hispanic and white men were much smaller and not statistically significant when evaluated at
ages 22 and 27. However, the coefficient on these quadratic terms tend to be precisely estimated and are jointly sig-
nificant, which is why we included them in the results we present in Appendix B and, as a result, why we used them


                                                        28
guided by the three econometric specifications. The returns to full-time schooling are markedly

larger based on the Dynamic Selection Control model as compared to those derived from the Se-

lection on Observables and Contemporaneous Control specifications. For example, the annual

wage returns to full-time schooling associated with full-time employment range from 9.9 to 14.0

percent for blacks, 13.2 to 18.2 percent for Hispanics and 11.3 to 15.3 percent for whites in the

first two model specifications. In contrast, the estimates based on the Dynamic Selection Control

specification imply that devoting full-time to school has much bigger payoffs than working while

in high school or college. This differential is especially large for both minority groups. In fact,

the returns to full-time schooling, especially high school, tend to be as large, if not larger, than

the returns to full-time work experience, even at older ages. While not conclusive, the absolute

and relative size of the returns to schooling associated with the Dynamic Selection Control model

appear to be quite consistent with recent empirical estimates in the returns to schooling litera-

ture.32

6.      Conclusion

           In this paper we have assessed the robustness of earlier findings about the impacts of

working while enrolled in school on subsequent wages of young men in the U.S. In particular,

we have examined how robust these findings are to a particular method of controlling for person-

specific unobserved sources of heterogeneity across young men. Our findings clearly suggest

that previous conclusions about the sizeable and persistent returns to subsequent wages from

working while enrolled in high school or college depends on how one accounts for dynamic

forms of selection (and endogeneity) bias, at least for young men. To be sure, attempts to en-

courage the acquisition of work experience to facilitate the transition from school to work may



to calculate the net returns presented in Table 6.
32
     See, for example, Card (1998) for a summary of this evidence.


                                                          29
have positive benefits for some youth, particularly disadvantaged and/or non-college bound

youth. However, our evidence suggests that high wage benefits later in life are much less clear.

Moreover, our results also indicate that efforts to increase a young man’s skills via full-time

schooling may have greater payoffs to subsequent wage attainment than will encourage youth to

combine school with work. Finally, our findings provide further support for the need to account

for dynamic forms of selection bias when analyzing the returns to schooling or other forms of

experience recently noted by Cameron and Heckman (1998).




                                              30
                                        References

Ahituv, A., M. Tienda, and V. J. Hotz (1998), “Pathways From School To Work Among Black,
       Hispanic and White Young Men in the 1980’s,” Unpublished manuscript, December
       1998.

Ahituv, A., M. Tienda, L. Xu, and V. J. Hotz (1994), “Initial Labor Market Experiences of
       Black, Hispanic and White Men,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago, June
       1994.

Barone, F. (1993), “The Effects of Part-Time Employment on Academic Performance,” NASSP
      Bulletin 77, 67-73.

Bound, J., D. Jaeger, and R. Baker (1995), “Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
      When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Vari-
      able is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(43), 443-450.

Cameron, S. and J. Heckman (1992), “The Role of Family, Labor Markets and Public Policy in
      Accounting for Minority Schooling Attainment,” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
      Chicago, December 1992.

Cameron, S. and J. Heckman (1993), “The Nonequivalence of High School Equivalents,” Jour-
      nal of Labor Economics, 11(1), Part 1, January 1993, 1-47.

Cameron, S. and J. Heckman (1998), “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias: Mod-
      els and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,” Journal of Political Economy,
      106, 262-333.

Card, D. (1998), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Eco-
       nomics, Vol. III, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam: North-Holland Press,
       forthcoming.

Carr, R., J. Wright; and C. Brody (1996), “Effects of High School Work Experience a Decade
       Later: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study.” Sociology of Education, 69:66-
       81.

Chaplin, D. and J. Hannaway (1997), “High School Employment: Meaningful Connections for
       At-Risk Youth,” Unpublished Manuscript, Urban Institute, 1997.

D’Amico, R. (1984), “Does Employment During High School Impair Academic Progress?” So-
     ciology of Education, 57(3), 152-64.

Eckstein, Z. and K. Wolpin (1989), “The Specification and Estimation of Dynamic Stochastic
       Discrete Choice Models,” Journal of Human Resources, 24, 562-598.

Ehrenberg, R. and D. Sherman (1987), “Employment While in College, Academic Achievement
      and Postcollege Outcomes,” Journal of Human Resources, 22(1), 1-24.

Flinn, C. and J. Heckman (1982a), “Models for the Analysis of Labor Force Dynamics,” in Ad-
        vances in Econometrics, Vol. 1, eds. R. Basmann and G. Rhodes, Greenwich, CT: JAI


                                            31
       Press, 35-95.

Flinn, C. and J. Heckman (1982b), “New Methods for Analyzing Structural Models of Labor
       Force Dynamics.” Journal of Econometrics, 18, 115-168.

Gade, E. and L. Peterson (1980), “A Comparison of Working and Non-Working High School
      Students on School Performance, Socioeconomic Status and Self-Esteem,” Vocational
      Guidance Quarterly, 29, 65-69.

Greenberger, E. and L. Steinberg (1986), When Teenagers Work: The Psychological and Social
      Costs of Adolescent Employment, New York: Basic Books.

Gritz, M. and T. MaCurdy (1992), “Participation in Low-Wage Labor Markets by Young Men,”
       Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University, September 1992.

Heckman, J. (1974), “Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 42,
     679-694.

Heckman, J. (1976), “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selec-
     tion and Limited Dependent Variables and A Simple Estimator for Such Models,” Annals
     of Economic and Social Measurement, 5/4, pp. 475-92.

Heckman, J. (1981a), “Statistical Models of Discrete Panel Data,” in Structural Analysis of Dis-
     crete Data with Econometric Applications, eds. D. McFadden and C. Manski, Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press, 114-178.

Heckman, J. (1981b), “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Conditions
     in Estimating a Discrete Time–Discrete Data Stochastic Process,” in Structural Analysis
     of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, eds. D. McFadden and C. Manski,
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 179-197.

Heckman, J. (1982), “Heterogeneity and State Dependence,” in Studies in Labor Markets, ed. S.
     Rosen, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. and V. J. Hotz (1989), “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods
     for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training,” Journal
     of the American Statistical Association, 48(408), 862-874.

Heckman, J. and R. Robb (1985), “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Interven-
     tions,” in Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, eds. J. Heckman and B. Singer,
     New York: Cambridge University Press, 156-245.

Heckman, J. and B. Singer (1984), “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional As-
     sumptions in Econometric Models of Duration Analysis,” Econometrica, 52, 271-320.

Hotz, V. J. and M. Tienda (1994), “Education and Employment in a Diverse Society: Generating
       Inequality through the School-to-Work Transition,” Unpublished Manuscript, University
       of Chicago, April 1994.

Hotz, V.J. and R. Miller (1993), “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dy-


                                              32
       namic Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 497-529.

Hotz, V.J., R. Miller, S. Sanders, and J. Smith (1994), “A Simulation Estimator for Dynamic
       Models of Discrete Choice,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 265-289.

Keane, M. and K. Wolpin (1994), “The Solution and Estimation of Discrete Choice Dynamic
       Programming Models by Simulation and Interpolation: Monte Carlo Evidence,” Unpub-
       lished Manuscript, University of Minnesota, January 1994.

Kilburn, R. (1993), “Minority Representation in the U.S. Military,” Unpublished Ph.D. Disserta-
       tion, University of Chicago.

Lillydahl, J. (1990), “Academic Achievement and Part-Time Employment of High School Stu-
       dents,” Journal of Economic Education, 21, 307-16.

Lynch, L. (1989), “The Youth Labor Market in the 80s: Determinants of Re-Employment Prob-
       abilities for Young Men and Women,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXI(1),
       February 1989, 37-45.

Mare, R. and C. Winship (1984), “The Paradox of Lessening Racial Inequality and Joblessness
      among Black Youth: Enrollment, Enlistment, and Employment, 1964-1981,” American
      Sociological Review, 49, February 1984, 39-55.

Marsh, H. (1991), “Employment during High School: Character Building or a Subversion of
      Academic Goals?” Sociology of Education, 64, 172-89.

Meyer, R. and D. Wise (1982), “High School Preparation and Early Labor Force Experience,” in
       The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes and Consequences, eds. R. Free-
       man and D. Wise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 227-339.

Mortimer, J. and M. Finch (1986), “The Effects of Part-Time Work on Adolescent Self-Concept
      and Achievement,” in Becoming A Worker, eds. K. Borman and J. Reisman, Norwood,
      NJ: Ablex, 66-89.

Ruhm, C. (1997), “Is High School Employment Consumption or Investment?” Journal of Labor
      Economics, 14(4), 1997, 735-776.

Rust, J. (1994), “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in Handbook of Econo-
        metrics, Vol. 4, eds. R. Engle and D. McFadden, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 3082-3143.

Sanders, S. (1995), “A Model of Welfare Dependence,” Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Univer-
       sity of Chicago.

Schoenhals, M., Tienda, M., and B. Schneider (1998). “The Educational and Personal Conse-
      quences of Adolescent Employment,” Social Forces, 77(2), 1998, 723-761.

Smith, M. (1985), “Early Labor Market Experiences of Youth and Subsequent Wages,” Ameri-
       can Journal of Economics and Sociology, 44, 391-400.

Stephenson, S. (1981), “In-School Labour Force Status and Post-School Wage Rates of Young
       Men,” Applied Economics, 13, 279-302.

                                              33
Stern, D. and Y.-F. Nakata (1989), “Characteristics of High School Students’ Paid Jobs and Em-
        ployment Experience after Graduation,” in Adolescence and Work: Influences of Social
        Structure, Labor Markets, and Culture, eds. D. Stern and D. Eichnorn, Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
        baum, 189-233.

Stevenson, W. (1978), “The Relationship between Early Work Experience and Future Employ-
       ability,” in The Lingering Crisis of Youth Unemployment, eds. A. Adams and G. Man-
       gum, Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 93-124.

Tienda, M. and A. Ahituv. (1996), “Ethnic Differences in School Departure: Does Youth Em-
       ployment Promote or Undermine Educational Achievement?” in Of Heart and Mind: So-
       cial Policy Essays in Honor of Sar Levitan, eds. G. Mangum and S. Mangum, Kalama-
       zoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 93-110.

Wolpin, K. (1989), “Black-White Differences in Early Labor Force Careers of Men,” Journal of
      Political Economy, 633-649.




                                               34
                         Table 1: Work and Schooling Experiences of Young Men, Selected Ages1
                                               [Data Source: NLSY79]

                                                                                           Black        Hispanic        White     Full
                                                                                                                                Sample3
Proportion Having Experienced Various Activities by Age 28:

Worked while in High School                                                                 0.85           0.88          0.93    0.92
Attended College                                                                            0.31           0.28          0.45    0.42
Worked while in College, if Attended College                                                0.85           0.89          0.89    0.88
Worked Part-Time while Not Going to School                                                  0.70           0.66          0.53    0.57
Worked Full-Time                                                                            0.74           0.83          0.86    0.84
Enlisted in the Military                                                                    0.19           0.10          0.14    0.15
Involved in Other Activities                                                                0.40           0.36          0.22    0.26

Years of Experience Accumulated in Various Activities by Age 28:

Ave. No. Yrs. of High School & Worked Part-Time2                                           2.25           2.44          2.62     2.55
Ave. No. Yrs. of College & Worked Part-Time, if Attended College 2                         2.45           2.68          3.10     3.01
Ave. No. of Grades Completed                                                              12.47          12.09         13.36    13.13
Ave. No. Yrs. Attended School since Age 13                                                 7.30           7.00          7.73     7.61
Ave. No. Yrs. of Non-School Related Part-Time Work2                                        2.22           2.13          1.58     1.71
Ave. No. Yrs. of Full-Time Work2                                                           3.59           4.46          4.57     4.42
Ave. No. of Yrs. since Age 13 Spent in Some Work-Related Activity4                         8.47           9.42          9.47     9.56
Ave. No. Yrs. in Military2                                                                 0.79           0.46          0.63     0.64
Ave. No. Yrs. in Other Activities2                                                         0.97           0.74          0.41     0.52
Number of Observations                                                                     571            797          1,265    2,573
1
  Standard deviations in parentheses.
2
  Years of experience measured from age 13 on.
3
  Full sample estimates use population weights to account for the oversampling of blacks and Hispanics in the NLSY79.
4
  Average of years spent in school-related and non-school-related work activities. It does not include time in the military.




                                                                       35
Table 2: Average Hourly Wage Rates by Employment-Enrollment Status, at Selected Ages
                              [Data Source: NLSY79]

                          Number of                                                Mean       Mean
                                                                   Did Not
                           Observa-               Worked                         Difference Difference
                                                                    Work
                              tions                                              in Levels   in Logs
       Work Status in High School:1
       At Age 17
       Hispanic                438                   3.99            4.09         -0.09          -0.061
       Black (N = 631)         631                   3.93            4.47         -0.54          -0.007
       White                 1,138                   3.72            3.84         -0.12          -0.035
       Full Sample           2,207                   3.77            4.02         -0.26          -0.039

       At Age 22
       Hispanic                       463            6.57            6.66         -0.09**         0.161*
       Black                          665            5.87            5.27          0.60*          0.068
       White                        1,125            6.74            5.70          1.04**         0.139**
       Full Sample                  2,253            6.61            5.67          0.94***        0.141***

       At Age 27
       Hispanic                       429            9.82            8.26          1.56*          0.194**
       Black                          623            8.60            8.91         -0.31          -0.016
       White                        1,089           11.17           10.27          0.90           0.181**
       Full Sample                  2,141           10.75            9.69          1.05           0.172***

       Work Status in College:2
       At Age 22
       Hispanic                 133                  6.80            5.92          0.87           0.229
       Black                    199                  6.15            6.08          0.07           0.037
       White                    501                  6.62            6.66         -0.04           0.037
       Full Sample              833                  6.58            6.55          0.03           0.050

       At Age 27
       Hispanic                       118           11.36            7.84          3.58**         0.479**
       Black                          187           10.37            8.59          1.79*          0.168
       White                          491           13.06           10.56          2.50***        0.211***
       Full Sample                    796           12.72           10.19          2.53***        0.224***
       1
        Calculated for all men in sample.
       2
        Calculated only for men who attended college.
       “*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes signifi-
       cant at 1% level.




                                                         36
           Table 3: Employment Rates, Accumulated Work Experience and Grades Completed
                         by Employment-Enrollment Status, at Selected Ages
                                       [Data Source: NLSY79]

                                Work Status in High School1                                      Work Status in College2
                         No. of               Did Not     Mean                       No. of                 Did Not       Mean
                         Obs.    Worked        Work     Difference                   Obs.        Worked       Work      Difference
Employment Rates:
At Age 17
Hispanic                  509          0.83            0.21            0.61***
Black                     796          0.74            0.10            0.64***
White                   1,258          0.85            0.12            0.73***
Full Sample             2,563          0.84            0.13            0.71***
At Age 22:
Hispanic                  499          0.87            0.51            0.36***        138          0.91            0.56   0.36***
Black                     781          0.77            0.61            0.16***        234          0.81            0.42   0.39***
White                   1,223          0.85            0.75            0.11**         545          0.89            0.50   0.38***
Full Sample             2,503          0.84            0.68            0.16***        928          0.88            0.50   0.38***
At Age 27:
Hispanic                  459          0.91            0.75            0.16**         122          0.97            0.60   0.37***
Black                     717          0.83            0.72            0.11**         217          0.84            0.55   0.29***
White                   1,145          0.92            0.81            0.11**         514          0.95            0.67   0.28***
Full Sample             2,321          0.91            0.78            0.13**         853          0.94            0.65   0.29***

Grades Completed:
By Age 18:
Hispanic                              10.67            9.68            0.99***
Black                                 10.94           10.63            0.31*
White                                 11.29           10.60            0.68***
Full Sample                           11.20           10.51            0.68***
By Age 23:
Hispanic                              11.78           10.42            1.36***                   14.34           12.32    2.02***
Black                                 12.15           11.70            0.45*                     14.51           12.46    2.04***
White                                 12.97           11.36            1.61***                   15.03           12.74    2.29***
Full Sample                           12.77           11.35            1.42***                   14.94           12.68    2.25***
By Age 28:
Hispanic                              12.23           10.78            1.45***                   15.00           13.15    1.85***
Black                                 12.51           12.21            0.30                      14.86           13.72    1.14***
White                                 13.44           11.98            1.47***                   15.68           13.69    1.99***
Full Sample                           13.23           11.93            1.30***                   15.56           13.67    1.89***
1
 Calculated for all men in sample.
2
 Calculated only for men who attended college.
“*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                                     37
                                                        Table 3 (Continued)

                          Work Status in High School1                                            Work Status in College2
                   No. of               Did Not     Mean                             No. of                 Did Not       Mean
                   Obs.    Worked        Work     Difference                         Obs.        Worked       Work      Difference
Years Attended School:
By Age 18:
Hispanic                               4.80            4.53            0.27**
Black                                  4.93            4.77            0.16*
White                                  4.88            4.70            0.18**
Full Sample                            4.88            4.70            0.18***
By Age 23:
Hispanic                               6.83            5.61            1.22***                     8.78            7.00   1.78***
Black                                  7.08            6.46            0.62***                     8.86            6.56   2.30***
White                                  7.33            5.93            1.40***                     9.00            6.50   2.49***
Full Sample                            7.26            6.05            1.21***                     8.97            6.53   2.44***
By Age 28:
Hispanic                               7.15            5.62            1.53***                    9.85             7.46   2.39***
Black                                  7.40            6.70            0.70**                     9.76             6.42   3.34***
White                                  7.84            6.01            1.83***                   10.03             6.76   3.27***
Full Sample                            7.73            6.17            1.56***                    9.99             6.74   3.25***

Years of Non-School Related Part-Time Work Experience:
By Age 23:
Hispanic                               1.11            1.47           -0.36                        0.35            0.69   -0.34
Black                                  1.08            1.06            0.01                        0.26            0.67   -0.41**
White                                  0.81            1.23           -0.42**                      0.20            0.71   -0.51***
Full Sample                            0.87            1.20           -0.34***                     0.22            0.71   -0.49***
By Age 28:
Hispanic                               2.05            2.83           -0.78*                       1.06            1.48   -0.41
Black                                  2.20            2.31           -0.10                        1.09            1.37   -0.27
White                                  1.52            2.45           -0.92***                     0.80            1.57   -0.78***
Full Sample                            1.65            2.44           -0.79***                     0.84            1.54   -0.70***

Years of Full-Time Work Experience:
By Age 23:
Hispanic                               1.53            1.03            0.51**                      0.69            0.91   -0.22
Black                                  1.04            0.74            0.30                        0.55            0.42    0.14
White                                  1.33            1.30            0.03                        0.57            0.99   -0.42**
Full Sample                            1.30            1.11            0.19                        0.57            0.91   -0.33**
By Age 28:
Hispanic                               4.60            3.14            1.47***                     3.65            3.18   0.47
Black                                  3.71            2.91            0.79**                      3.13            1.97   1.16**
White                                  4.62            3.78            0.84**                      3.62            3.02   0.59
Full Sample                            4.49            3.47            1.02***                     3.57            2.88   0.68**
1
 Calculated for all men in sample.
2
 Calculated only for men who attended college.
“*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                                     38
Table 4: Personal and Family Background Characteristics by Employment-Enrollment Status,
                                     at Selected Ages
                                  [Data Source: NLSY79]

                              Work Status in High School1 Work Status in College2
                                       Did Not     Mean         Did Not      Mean
                              Worked    Work Difference Worked   Work Difference
     AFQT Test Score:
     Hispanic                   56.32           41.80        14.52***           72.03           52.15       19.88***
     Black                      47.34           47.74        -0.40              61.11           49.95       11.16***
     White                      72.58           62.81         9.77***           84.27           73.87       10.40***
     Full Sample                67.92           56.20        11.72***           81.17           69.60       11.57***

     Mother’s Educational Attainment:
     Hispanic           8.66       7.04                        1.62***          10.34            8.94         1.40
     Black             11.14      10.90                        0.24             12.32           11.12         1.20***
     White             12.12      11.26                        0.86***          13.11           11.73         1.38***
     Full Sample       11.76      10.74                        1.02***          12.90           11.52         1.38***

     Family Income in 1979 (1000 of $):
     Hispanic          14.02       11.83                       2.19             18.92           15.85         3.07
     Black             11.38       11.64                      -0.26             14.12            9.12         5.00***
     White             23.38       18.57                       4.81***          28.09           22.46         5.63***
     Full Sample       21.04       16.24                       4.80***          26.12           20.53         5.59***

     In Female Headed Household at Age 14:
     Hispanic          0.24        0.24     0.00                                 0.21            0.31        -0.10
     Black             0.35        0.33     0.02                                 0.33            0.35        -0.02
     White             0.09        0.05     0.04                                 0.09            0.11        -0.02
     Full Sample       0.14        0.15    -0.01                                 0.12            0.15        -0.03
     1
      Calculated for all men in sample.
     2
      Calculated only for men who attended college.
     “*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                              39
Table 5: Means of Exogenous Variables Used in (Log) Wage Equation and Activity Choice Estimation
                               (Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
                                     [Data Source: NLSY79]

                           Variable                       Black      Hispanic    White
       Foreign Born                                        0.02        0.23       0.02
                                                          (0.13)      (0.42)     (0.14)
       AFQT Score                                          47.40      54.77       72.02
                                                          (18.29)    (20.65)     (19.37)
          Percentage Missing AFQT Score                     3.60       5.90        4.30
       Mother’s Educational Attainment                    11.11        8.48      12.07
                                                          (2.49)      (4.33)     (2.32)
          Percentage Missing Mother’s Education            9.20       10.00       4.50
       Father’s Educational Attainment                    10.61        8.98      12.51
                                                          (3.18)      (4.71)     (3.24)
          Percentage Missing Father’s Education           26.20       21.40       6.70
       Family Income in 1978 (1000’s of 1982$)            11.41       13.77       23.04
                                                          (8.36)     (10.37)     (13.82)
          Percentage Missing Family Income                19.50       17.20       18.00
       In Female-Headed Family at Age 14                    0.35       0.24        0.09
                                                           (0.48)     (0.43)      (0.28)
       State UE Rate                                        2.82        3.05       3.00
                                                           (0.94)      (1.10)     (1.05)
          Percentage Missing UE Rate                        8.50        7.00       7.10
       Growth Rate in County Employment                     0.017       0.024      0.022
                                                           (0.030)     (0.028)    (0.032)
       Growth Rate in County Manu. Employment               0.011       0.013      0.013
                                                           (0.017)     (0.012)    (0.017)
       Growth Rate in County Service Sector Empl.           0.001       0.003      0.002
                                                           (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.012)
          Percentage Missing County Empl. Growth Data       1.10        1.10       1.00
       County Income/Worker                                11.96      12.26       12.20
                                                           (3.05)     (3.53)      (2.93)
       County Income/Worker in Manu. Sector                22.31      21.88       22.74
                                                           (6.20)     (5.49)      (5.21)
       County Income/Worker in Service Sector              13.50      14.29       12.80
                                                           (2.90)     (2.99)      (2.48)
          Percent. Missing County Income/Worker Data        9.10       4.90       12.60
       Percentage of Sample in Ethnic/Racial Group        15.03        7.23      77.73
       Number of Individuals in Sample                      797         511       1,265
       Number of Person Years                             12,364      7,890      19,569




                                                     40
                     Table 6: Effects of an Additional Year of School, Work and Other Types of Experience on Wages Rates
                                                    (Asymptotic Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                                                            Panel A: Blacks

                                                                                         Change in log of Wage Associated with:
                                                          School & Work                           Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                                             Contemp.   Dynamic                         Contemp.    Dynamic                    Contemp.   Dynamic
                                              Selection on                               Selection on                           Selection on
       An Additional Year Spent in:                          Selection  Selection                       Selection   Selection                  Selection  Selection
                                              Observables                                Observables                            Observables
                                                              Control    Control                         Control     Control                    Control    Control
Evaluated at Age 17:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .014          .009          .029*          .043**        .034**        .100***    .033***     .021**       .099***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)         -.001         -.006         -.002           .010         -.001          .085***    .061***     .045***      .116***
Part-Time Work Only                             .036          .054          .041           .055***       .038*         .044***    .026***     .021***      .019**
Full-Time Work Only                             .209***       .218**        .190***        .040***       .055***       .051***    .101***     .065***      .094***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.015         -.015*        -.031*         -.034         -.035***      -.015       .029***     .024***      .017

Evaluated at Age 22:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .047***       .047***       .069***        .065***       .057***       .128***    .048***     .038***      .132***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .046***       .047***       .055***        .056***       .050***       .105***    .072***     .060***      .133***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)              .110***       .107***       .115***        .063***       .067***       .097***    .099***     .095***      .136***
Part-Time Work Only                             .030          .045*         .034           .052***       .037*         .042***    .028***     .023***      .021***
Full-Time Work Only                             .182***       .192***       .166***        .041***       .053***       .051***    .094***     .063***      .088***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.001          .0001        -.015          -.008         -.007         -.023       .023***     .022***      .0001
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb            .063***       .060***       .045**        -.002          .009         -.031       .051***     .056***      .004

Evaluated at Age 27:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)             .055***        .055***        .079***     .069***         .062***      .134***   .052***     .042***      .140***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)           .054***        .056***        .064***     .062***         .056***      .111***   .075***     .064***      .139***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)               .117***        .114***        .122***     .068***         .071***      .103***   .101***     .096***      .141***
Part-Time Work Only                              .022           .034*          .025        .048***         .036**       .039***   .031***     .026***      .023***
Full-Time Work Only                              .093***        .100***        .087***     .043***         .044***      .051***   .072***     .057***      .067***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola        -.001           .001          -.014       -.008           -.006        -.023      .023***     .021***     -.001
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb             .062***        .059***        .044**     -.001            .009        -.031      .049***     .054***      .001
a
  Estimate is difference between “High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
b
  Estimate is difference between “College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
“*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                                                    41
                                                                         Table 6: (Continued)

                                                                          Panel B: Hispanics

                                                                                           Change in log of Wage Associated with:
                                                          School & Work                             Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                                             Contemp.   Dynamic                           Contemp.    Dynamic                    Contemp.   Dynamic
                                              Selection on                                 Selection on                           Selection on
       An Additional Year Spent in:                          Selection  Selection                         Selection   Selection                  Selection  Selection
                                              Observables                                  Observables                            Observables
                                                              Control    Control                           Control     Control                    Control    Control
Evaluated at Age 17:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .052***       .048***       .069***         .007         .000          .085***     .058***      .051***      .141***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .032          .026***       .033            .008        -.002          .085***     .083***      .070***      .132***
Part-Time Work Only                             .067***       .084***       .068***         .057***      .040          .047***     .026***      .020***      .015*
Full-Time Work Only                             .217***       .226***       .203***         .063***      .078          .074***     .115***      .078***      .112***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.020         -.021*        -.036            .001        -.002*         .000        .025**       .019**      -.009

Evaluated at Age 22:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .085***       .085***       .109***         .028         .023*         .113***     .074***      .068***      .175***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .079***       .080***       .090***         .055***      .049***       .106***     .094***      .085***      .149***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)              .090***       .087***       .094***         .046*        .050***       .078**      .087***      .086***      .101***
Part-Time Work Only                             .061***       .075***       .061***         .054***      .039**        .045***     .027***      .022***      .017**
Full-Time Work Only                             .191***       .200***       .179***         .063***      .076***       .074***     .108***      .077***      .105***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.007         -.006         -.020            .026         .026**       -.007        .019*        .017**      -.025
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb            .005          .002         -.015            .018         .027         -.035        .013         .017        -.073***

Evaluated at Age 27:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .093***        .094***        .119***     .033            .028**        .119***    .078***      .072***      .182***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .087***        .089***        .099***     .060***         .055***       .111***    .097***      .089***      .155***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)              .097***        .094***        .101***     .051**          .054***       .084***    .088***      .087***      .106***
Part-Time Work Only                             .053***        .064***        .052**      .050***         .038***       .042***    .030***      .026***      .019***
Full-Time Work Only                             .102***        .108***        .100***     .065***         .068***       .074***    .086***      .071***      .084***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.006          -.005          -.019        .027            .027**       -.008       .019*        .017**      -.026
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb            .003           .000          -.017        .018            .026         -.035       .011         .015        -.076***
a
  Estimate is difference between “High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
b
  Estimate is difference between “College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
“*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                                                      42
                                                                         Table 6: (Continued)

                                                                            Panel C: Whites

                                                                                           Change in log of Wage Associated with:
                                                          School & Work                             Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                                             Contemp.   Dynamic                           Contemp.    Dynamic                    Contemp.   Dynamic
                                              Selection on                                 Selection on                           Selection on
       An Additional Year Spent in:                          Selection  Selection                         Selection   Selection                  Selection  Selection
                                              Observables                                  Observables                            Observables
                                                              Control    Control                           Control     Control                    Control    Control
Evaluated at Age 17:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .043***       .038***       .059***         .007        -.002          .085***     .041***      .030***     .113***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .035***       .029***       .035***         .026**       .016          .100***     .072***      .056***     .125***
Part-Time Work Only                             .069***       .086***       .070***         .077***      .060**        .070***     .056***      .049***     .041***
Full-Time Work Only                             .224***       .234***       .208***         .073***      .089***       .082***     .115***      .079***     .112***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola       -.009         -.010         -.024**          .019         .017          .014        .030***      .025***     .012

Evaluated at Age 22:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .077***       .076***       .099***         .028***      .021*         .113***     .057***      .048***      .146***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .082***       .082***       .091***         .073***      .067***       .120***     .082***      .071***      .142***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)              .074***       .072***       .078***         .077***      .081***       .111***     .105***      .102***      .122***
Part-Time Work Only                             .063***       .077***       .063***         .074***      .059***       .068***     .058***      .051***      .043***
Full-Time Work Only                             .197***       .207***       .185***         .073***      .087***       .082***     .109***      .077***      .106***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola        .005          .006         -.008            .045***      .046***       .007        .025***      .023***     -.004
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb           -.002         -.004         -.021            .049**       .060**       -.002        .048***      .054***     -.024**

Evaluated at Age 27:
Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade)            .084***        .085***        .109***     .033***         .026**        .119***    .060***      .052***      .153***
High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)          .090***        .091***        .101***     .078***         .073***       .126***    .085***      .074***      .148***
College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)              .081***        .079***        .086***     .082***         .086***       .117***    .106***      .103***      .127***
Part-Time Work Only                             .055***        .066***        .054***     .070***         .058***       .065***    .060***      .055***      .045***
Full-Time Work Only                             .108***        .116***        .105***     .076***         .079***       .082***    .086***      .072***      .084***
Net Return to Work while in High Schoola        .006           .006          -.008        .045***         .046***       .006       .025***      .022***     -.005
Net Return to Work while in Collegeb           -.004          -.006          -.023*       .050***         .059**       -.002       .046***      .051***     -.026***
a
  Estimate is difference between “High School & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
b
  Estimate is difference between “College & Work (& Gain Add. Grade)” and “Full-Time School (& Gain Add. Grade).”
“*” Denotes significant at 10% level; “**” Denotes significant at 5% level; and “***” Denotes significant at 1% level.




                                                                                      43
                                              Appendix A
                          The Non-Parametric Maximum Likelihood Estimator
                             for the Generalized Dynamic Selection Model

       The estimation of the multi-state, discrete choice model specified in equations (4.1) and

(4.4) through (4.8) is accomplished using the non-parametric maximum likelihood (NPML)

strategy proposed by Heckman and Singer (1984). Let ditj denote the indicator variable for the

choice of activity j by the ith individual at age t, where ditj =1 if activity j is chosen and ditj = 0

otherwise, where

                                                      J

                                                    ∑dj =1
                                                             itj   = 1, for all i, t .


Also let

                           θ = ( β 2′ , δ 2′ , β 3′ , δ 3′, β 4′ , δ 4′ , γ 1′, λ1′, γ 2′ , λ2′ ,K, γ 6′ , λ6′ )′,
                           π = (κ 2 , κ 3 , κ 5 , α1 ,..., α 6 )′

denote the vectors of equation parameters and factor loadings, respectively. The objects of esti-

mation are θ and π.

       Conditional on the ξi’s, the structure of the econometric model is a combination of a

standard discrete choice model with activity-specific wage regressions. We assume that the idio-

syncratic disturbances (the νitj’s and the ωitj’s) are normally distributed, where the νitj’s are as-

sumed to have unit variances. The conditional probability of choosing activity k, given ξi, Z itw− s ,

the X’s, θ and π, is given by

           (                                      )
      Pr d itk = 1 Z itw− s , X 2it ,θ , π , ξi ≡ Pitk (ξi )
                            ∞
                                                                                                                      (A.1)
                       =∫           Φ ( Ait1,k +η ) KΦ( Aitk −1,k + η )Φ ( Aitk +1,k +η ) K Φ( AitJ ,k +η )φ (η )dη
                            η =−∞


where Φ(⋅) and φ(⋅) are the standard normal distribution and density functions, respectively and

                 Aitj ,k = (γ ′j − γ k′ ) Z itw− s + (λ ′j − λk′ ) X 2it + (α j − α k )ξi , for all j,k, j≠k.

Note, too, that the density function characterizing the (log) wage equation is given by:


                                                                           44
                                                            φ ( Bitj′ ) , for all j′ = 2,3,4,                                              (A.2)

where

                                                            ln Witj′ − β ′j′ Z itw− s − δ ′j X 1it − κ j′ξi
                                                  Bitj′ =                                                      ,
                                                                                    σω   j′




and σ ω2 j′ is the variance of ωitj′. It follows that the contribution to the conditional (on ξi) likeli-

hood function for the (i,t)th observation is given by:

          l it (θ , π , ξi ) = [ Pit1 ]           [ Pit 2φ ( Bit 2 )] [ Pit 3φ ( Bit 3 )] [ Pit 4φ ( Bit 4 )] [ Pit 5 ] [ Pit 6 ]
                                          dit 1                     d it 2                        dit 3            dit 4   dit 5   dit 6
                                                                                                                                           (A.3)

           To form the unconditional likelihood function, one proceeds by using a discrete ap-

proximation to the distribution of ξi, letting the number of discrete values for the distribution, K,

as well as the locations of the random variable (the ξk’s, k = 1,...,K) and the associated probabili-

ties (pk ≡ Pr(ξi=ξk)) be free parameters that are estimated in conjunction with θ and π. In par-

ticular, the contribution for the ith individual to the unconditional likelihood function is:

                                                                                              K           Ti
                              l i (θ , π , ξ1 ,K, ξ K , p1 ,K , pK −1 ) = ∑∏ l it (θ , π , ξ k ) pk .                                      (A.4)
                                                                                              k =1 t =13


where Ti is the ith individual’s highest age available in the data, where Ti ≤ 28.33 The complete

(log) likelihood function is given by

                                                                             N
                  L(θ , π , ξ1 , K , ξ K , p1 , K , pK −1 ) = ∑ log l i (θ , π , ξ1 , K , ξ K , p1 , K , pK −1 ) .                         (A.5)
                                                                             i =1


           Because the “activity” choice component of our specification is a multinomial discrete

choice model, the standard requirements for model identification apply; in particular, we require

the imposition of a set of normalizations on parameters characterizing the Vitj’s. In our analysis,




33
     The number of points of support, K, is a chosen in the maximization of the likelihood function.




                                                                                     45
we normalize the coefficients associated with valuation function for Activity 1 (School Only) to

zero, i.e., γ1 = 0, λ1 = 0, and α1 = 0.




                                              46
                                                               Appendix B
                                               Coefficient Estimates for lnWage Equations
                              for Alternative Estimation for Models with and without Heterogeneity Control
                                                     [Data Source: NLSY79, 1978-92]

                                                   School & Work                       Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                          Selection Contemp.        Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic
                  Variables              on Observ- Selection       Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection
                                            ables    Control         Control     ables    Control           Control     ables    Control           Control
LnWage Equations:
κ (Factor Loading)                                                   0.7534***                              1.7449***                              2.3218***
                                                                    (0.0381)                               (0.0667)                               (0.0625)
Constant                                   1.4009***    1.5268***    1.1732***    1.2116***    1.3486***    0.2281       0.9249***    1.1601***   -0.0785
                                          (0.0958)     (0.1755)     (0.0980)     (0.1283)     (0.2558)     (0.1733)     (0.0696)     (0.1331)     (0.1102)
Black                                      0.1571**     0.1545**     0.1444*     -0.2624**    -0.2545**    -0.2312*     -0.0985      -0.0801      -0.1282
                                          (0.0717)     (0.0771)     (0.0736)     (0.1202)     (0.1246)     (0.1391)     (0.0707)     (0.0886)     (0.1023)
Hispanic                                  -0.1815**    -0.1872**    -0.1625*     -0.0771      -0.0893      -0.0800      -0.0662      -0.0954      -0.1092
                                          (0.0871)     (0.0875)     (0.0887)     (0.1389)     (0.1304)     (0.1462)     (0.0638)     (0.0864)     (0.0860)
Age = 14 in 1978                          -0.0045      -0.0050      -0.0075      -0.0352**    -0.0348*     -0.0320      -0.0089      -0.0102      -0.0061
                                          (0.0112)     (0.0124)     (0.0120)     (0.0174)     (0.0190)     (0.0224)     (0.0070)     (0.0109)     (0.0136)
Age = 15 in 1978                          -0.0221*     -0.0235*     -0.0195*     -0.0584***   -0.0594***   -0.0516**    -0.0205**    -0.0223**    -0.0089
                                          (0.0113)     (0.0126)     (0.0121)     (0.0171)     (0.0191)     (0.0218)     (0.0068)     (0.0112)     (0.0137)
Age = 16 in 1978                          -0.0187*     -0.0169      -0.0291**    -0.0189      -0.0170      -0.0536**    -0.0542***   -0.0538***   -0.0649***
                                          (0.0117)     (0.0135)     (0.0124)     (0.0179)     (0.0198)     (0.0228)     (0.0073)     (0.0115)     (0.0147)
Foreign Born                              -0.0035      -0.0047       0.0011       0.0034       0.0053       0.0242       0.0156       0.0128       0.0608**
                                          (0.0189)     (0.0194)     (0.0215)     (0.0309)     (0.0298)     (0.0394)     (0.0120)     (0.0168)     (0.0232)
AFQT                                       0.0005**     0.0003       0.0003       0.0038***    0.0040***    0.0017***    0.0031***    0.0033***    0.0010***
                                          (0.0002)     (0.0003)     (0.0002)     (0.0004)     (0.0006)     (0.0005)     (0.0001)     (0.0003)     (0.0003)
Missing AFQT                               0.0560**     0.0482       0.0665**     0.1225**     0.1294***    0.0471       0.1428***    0.1478***    0.0602*
                                          (0.0269)     (0.0339)     (0.0305)     (0.0410)     (0.0397)     (0.0536)     (0.0164)     (0.0265)     (0.0303)
State UE Rate                             -0.0065      -0.0064      -0.0065      -0.0262**    -0.0301***   -0.0311**    -0.0337***   -0.0336***   -0.0286***
                                          (0.0054)     (0.0055)     (0.0053)     (0.0097)     (0.0107)     (0.0097)     (0.0042)     (0.0056)     (0.0048)
Black × UE Rate                           -0.0119      -0.0123      -0.0098       0.0080       0.0077       0.0188       0.0175**     0.0195**     0.0093
                                          (0.0084)     (0.0084)     (0.0082)     (0.0138)     (0.0130)     (0.0148)     (0.0077)     (0.0093)     (0.0081)
Hispanic × UE Rate                        -0.0002       0.00003      0.0033      -0.0059      -0.0051       0.0086      -0.0194**    -0.0170**    -0.0166**
                                          (0.0099)     (0.0094)     (0.0101)     (0.0136)     (0.0128)     (0.0135)     (0.0071)     (0.0083)     (0.0082)
Missing UE Rate                           -0.0224      -0.0057      -0.0232      -0.1078*     -0.0893*     -0.1041**    -0.0868**    -0.0423      -0.1075***
                                          (0.0263)     (0.0343)     (0.0264)     (0.0563)     (0.0535)     (0.0516)     (0.0273)     (0.0314)     (0.0249)
Growth Rate in County Employment           0.0158       0.0220      -0.1262       0.6697*      0.6299*      0.2785       0.6595**     0.5175**    -0.1851
                                          (0.2229)     (0.2206)     (0.2213)     (0.3870)     (0.3473)     (0.3758)     (0.2338)     (0.2280)     (0.2110)
Growth Rate in County Manu. Employment     0.4619       0.5129       0.3761      -0.0827      -0.1203       0.0438      -0.2059      -0.3655      -0.1721
                                          (0.3410)     (0.3193)     (0.3360)     (0.5794)     (0.4289)     (0.5621)     (0.3944)     (0.2810)     (0.3219)




                                                                           47
                                                    School & Work                       Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                            Selection Contemp.       Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic
                Variables                  on Observ- Selection      Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection
                                              ables    Control        Control     ables    Control           Control     ables    Control           Control
Growth Rate in County Service Employmnt.   -0.0332      -0.0525       0.2491      -2.0080**    -1.8521**    -1.5242*     -0.1009       0.3359       0.0513
                                           (0.4964)     (0.4676)     (0.4865)     (0.9043)     (0.8000)     (0.8381)     (0.5499)     (0.5305)     (0.4474)
Missing County Employment Growth Data       0.2649***    0.2683***    0.2530***    0.3771***   -0.1887**     0.3481***    0.4503***   -0.1140**     0.3802***
                                           (0.0260)     (0.0749)     (0.0260)     (0.0350)     (0.0753)     (0.0445)     (0.0158)     (0.0506)     (0.0250)
County Income/Worker                        0.0105***    0.0100***    0.0102***    0.0037       0.0036       0.0058       0.0110***    0.0107***    0.0101***
                                           (0.0026)     (0.0030)     (0.0027)     (0.0039)     (0.0040)     (0.0045)     (0.0014)     (0.0021)     (0.0020)
County Income/Worker in Manu. Sector       -0.0010      -0.0010      -0.0004      -0.0012      -0.0012       0.0004       0.0014**     0.0016*      0.0014*
                                           (0.0010)     (0.0011)     (0.0010)     (0.0016)     (0.0016)     (0.0018)     (0.0006)     (0.0009)     (0.0009)
County Income/Worker in Service Sector      0.0163***    0.0165***    0.0152***    0.0236***    0.0236***    0.0176***    0.0172***    0.0174***    0.0127***
                                           (0.0025)     (0.0029)     (0.0026)     (0.0034)     (0.0037)     (0.0041)     (0.0014)     (0.0021)     (0.0020)
Missing County Income/Worker Data           0.2641***    0.2639***    0.2105***   -0.1791*      0.3763***   -0.1199      -0.1044*      0.4590***   -0.1051**
                                           (0.0486)     (0.0287)     (0.0497)     (0.0968)     (0.0400)     (0.0821)     (0.0528)     (0.0245)     (0.0506)
Grades Completed                           -0.1242***   -0.1369***   -0.1573***   -0.0556**    -0.0553**    -0.0992***   -0.0311**    -0.0407**    -0.1010***
                                           (0.0192)     (0.0254)     (0.0200)     (0.0227)     (0.0271)     (0.0289)     (0.0108)     (0.0168)     (0.0169)
Black × Grades Completed                    0.0002       0.0007       0.0001       0.0235**     0.0233*      0.0159       0.0204***    0.0191**     0.0168*
                                           (0.0104)     (0.0112)     (0.0109)     (0.0097)     (0.0122)     (0.0124)     (0.0057)     (0.0082)     (0.0092)
Hispanic × Grades Completed                 0.0285**     0.0290**     0.0232*      0.0272**     0.0278**     0.0215       0.0149**     0.0163*      0.0176*
                                           (0.0125)     (0.0125)     (0.0130)     (0.0124)     (0.0138)     (0.0147)     (0.0059)     (0.0085)     (0.0089)
(Grades Completed)2                         0.0060***    0.0065***    0.0071***    0.0033**     0.0034***    0.0048***    0.0024***    0.0027***    0.0052***
                                           (0.0008)     (0.0011)     (0.0009)     (0.0010)     (0.0012)     (0.0012)     (0.0004)     (0.0007)     (0.0006)
Years in School with No Work                0.0434**     0.0311       0.0643***   -0.0263      -0.0432       0.0803**     0.0077      -0.0022       0.0763***
                                           (0.0158)     (0.0220)     (0.0165)     (0.0239)     (0.0364)     (0.0326)     (0.0115)     (0.0158)     (0.0195)
Black × Yrs. of School & No Work           -0.0294**    -0.0300**    -0.0302**     0.0130       0.0125      -0.0009      -0.0292***   -0.0289***   -0.0303**
                                           (0.0121)     (0.0134)     (0.0126)     (0.0159)     (0.0168)     (0.0192)     (0.0072)     (0.0104)     (0.0121)
Hispanic × Yrs. of School & No Work        -0.0196      -0.0197      -0.0133      -0.0271      -0.0262      -0.0216       0.0023       0.0040       0.0109
                                           (0.0156)     (0.0158)     (0.0161)     (0.0202)     (0.0185)     (0.0235)     (0.0081)     (0.0113)     (0.0130)
(Yrs. of School & No Work)2                 0.0019       0.0035       0.0029*      0.0040*      0.0051       0.0021       0.0029**     0.0035**     0.0060**
                                           (0.0019)     (0.0026)     (0.0020)     (0.0025)     (0.0032)     (0.0035)     (0.0013)     (0.0017)     (0.0022)
Years of High School in which Worked        0.0409**     0.0369***    0.0521***    0.0085      -0.0053       0.1105***    0.0580***    0.0457***    0.1321***
                                           (0.0136)     (0.0136)     (0.0137)     (0.0172)     (0.0274)     (0.0205)     (0.0079)     (0.0123)     (0.0131)
Black × Yrs. of HS & Work                  -0.0358**    -0.0356***   -0.0367**    -0.0401**    -0.0399**    -0.0305*     -0.0307***   -0.0299***   -0.0260**
                                           (0.0125)     (0.0127)     (0.0130)     (0.0149)     (0.0163)     (0.0181)     (0.0060)     (0.0094)     (0.0104)
Hispanic × Yrs. of HS & Work               -0.0313**    -0.0314**    -0.0250*     -0.0457**    -0.0459**    -0.0356*     -0.0032      -0.0019      -0.0104
                                           (0.0141)     (0.0143)     (0.0148)     (0.0165)     (0.0182)     (0.0202)     (0.0073)     (0.0102)     (0.0116)
(Yrs. of HS & Work)2                        0.0046*      0.0056**     0.0055**     0.0085**     0.0097***   -0.0015      -0.0007       0.0003      -0.0029*
                                           (0.0024)     (0.0025)     (0.0024)     (0.0027)     (0.0034)     (0.0033)     (0.0013)     (0.0018)     (0.0020)
Years of College in which Worked            0.0571***    0.0542***    0.0676***    0.0510**     0.0552**     0.0939***    0.0795***    0.0813***    0.1007***
                                           (0.0153)     (0.0158)     (0.0153)     (0.0205)     (0.0241)     (0.0252)     (0.0075)     (0.0113)     (0.0109)
Black × Yrs. of College & Work              0.0359**     0.0348**     0.0363**    -0.0377**    -0.0379*     -0.0297      -0.0259**    -0.0264**    -0.0030
                                           (0.0140)     (0.0158)     (0.0142)     (0.0185)     (0.0200)     (0.0220)     (0.0082)     (0.0111)     (0.0120)
Hispanic × Yrs. of College & Work          -0.0124      -0.0137      -0.0076      -0.0582**    -0.0593***   -0.0543**    -0.0326***   -0.0326**    -0.0388**
                                           (0.0183)     (0.0175)     (0.0189)     (0.0192)     (0.0228)     (0.0231)     (0.0095)     (0.0129)     (0.0141)



                                                                            48
                                                 School & Work                      Part-Time Work Only                    Full-Time Work Only
                                       Selection Contemp.        Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic Selection Contemp.             Dynamic
                    Variables         on Observ- Selection       Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection on Observ- Selection         Selection
                                         ables    Control         Control     ables    Control           Control     ables    Control           Control
(Yrs. of College & Work)2              -0.0014      -0.0009      -0.0018       0.0016       0.0001       0.0002      -0.0018      -0.0025      -0.0021
                                       (0.0022)     (0.0025)     (0.0022)     (0.0035)     (0.0045)     (0.0041)     (0.0014)     (0.0019)     (0.0019)
Years of Part-Time Work & No School     0.0690***    0.0861***    0.0701**     0.0774***    0.0601**     0.0702***    0.0561***    0.0489***    0.0413***
                                       (0.0204)     (0.0272)     (0.0213)     (0.0120)     (0.0269)     (0.0101)     (0.0046)     (0.0069)     (0.0066)
Black × Yrs. of Part-Time Work         -0.0327      -0.0321      -0.0286      -0.0220**    -0.0223***   -0.0259***   -0.0298***   -0.0283***   -0.0223***
                                       (0.0268)     (0.0214)     (0.0272)     (0.0080)     (0.0078)     (0.0073)     (0.0046)     (0.0062)     (0.0062)
Hispanic × Yrs. of Part-Time Work      -0.0021      -0.0025      -0.0019      -0.0199*     -0.0200**    -0.0233**    -0.0306***   -0.0291***   -0.0263***
                                       (0.0231)     (0.0240)     (0.0240)     (0.0104)     (0.0087)     (0.0098)     (0.0052)     (0.0065)     (0.0069)
(Yrs. of Part-Time Work Only)2         -0.0039      -0.0055      -0.0045      -0.0022      -0.0005      -0.0013       0.0012       0.0016       0.0010
                                       (0.0041)     (0.0037)     (0.0042)     (0.0015)     (0.0028)     (0.0012)     (0.0009)     (0.0011)     (0.0010)
Years of Full-Time Work                 0.2246***    0.2349***    0.2093***    0.0728***    0.0894***    0.0818***    0.1156***    0.0789***    0.1125***
                                       (0.0113)     (0.0176)     (0.0119)     (0.0112)     (0.0266)     (0.0116)     (0.0053)     (0.0140)     (0.0035)
Black × Yrs. Of Full-Time Work         -0.0150      -0.0154      -0.0185      -0.0327***   -0.0343***   -0.0309**    -0.0143***   -0.0143***   -0.0179***
                                       (0.0155)     (0.0155)     (0.0172)     (0.0095)     (0.0091)     (0.0092)     (0.0040)     (0.0041)     (0.0026)
Hispanic × Yrs. of Full-Time Work      -0.0067      -0.0074      -0.0055      -0.0102      -0.0109      -0.0079      -0.0006      -0.0007      -0.0004
                                       (0.0134)     (0.0145)     (0.0143)     (0.0089)     (0.0089)     (0.0087)     (0.0039)     (0.0041)     (0.0025)
(Yrs. of Full-Time Work)2              -0.0162***   -0.0166***   -0.0145***    0.0004      -0.0015       0.0000      -0.0041***   -0.0010      -0.0039***
                                       (0.0020)     (0.0024)     (0.0021)     (0.0015)     (0.0031)     (0.0016)     (0.0006)     (0.0012)     (0.0004)
Years in Military                       0.1483**     0.1569***    0.1471**     0.0223       0.0149       0.0738**     0.0456***    0.0444***    0.0639***
                                       (0.0459)     (0.0429)     (0.0501)     (0.0241)     (0.0249)     (0.0281)     (0.0113)     (0.0130)     (0.0173)
Black × Yrs. in Military                0.0070       0.0060       0.0062       0.0215       0.0203       0.0174       0.0204**     0.0187*      0.0261**
                                       (0.0349)     (0.0297)     (0.0360)     (0.0169)     (0.0172)     (0.0200)     (0.0080)     (0.0102)     (0.0126)
Hispanic × Yrs. in Military            -0.0330      -0.0357      -0.0125       0.0328       0.0345       0.0275      -0.0101      -0.0123      -0.0103
                                       (0.0371)     (0.0342)     (0.0483)     (0.0278)     (0.0238)     (0.0278)     (0.0104)     (0.0129)     (0.0158)
(Yrs. in Military)2                    -0.0176      -0.0177*     -0.0163      -0.0022      -0.0008      -0.0072       0.0017       0.0021       0.0009
                                       (0.0127)     (0.0101)     (0.0139)     (0.0052)     (0.0052)     (0.0060)     (0.0028)     (0.0025)     (0.0039)
Years in Other Activities              -0.0195      -0.0138      -0.0263      -0.0046      -0.0126       0.0206       0.0247***    0.0247**     0.0166
                                       (0.0493)     (0.0334)     (0.0488)     (0.0144)     (0.0204)     (0.0159)     (0.0070)     (0.0114)     (0.0133)
Black × Yrs. in Other Activities        0.0044       0.0082       0.0141       0.0181       0.0215       0.0195       0.0017       0.0030       0.0019
                                       (0.0563)     (0.0410)     (0.0551)     (0.0132)     (0.0155)     (0.0152)     (0.0085)     (0.0123)     (0.0131)
Hispanic × Yrs. in Other Activities     0.0132       0.0168       0.0119       0.0099       0.0121       0.0041      -0.0145*     -0.0137       0.0067
                                       (0.0711)     (0.0546)     (0.0693)     (0.0187)     (0.0190)     (0.0216)     (0.0098)     (0.0133)     (0.0156)
(Yrs. in Other Act.)2                   0.0105       0.0102       0.0088       0.0051**     0.0061**     0.0025      -0.0003      -0.0003       0.0015
                                       (0.0188)     (0.0081)     (0.0178)     (0.0024)     (0.0031)     (0.0026)     (0.0013)     (0.0021)     (0.0027)
  2
σω                                                               0.1411***                              0.1545***                              0.0908***
                                                                 (0.0014)                               (0.0021)                               (0.0006)
Cov(utj,εtj)                                        -0.0695                                -0.1083                                -0.2042***
                                                    (0.0773)                               (0.1567)                               (0.0726)
Log-Likelihood Function                              -44425.3    -41996.7
Number of Individuals                   2,573
Number of Person-Years                  39,823



                                                                        49
   Points of Support for Dynamic Selection Control Model
                                                   Probability
                                      Location
                                                     Mass
Support Point 1                        0.0000       0.0140***
                                                   (0.0037)
Support Point 2                        0.3146***    0.1752***
                                      (0.0121)     (0.0128)
Support Point 3                        0.4652***    0.4330***
                                      (0.0137)     (0.0165)
Support Point 4                        0.5979***    0.3094***
                                      (0.0160)     (0.0157)
Support Point 5                        0.7505***    0.0648***
                                      (0.0197)     (0.0072)
Support Point 6                        1.0000       0.0037




                            50
