                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ARE WHITES STILL “FLEEING”?
                              RACIAL PATTERNS AND ENROLLMENT
                                   SHIFTS IN URBAN PUBLIC
                                      SCHOOLS, 1987-1996

                                             Charles T. Clotfelter

                                            Working Paper 7290
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7290


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Charles T. Clotfelter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Whites Still “Fleeing”? Racial Patterns and
Enrollment Shifts in Urban Public Schools, 1987-1996
Charles T. Clotfelter
 NBER Working Paper No. 7290
August 1999
JEL No. R2, I2
                                              ABSTRACT

        The effect of interracial contact in public schools on the enrollment of whites has been an important
concern in assessments of desegregation since the 1970s. It has been feared that “white flight” -- meaning
exit from or avoidance of racially mixed public schools -- could undermine the racial contact that
desegregation policy seeks to enhance. This study examines this question using recent data. It also
expands coverage from large urban districts to entire metropolitan areas, paying attention to the spatial
context within which enrollment decisions are made. To do so, it examines data for 1987 and 1996 on
racial composition and enrollment in all schools and school districts in 238 metropolitan areas. The study
finds that white losses appear to be spurred both by interracial contact in districts where their children
attend school and by the opportunities available in metropolitan areas for reducing that contact.
Implications for metropolitan segregation are examined.


Charles T. Clotfelter
Box 90245
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0245
and NBER
Charles.Clotfelter@Duke.edu
7/27/99


                    Are Whites Still "Fleeing"? Racial Patterns and Enrollment

                             Shifts in Urban Public Schools, 1987-1996


                                         Charles T. Clotfelter


       In sharp contrast to the firestorm of controversy it generated into the 1 970s, school

desegregation has receded from prominence as a national issue in the last two decades. One

reason for its virtual disappearance has been the Supreme Court's clear resolve to place limits on

aggressive efforts to achieve and maintain racial balance in public schools.1 Yet school

desegregation survives as national policy, and most of the issues that surrounded its

implementation in the 1960s remain important today. Among the most significant issues is what

effect desegregation itself has on the tendency of white and middle class families to leave — or

avoid — racially mixed,     largely urban school districts. Such departures are important, of course,

because they tend to undercut desegregation, to the extent that they result in greater racial

disparities among districts.

          The aim of this paper is to examine recent changes in the racial composition and

enrollment levels in urban public schools and, in particular, the factors associated with white

losses. These white losses, sometimes dubbed "white flight," arise not only when white families

move from one district to another or enroll in private schools, but also when they simply avoid



          *
              I am grateftil to Jens Ludwig for helpftil comments and to Thomas Anderson, Cathleen
McHugh, and Randy Walsh for research assistance. c:\wp\x\metro\chdraft
moving into districts with high interracial contact. Utilizing data covering all public schools and

districts in a sample of metropolitan areas, the study assesses trends over the period 1987 to 1996

for all major districts in these metropolitan areas, not just central city districts. It examines

changes in white public school enrollments as well as changes in racial compositions, levels of

interracial contact, and segregation. The data, which are taken from the Department of

Education's Common Core of Data, include the enrollment by race and ethnic group of virtually

every public school in 238 metropolitan areas in both 1987 and 1996.2 In contrast, the

comparable data used in most previous research were collected only for selected districts, making

it necessary to restrict attention to large urban, mostly central city districts.3 The data used in the

current study cover all districts, thus making it feasible to obtain a complete picture of each

metropolitan area's public schools and to examine patterns over time in those metropolitan areas.

Thus it is possible to see if the kinds of patterns observed in the 1960s and 1970s are still

 evident, with the maturation of school desegregation as a policy. It is particularly interesting to

 trace the effects of recent demographic trends, including significant ethnic shifts arising from

 immigration, as well as public policies aimed at fostering integration. It will be important as

 well to reflect insofar as possible the tremendous heterogeneity among metropolitan areas — by

 size, region, age, number of central cities, and number of school districts. One dimension of

 heterogeneity is the physical distance separating districts. Fortunately, the data set's complete

 coverage of districts allows one to take into account the geographical proximity of districts to

 which whites might consider moving in order to escape high concentrations of nonwhites.

         The study addresses two sets of questions. First, it will be useftil to describe recent trends

 in enrollment and racial composition. Is the movement of whites out of central cities slowing or

                                                    2
accelerating? Are interracial contact and segregation increasing or decreasing? And, is there

evidence that the South, whose previous patterns were deeply influenced by the existence of legal

segregation in schools, is evincing patterns increasingly similar to the North? Second, it is

important to raise again the perennial question of whether and how desegregation contributes to

white enrollment losses. Is there evidence of tipping points in these losses, as previous research

has suggested?4 Do white reactions to interracial contact differ by nonwhite group?

        What makes these questions important to ask are the ramifications of racial patterns in

schools for socially significant outcomes. Racial contact in schools may affect such things as the

level and distribution of academic achievement in the population, racial attitudes, subsequent

social and economic outcomes of students, and patterns of residential integration.5 These

important issues, however, are beyond the scope of the present paper.

        Section I provides background for the analysis, including a brief review of related

statistical studies. Section II describes the data used and the variables defined in the current

 study. Section III presents and discusses regression analysis for a sample of districts, and section

 IV examines the implications for changes at the metropolitan level. There is a brief concluding

 section.



 I. Background

            Although the landmark Brown v. Board of Education was handed down in 1954, it was

 not until the late 1960s that many Southern school districts had undertaken substantial efforts to

 desegregate their schools. But when desegregation did take place, it typically produced dramatic

 changes in interracial contact. Between 1968 and 1972 the percentage of black students going to
schools with 90 to 100 percent minority enrollments fell from 78 to 25 percent in the South, by

far the biggest change in any region (Orfield 1983, p. 4). Concomitantly, the exposure of whites

to blacks increased, largely but not exclusively in the South.6 In urban areas this desegregation

often took the form of cross-town busing, a policy that was endorsed by the Supreme Court in its

1971 decision Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg Board of Education.



Research on Desegregation and "White Flight"

        One major concern that developed in the wake of this and other federal court decisions

was whether these actions would cause white families to leave desegregating districts, thereby

undercutting the potential for racial integration. To examine the question of whether school

desegregation itself caused "white flight,"7 James Coleman and two colleagues (Coleman et

a!. 1975) examined enrollments in a sample of districts data over time, concluding that larger

white enrollment declines were associated with declines in measured segregation and with higher

proportions of black students. Although this conclusion met with initial opposition, the bulk of

subsequent empirical research has supported the main thrust of that study.

        With a few exceptions, the empirical studies of the effect of desegregation on white

 enrollment have utilized school-level data on enrollment by race, collected since 1967 by the

 Office for Civil Rights (OCR), data which allow the calculation of indices of interracial contact

 and segregation as well as changes in total enrollment. The unit of observation has generally

 been the school district, with most studies focusing on urban districts. In general, the studies

 have attempted to distinguish changes in white enrollment that are attributable to desegregation

 policies from those that would have occurred in their absence. That is, since whites have been

                                                  4
declining as a percentage of all public school students in the country, and many central cities

have witnessed the decline in white population for years, it would be incorrect to attribute all of

those declines to desegregation policies. Two studies that sought to assess the Coleman et al.

results were Clotfelter (1979) and Farley, Richards, and Wurdock (1980), the former reanalyzing

the original data set and the latter using a sample of 104 urban school districts. Both studies

supported the basic Coleman et al. findings.

        Subsequent studies likewise suggested that white enrollments are sensitive to the

presence of nonwhites in the public schools. Wilson (1985) contended that racial contact,

irrespective of the form of the policy, is the central cause of such losses. But a number of

subsequent studies concluded that the form of the policy was important, with white losses being

greater under mandatory desegregation plans than under voluntary plans. Welch and Light

(1987), Rossell (1990, 1994), and Rossell and Armor (1996) all compared the effects of different

desegregation techniques, and concluded that mandatory plans such as pairing or clustering lead

to bigger white losses. Some recent evidence offered by Armor (1995, p.1 79) further supports

the hypothesis that whites are sensitive to changes in racial composition in schools attended by

their children. Focusing on formerly minority schools to which whites were assigned as part of

mandatory desegregation plans, Armor shows abnormally high proportions of "no-shows" among

the whites. Similar sensitivity to racial composition is apparent in Lankford and Wyckoff's

(1997) study using the school choices of individual families in metropolitan areas in New York

State. All of this empirical work supports the working assumption stated by James (1989, p.

966): "white parents make decisions based on the actual or potential exposure of their children to

blacks, not how equally students are assigned to schools by race."

                                                  5
Recent Patterns and Trends

       Before analyzing recent data on school racial patterns and white enrollment changes, it is

useful to consider broader patterns and trends in metropolitan areas. A basic fact is that public

schools at the metropolitan level tend to be quite segregated, in that the observed patterns of

enrollment by school depart markedly from racial balance. This divergence is greatest in the

largest metropolitan areas. By region, metropolitan-level segregation tends to be most severe in

the Northeast and Midwest, least in the West and South. The bulk of this observed segregation

can be attributed to disparities in racial composition among the various school districts in

metropolitan areas, as opposed to segregation within districts.8 Thus a considerable portion of

existing school segregation in metropolitan areas is associated with segregated housing patterns.

Combined with the Supreme Court's decision in the 1974 Milliken v. Bradley case, this

residential segregation virtually guarantees public school segregation in urban America for the

foreseeable future. Although Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor (1999) find that neighborhood

segregation declined after 1970 and Parley and Frey (1994) report some lessening of residential

segregation in metropolitan areas during the 1980s (especially in younger, smaller areas), those

residential patterns remain highly segregated. Moreover, Massey and Hujnal (1995) argue that

segregation among jurisdictions has been increasing. Movements inside metropolitan areas

continue to be dominated by suburbanization by the middle class, both white and nonwhite,

leaving concentrations of poor people in parts of central cities.

        Another set of trends with important implications are demographic. The racial and ethnic

composition of the school-age population is changing. Owing to immigration and differences in

birth rates, the black and Hispanic school-age population is growing faster than that of the white

                                                  6
population. As shown in Table 1, between 1986 and 1996, while the number of whites in public

elementary and secondary schools was increasing by 3 percent, the number of black students rose

by 14 percent, and the number of Hispanic students rose by 45 percent. According to Frey

(1995), the recent, ethnically diverse immigration that underlies some of these changes has

profoundly influenced patterns of internal migration, so that immigrants have come to supplant

natives in some metropolitan areas. Combining these demographic trends with ongoing

suburbanization, it should come as no surprise that public schools are becoming, on average,

increasingly nonwhite.9 Beyond that, however, the implications for school segregation and white

enrollments are by no means obvious.

       Another set of changes, related to education policy rather than demography, arise from

consolidations of school districts. Although the findings in the present study suggest that any

movement in this regard is relatively minor, the temporal comparisons examined in this paper

require consistency in the definition of districts over time. Thus it will be necessary to pay

attention to consolidations and other changes in district boundaries.

        A final trend with obvious relevance has to do with changes in attitude and race relations.

Although changes in this area are nothing if not complex, it appears that, over the last two

decades, interracial contact has slowly increased and white racial prejudice has declined

steadily.'°



 II. Data and Methodology

        The principal source of data used in the present paper is the National Center for

 Education Statistics' Common Core of Data, which includes information on the racial

                                                  7
composition of individual schools." The research strategy for the current study was to collect

information for similarly-defined metropolitan areas at two points in time in order to assess

changes over that period. Data were not available for all metropolitan areas, however. The data

are supplied voluntarily by states, and, while the number of participating states has increased

steadily, a significant number did not participate during the 1980s. Weighing the advantages of a

longer period against the disadvantages of a smaller sample size, the decision was made to use

1987 as the beginning year. The Common Core for the fall of that year lacked data for 17 states,

compared to only two states that were missing in 1996.12

        Calculations were made for metropolitan areas in both 1987 and 1996, using the

component counties (or, in New England, towns and cities) for each defined by the Census in

1990. Thus, while the definitions of metropolitan areas are periodically updated, the present

paper utilizes the definitions as of 1990 in order to achieve comparability over time. Given these

definitions and the states for which data were available, sufficient data were available for 238

metropolitan areas to make comparable calculations for both 1987 and 1996. In 1996 these 238

 areas contained almost 4,000 districts. As in the case of the metropolitan areas, it was desirable

 to have consistent definitions of the school districts over the period. However, this aim was

 frustrated by changes in district boundaries over time, most commonly consolidations of two or

 more 1987 districts into one 1996 district. Through careful accounting, comparable districts

 were formed, typically by combining the components of the consolidated district into a "virtual"

 district in 1987. These virtual districts constituted only about 2 percent of the districts in the

 sample.13



                                                   8
Measures and Variables

       The basic measure of white behavior is changes in white public school enrollment. This

measure is necessarily a net measure, reflecting the difference between departures and new

enrollments. As such, the measure cannot measure the absolute number of departures, nor can it

identify whether departures take the form of moving to another district, enrolling in a private

school, or simply graduation. Nor can it reflect the choice not to move into a district in the first

place, a decision having much the same impact as a departure. Where W0 and W are white

enrollments in years 0 and t, the change in white enrollment is expressed as the exponential

growth rate g in the equation

             W0 e.

Expressed as a percentage, the growth rate between 1987 and 1996 is

        100 g = 100 in (W96/W87)/9.

        Measures of composition and segregation are based entirely on racial and ethnic

 categories used in the survey. No measure of economic status is included.'4 The basic measure

 of interracial contact is the exposure rate of whites to nonwhites, which is the percent nonwhite

 in the average white student's school. It is defined as:

                           E= (11W)        W [N. /(W + N)]       ,      (1)



 where W and N1 are the number of whites and nonwhites, respectively, in school i and W and N

 are their totals for the district. If schools were racially balanced, each white child would attend a

 school whose racial composition was PCN = N/(W+N), the overall proportion of students who

 are nonwhite. The gap between this theoretical maximum and the actual rate of racial contact,

                                                   9
expressed as a proportion of the area's racial composition, represents one measure of the extent of

segregation.15 This gap-based index,

                         S = (PCN - E)/PCN,

ranges from zero, signifying perfect racial balance among schools, to one, signifying total

segregation. Since the measures of exposure and segregation are based on school-level

enrollment data, they do not measure racial contact in classrooms or in school groups. Nor do

these measures differentiate between voluntary or mandatory desegregation plans.

        To account for differences in overall growth among metropolitan areas, the population

growth rate, expressed as a percentage, is included as an explanatory variable:

        PG = 100 in (P901P80)/l0.

Finally, to account for the differing legal history of school segregation and other, otherwise

unmeasured regional differences, metropolitan areas were assigned to one of five regions: South,

Border, Northeast, Midwest, and West.16



Patterns and Trends in the Data

        Before discussing the last set of variables, it is useful to examine the sample of 238

metropolitan areas for patterns and trends. It is helpful to begin by examining aggregate figures.

 Table 1 compares total public school enrollment for the nation with the enrollment in the 238

 metropolitan areas analyzed in the current study. Not only does it give a sense of overall

 demographic changes over time, the table also allows an assessment of how representative the

 data used in the present analysis are. As indicated by the total enrollment figures, the present

 sample -- although it omits all schools outside of metropolitan areas as well as metropolitan areas

                                                  10
for which complete data were not available -- still covers more than half of all public school

students. As expected, the racial composition of these metropolitan areas differs from the nation

at large, featuring higher percentages of blacks, Hispanics, and other nonwhites than the U.S. as a

whole. It is clear also that the racial composition of the nation and metropolitan areas is

changing over time, with nonwhites assuming a continually increasing share. The reason behind

this changing composition is illustrated in the table's last column, which lists average annual

growth rates for each racial and ethnic group. Enrollment of whites grew at 0.5 percent a year,

slower than the rate for blacks (2.0 percent) , and considerably slower than the 5.4 percent rate

for Hispanics and the 4.4 percent for other nonwhite students.

        To illustrate the sort of data examined, Table 2 presents several measures for 16

metropolitan areas of various sizes and from different regions. The table makes plain the great

differences in size of metropolitan areas: public school enrollment in these 16 areas in 1987

ranged from 1.3 million in the 83 districts in the Los Angeles-Long Beach PMSA to 32,000 in

the two districts covered by the Tallahassee MSA. In keeping with the findings of Clotfelter

(forthcoming), larger metropolitan areas, and those in the Northeast and Midwest, tended to have

more districts than smaller areas and those in the South and West. The areas also differed

markedly in racial and ethnic composition. The percentage of students who were nonwhite

(which includes Hispanic whites) ranged from 3 percent in Johnstown to 71 percent in Los

Angeles-Long Beach, with other nonwhites outnumbering blacks in the latter. Blacks were

 relatively most numerous in the Southern areas, Columns F and U of the table give the average

 annual growth rate in white and nonwhite enrollment for metropolitan areas. Reflecting the

 national trends shown in Table 1, nonwhite enrollments were increasing in all these metropolitan

                                                  11
areas, while whites increased in only about two thirds of them.

       Racial segregation at the metropolitan level differed quite a bit among the 16 areas

shown, but the calculated indices for individual metropolitan areas did not change greatly over

the period. Clotfelter (forthcoming) shows that segregation in the public schools is most

pronounced in the largest metropolitan areas, and the calculations for the areas shown in this

table bear out that generalization; Detroit, in fact, was found to have the most segregated schools

among all metropolitan areas studied in 1994. However, some of the areas, in particular the

seven with indices less than 0.20, exhibited quite low levels of segregation, suggesting near

racial balance throughout the public schools in each metropolitan area.

       Because much of the interest in white withdrawals from public schools has focused on

individual school districts, especially central city districts, it is useful to examine data for some

illustrative districts as well. Table 3 presents information for the two largest districts in each of

the 16 metropolitan areas shown in Table 2. For a majority of the metropolitan areas, the largest

district also shares the name of the area's primary central city. In 1987 these districts ranged in

size from 582,871 in Los Angeles to 3,104 in Somerset, PA. As a percentage of their respective

metropolitan areas, they ranged from 74.1 percent in Hillsborough County, Florida to 2.9 percent

in Lynn, Massachusetts. In most cases, the largest district in each metropolitan area had both a

higher nonwhite percentage and a slower growth rate of white students than the metropolitan area

as a whole. (Exceptions were in Raleigh-Durham and Tallahassee.) Their growth in nonwhite

enrollments was less predictable, however, with 19 of the 32 districts having faster nonwhite

growth than their metropolitan areas. Revealing their generally low levels of segregation,

exposure rates were quite close to their overall nonwhite proportions.


                                                  12
         The last three columns relate to the opportunities open to white families to reduce their

children's exposure to nonwhites in the public schools by moving to other districts in the

metropolitan area. As one simple measure of such opportunities, column H shows, for each

district, the number of districts in its metropolitan area that satisfied these conditions in 1987:

enrollment 5,000 or more, no more than 10 miles away, and an exposure rate to nonwhites at

least 10 percentage points less than the listed district. Using this criterion, one discovers that

whiter! alternative districts did exist for almost half of these districts, with as many as 21 such

districts, in the case of Boston. The last two columns present more refined measures of access

that are discussed in the following section.

         To get a more representative picture of racial composition and white enrollment growth

in districts, Table 4 presents weighted mean values by size and region of metropolitan area. The

table shows clearly that the nonwhite percentage tended to rise with metropolitan area size: while

the smallest metropolitan areas had enrollments that averaged 25 percent nonwhite, those in the

largest metropolitan areas averaged 54 percent. By region, the components of the nonwhite

percentage differed markedly, with blacks being most numerous in Midwest districts and

Hispanics and other nonwhites most numerous in the West. Overall, white enrollments were

declining over the nine-year period. They declined most rapidly in districts contained in the

largest metropolitan areas, and they grew slightly in districts within the smallest metropolitan

areas.



The Spatial Context of Enrollment Choices

         An important aspect of enrollment shifts in metropolitan areas lies in their spacial
                                                   1-,
                                                   L)
context. White families which, for whatever reason, desire to enroll their children in public

schools with a smaller proportion of nonwhites usually can bring this about by moving to another

district. If they are moving into a metropolitan area, they can simply avoid districts with high

nonwhite enrollments. But locating in predominantly white districts may entail longer commutes

to work. Thus the desirability of moving from or avoiding a given urban district will likely

depend on the existence of alternative public school districts with lower nonwhite percentages,

the extent of the difference in racial compositions, and the distance from that given district to the

alternative districts.

        To illustrate the variegated jurisdictional landscape in metropolitan areas, Table 5

presents data for the largest districts in three metropolitan areas. The largest of these three,

Detroit, features a dominant central city district surrounded by a multitude of other districts,

many of which would accurately be described as "suburban." True to the stereotype of big U.S.

urban areas, the Detroit district is overwhelmingly nonwhite in composition, while most of the

surrounding districts are predominantly white. Within the Detroit district, the racial makeup of

individual schools deviated from racial balance, as indicated by the segregation index of 26.6.

During the nine-year sample period, the number of whites in the Detroit district fell by a rate of

more than 5 percent a year. White families in Detroit who wanted to move from or avoid moving

into the Detroit district could certainly find alternative districts with lower exposure rates to

nonwhites, but locating in one of the biggest of these would require being more than 10 miles

away from the center of the Detroit district. Many virtually all-white enclaves did exist, however,

among the more than 100 smaller districts not listed in the table.

         In contrast to the dominating size of one central city district, the Anaheim metropolitan


                                                  14
area features much more balance among the top eight districts. The racial composition also

differs markedly, with Hispanics and other nonwhites being much more numerous than blacks.

Distances to the largest district, Santa Ana, tended to be less, but so too were the differences in

potential exposure rates for whites. As in the Detroit area, the largest district was characterized

by an exposure rate over 80 percent and a declining white enrollment. A third pattern is

illustrated by the smaller Raleigh-Durham metropolitan area, which contains only five districts.

The largest of these, the county containing Raleigh, features growing rather than declining white

enrollment. It is the second-largest district, Durham, that is characterized by the high exposure

rate and white decline usually associated with central city districts.

        As these three examples amply illustrate, districts can differ greatly in how easy it is for

white families to lower their exposure to nonwhites by avoiding or moving from some districts.

As illustrated by the largest two districts in each of the 16 illustrative metropolitan areas shown

above, comparatively white alternatives are not uncommon, but in some metropolitan areas they

simply do not exist. As an illustration of how common such alternatives were in 1987, a

tabulation showed that over a third of white students in the 975 largest districts in the current

sample could have lowered their exposure rate by at least 0.10 by moving to a district within 10

miles.17 If one wishes to model white enrollment shifts, it is important to take such alternatives

into account. While a few studies of school segregation and white flight have included variables

that are designed to reflect the opportunities for avoidance on a very aggregated level within

metro areas, none to my knowledge has incorporated data on distance among districts in a

metropolitan area. In the present paper I propose two measures to characterize the options facing

 white families in metropolitan areas. Each of these measures is designed to account for three


                                                  15
spatially-related factors that would impinge on any white family's decision to move to another

district, to avoid moving into a district in the first place, or to enroll in a private school:

        a)How many other options for enrollment are available in the local housing market? One

way of measuring this is by enrollment: how large are the whiter alternative districts compared to

the enrollment of the family's own school system?

        b)How close in distance are those other districts? If one must move a long way away to

attend a different district, that might mean changing jobs or commuting farther, given that the

current location is otherwise logical, if not optimal. The farther away, the less good the option.

        c)How much can the exposure to nonwhites be reduced (the postulated objective for

changing schools) by moving? If other districts offer similar rates of exposure, there would be

little gain from moving no matter how far away they are.

        Two variables of accessibility to whiter districts, which take these three factors into

account, are defined below. District i is the "origin" district, from whose perspective the

calculations are made; districts j are possible alternative districts. D1 is the distance between

districts i and j. E1 is the average exposure rate of whites to nonwhites in district i and T is the

enrollment in district i.    and T are defined similarly. The bigger, the more numerous, and the

closer the alternative districts featuring lower exposure rates to nonwhites, the greater are the

options for reducing nonwhite exposure through relocation. The first measure selects as possible

 alternatives those districts that are within 10 miles distance and feature an exposure rate at least

 10 percentage points (0.10) less than the origin district. In order to account for the relative size

 of these possible destination districts, this measure of accessibility is based on the ratio of the

 enrollment of such districts to that of the origin district:


                                                     16
       Al = [   (T/T) ] for allj s.t. E-E         0.10 and D1 10 miles,

where r is a factor reflecting the importance of alternative enrollments. If r 1, the accessibility

proxy rises in proportion to the enrollment of neighboring districts offering the 10 percentage-

point potential reduction in exposure; if r = 0.5, it rises with the square root. The threshold values

of 10 miles for distance and 10 percent for exposure are quite arbitrary, of course. In order to

account for distance and exposure on a continuous basis, a second measure adds these two

factors multiplicatively:

        A2 =       (T/T) (1/ D)a (E.E)JS for (E-E)>0,
where a is a constant indicating the effect of distance on the attractiveness of a particular

alternative district and s is another constant.

        Both Al and A2 are proxy variables having no exact interpretation. Their values are

arbitrary, depending on the parameters a, r, and s. All that can be said about these proxy

variables is that a given district will have large values for them the more a district is surrounded

by close, relatively large, and predominantly white districts. In the analysis described below, the

values of a and s are both assigned 0.5, while r    1. In order to approximate distances between

pairs of districts, I measure the distance between the centroids of the zip codes in which the

district offices are located.19

        To give a sense of the values for Al and A2, Table 3 presents calculations of these

indices for the two largest districts in each of the 16 metropolitan areas listed in Table 2. Both

indices suggest considerable divergence in accessibility to whiter enclaves among this group of

32 districts. The indices are highly correlated: the districts in which white families have the best


                                                   17
opportunities to lessen their exposure to nonwhites tend to have higher values of both indices,

although the differences are less stark with A2, owing to the continuity built into it.2° Districts

where whites are deemed to have more opportunities for avoidance are Lynn, MA, Aldine, TX,

Boston, and Providence, all of which feature high exposure rates and proximity to districts with

much lower ones. At the other end of the opportunity spectrum are large districts with relatively

low exposure rates: Leon County, FL, Wake County, NC, and Warwick, RI. Despite the arbitrary

nature of these two accessibility measures, it seems clear that they both reflect the same basic

phenomenon. Not surprisingly, these two accessibility measures yield similar results in

tabulations and estimation. In the estimates presented below, Al is used because it is the

simpler of the two measures, but the qualitative results are not affected by which measure is

used.



 III. Analysis of White Enrollment Changes by District

        A perusal of Table 3 suggests that the districts having the fastest white enrollment

 declines tended to be those with high proportions of nonwhites and more opportunities for

 avoidance of nonwhites. To see whether this relationship exists more generally, Table 6 shows

 the average growth rate of whites in 374 larger districts (all with school enrollments of 5,000 or

 more and at least 10 percent of its metropolitan area's enrollment), broken down by accessibility

 (Al) and whites' exposure rate to nonwhties. In line with the tendencies noted in the previous

 table, the growth rate of white enrollment tends to decline as both variables increase, suggesting

 that white enrollment trends over this period were influenced both by the "push" of interracial

 contact and the "pull" of nearby whiter school districts.

                                                   18
       In order to examine more fully the forces that influence changes in white enrollment, I

estimated equations explaining the growth rate in white enrollment between 1987 and 1996.

Previous analysis of "white flight" from urban school districts focused almost entirely on large,

central city districts, most of which were in large metropolitan areas. Indeed, Coleman (1975, p.

11) stated: "The flight from integration appears to be principally a large-city phenomenon."

Because of the continuing significance of their enrollment patterns, these big urban districts

should obviously remain a major focus of research. However, it seems possible if not likely that

urban districts differ in the enrollment patterns they exhibit. For example, small metropolitan

areas, owing to the comparative ease of traversing them, may evince different residential and

enrollment patterns than large metropolitan areas. Another possibility worth examining is that

enrollment patterns for districts which are small relative to their metropolitan areas might be

easier to avoid or be otherwise different from dominant districts. Given the large number of

metropolitan areas and districts encompassed by the current sample, it is possible to analyze

separately districts according to metropolitan area size. It is also possible to distinguish between

districts that account for a significant share of their metropolitan area's total enrollment (defined

here as a 10 percent share) and those that are small in relation to the whole.

        The 3,933 districts in the sample were divided into four samples. The first three samples

were restricted to districts at least 5,000. Not only are these the most important districts to study,

measured enrollment growth for them is less subject to error or undetected changes in district

definitions. The first sample includes those sorts of districts which have traditionally received

 the bulk of attention in studies of white enrollment losses; these are districts in metropolitan

 areas with public school enrollments of 50,000 or more which account for at least 10 percent of


                                                  19
the total enrollment of their respective metropolitan area. The second sample includes districts in

metropolitan areas with enrollments smaller than 50,000, again with at least 10 percent of the

metropolitan total. The third sample includes districts with less than 10 percent of their

metropolitan enrollment; given the 5,000 minimum size, these districts were thus all in

metropolitan areas of 50,000 or more. The remaining fourth sample, composed of districts

smaller than 5,000, is by far the most numerous, containing over three quarters of all the districts

studied.

        Previous econometric studies of white enrollment losses have sought to explain white

losses, usually measured by percentage change, as a function of variables describing racial

composition, segregation, and other factors thought to be important in the decisions of white

families. One early and influential study, by Coleman et a!. (1975), noted above, used panel data

on a set of large urban districts to estimate the equation:


        %Wa+b1 Sb+b2Pb+ b3lnT+ XZ+u,

where %W is the percentage change in white enrollment, Sb is the change in the segregation


index (using blacks in place of nonwhites), b is the proportion of blacks in the district, T is

district enrollment, Z is a vector of other variables, a, the b's, and the vector X are coefficients,

and u is an error term. As noted above, Coleman et al. found that greater white losses were

associated with higher black proportions and decreases in segregation, leading to their conclusion

that school desegregation was causing white flight, and was therefore contributing to the

resegregation of schoo1s.2


                                                  20
       The present study employs a similar model, but with a wider variety of school districts

and with a single cross-section of one-year changes in place of the pooled annual changes

analyzed by Coleman et al. Change in white enrollment is measured by the exponential annual

growth rate.22 In place of the district percentage black, I used the exposure rate of whites to

nonwhites, because exposure, not overall district racial composition, affects the experiences of

whites, and to reflect the large and growing significance of Latinos and Asian-Americans in

urban school systems. Accessibility to whiter alternative districts is measured by Al, as

described above. The growth rate of metropolitan area population from 1980 to 1990 is included

to account for overall metropolitan growth. It seems reasonable to treat this growth as an

exogenous variable. Finally, a set of dummy variables is included to reflect regional differences

in the growth of white enrollments.

        Table 7 presents for each of the samples of districts the mean values for the basic

variables used in estimation. Among the four samples, the growth rate of white enrollment, as

well as interracial exposure and accessibility, differs noticeably. The two samples of districts in

the largest metropolitan areas, I and III, show declines in white enrollments on average, whereas

white enrollments in the average district in sample II remained steady over the period and those

in the smallest districts grew. The sample I districts had much higher rates of exposure of whites

to nonwhites than those in II and III, fitting the common image of large central city districts,

while the smallest districts displayed the lowest exposure rates. Accessibility to districts with

lower exposure rates also differed, with the smaller districts in III and IV having the highest

indices. It is also worth noting that samples III and IV have relatively fewer districts in the

South, owing to the large average size of districts in that region.


                                                 21
       Table 8 presents the basic model explaining growth in white enrollments estimated for

each of the four samples of school districts. Since the measured index of segregation depends in

large part on the district's desegregation policy, and that policy could be influenced by white

enrollment trends, it is not altogether clear that the change in segregation should be treated as

exogenous as Coleman et al. did. Accordingly, the basic model is estimated using instrumental

variables as an alternative to ordinary least squares.

       The similarity of the estimates across the four samples is quite striking. Three variables

are consistently important in explaining white growth rates in this basic model, regardless of the

sample or estimation technique employed. First, the exposure of whites to nonwhites in 1987 has

large and statistically significant estimated coefficients. Equation (1), for example, implies that

in the most important districts in the large metropolitan areas an increase in exposure of 0.10 —

say from 0.15 to 0.25 — in 1987 would have been associated with an acceleration of white losses,

in the form of a decrease in the growth rate of white enrollment of -0.7 percent a year. The

estimated effect is somewhat smaller in sample II, but it is considerably larger in samples III and

IV, implying a responsiveness half again as large in the smaller and less "significant" districts.

The strong effect of exposure in all four samples is very much in line with Coleman et al.'s

results for the district's proportion of blacks and with James' (1989) stated assumption that

whites respond to interracial contact, not segregation per Se.

        A second consistent finding, indicated by the negative estimated coefficients for Al, is

that white losses were greater where there were more opportunities in the metropolitan area for

whites to find districts with lower rates of exposure — the "pull" factor. This finding is, of

course, quite complementary to the first.23 The third consistent finding is that white enrollment
trends were — not surprisingly — influenced by overall metropolitan growth. Where the

metropolitan population was growing, white enrollments in large districts tended to grow rather

than shrink, but where the metropolis was stagnant there was less impetus to maintain white

enrollments. This correspondence is much higher in the smaller metropolitan areas of sample II

and the small districts in sample IV.

       The major policy variable in the equations is the change in the segregation index.

Holding constant interracial exposure in 1987, an increase in segregation would be expected to

hold whites and thus increase the white enrollment growth rate (or decrease the rate of loss).

This is what Coleman et al. (1975) found in their study of larger urban districts. And it is also

what is implied in equation (1) in Table 8, the OLS equation covering the sample most similar to

the ones they analyzed. The estimated coefficient in that equation implies that an increase in the

segregation index S of 0.10 would have decreased the rate of white enrollment decline by 0.83,

say from its mean of -1.55 to -0.72 percent a year. The corresponding coefficients in the other

equations are not statistically significant, however. The estimated effect of this variable loses its

statistical significance when it is treated as endogenous in the instrumental variables estimation

in equation (5), as it also does in equations (6) and (7). Equation (8) actually yields a significant

negative coefficient, but comparison to the OLS version suggests that that coefficient is quite

unstable. Unfortunately, the first stage equations in all these equations are poor predictors of the

change in segregation, resulting in estimated coefficients that are generally small relative to their

standard errors, though with little change in the other coefficients of interest.

        For the most part, the equations reveal little regional variation in white enrollment growth

apart from that which is explained by the other included regressors. Only in samples III and IV is


                                                  Li
there a statistically significant regional effect: in those relatively small districts, whites were less

likely to leave or avoid districts in the South.

        Central to these estimates is the reaction of white parents to the presence of nonwhites in

the schools their children attend. It is especially germane to ask at least two questions related to

that reaction. First, are whites more sensitive to one group of nonwhites than to others? To

examine this question the first four equations in Table 9 split up the exposure rate of whites to

nonwhites into three components, corresponding to blacks, Hispanics, and other nonwhites. For

all but sample II, an F-test rejects at the 99 percent level the hypothesis that all the coefficients

are the same. In each of those cases, the estimates suggest that whites respond most sharply to

exposure to blacks24

        The other exposure-related question addressed in Table 9 is whether the reaction of

whites to nonwhite exposure in the schools is nonlinear, specifically whether there is a "tipping

point," or a threshold exposure rate beyond which white departures and avoidance accelerate. To

allow for such nonlinearities, both cubic and spline functions were estimated, with much the

same result. Plots of the former are shown in the table and illustrated in Figure 1, which gives

the predicted rate of growth of whites, calculated at mean values, as a ftinction of exposure to

nonwhites in 1987. They are remarkably similar, implying growth in white enrollments where

exposure rates are below about 0.25 and losses beyond that point. Over most of the range of

exposure rates the rate of loss is approximately linear. There is no evidence of a threshold

beyond which losses accelerate. In fact, losses are reversed somewhat at very high exposure rates

in samples I and III.

        The conclusion that arises from these regressions is that the phenomenon of "white


                                                   24
flight," the loss of whites from school districts featuring significant interracial exposure, first

identified and studied in the 1970s, was still at work in the 1990s. To be sure, white enrollment

losses are made more likely by a slowing growth rate among the white population nationally and

in metropolitan areas that are not growing, but they continue to be stimulated by exposure to

nonwhites in the public schools, especially where those rates become large. Such white losses

are moderated by configurations of school districts that minimize the opportunities for avoidance,

such as the large county-wide districts common in parts of the South and West. But in the

absence of a dramatic reversal of the Supreme Court's ban on cross-district desegregation plans,

as well as the continuing influx of nonwhite immigrants, we are likely to see a continuation of

these trends.

        Before turning to the implications of these findings for school segregation, it is instructive

to compare them to the earlier study by Coleman et al. (1975). Like Coleman et al., I find that

districts with higher rates of white enrollment losses also had higher exposure rates to nonwhites.

Changes in segregation are less clearly implicated, although the OLS estimates for sample I are

consistent with Coleman et al.'s earlier findings. In order to compare present patterns of white

withdrawal with those observed by Coleman et al. two decades earlier, a similar specification

was estimated for sample I, the sample most similar to the group of large districts analyzed in the

earlier study. The racial composition and segregation variables were redefined using blacks

instead of nonwhites, to conform to Coleman et a!. Table 10 compares the Coleman et al.

regressions with this reestimated one using sample I. For both change in segregation and

exposure, the responses implied using the recent data in sample I are considerably smaller than

those implied by the sample of largest districts in 1968-73. They are, however, much closer in


                                                   25
magnitude to those based on the sample of 46 smaller central city districts. In another

specification, not shown here, the estimated effect of between-district segregation based on the

current sample I is quite similar to that reported by Coleman et al.25 Like the regressions

presented above, this comparison suggests that the factors contributing to white losses from

urban public school districts have not changed substantially in the 20 years since this topic first

arose as a serious policy concern. While the magnitude of white response is not as large as that

which Coleman et al. found for the very largest central city districts, it remains substantial.



IV. Implications for Segregation in Schools

        The estimates presented above make clear that white losses from urban public schools are

not evenly distributed, but rather are systematically related to interracial contact and the ease of

 avoiding that contact. This kind of systematic avoidance was documented in research done in the

 1 970s. The present paper shows that it remained an important phenomenon in the 1 990s. Since a

 principal concern about white enrollment losses has been that they would lead to resegregation, it

 is useful to conclude by considering the impact of these white enrollment trends on measured

 segregation.

        Overall, public schools in metropolitan areas became more segregated between 1987 and

 1996. Figure 2 shows the distribution of metropolitan areas by segregation index S. It reveals a

 perceptible shift to the right, with a decline in the number of metro areas in the lowest two

 categories and increases in most of the higher categories.

         Table 11 presents a more detailed summary of changes in metropolitan-level school

 segregation. The entries give the weighted average of the segregation index S for the 238

                                                  26
metropolitan areas in the present sample, broken down by size and region. In addition, the

segregation indices are decomposed into two components: the portion that is attributable to

segregation between districts and that which is attributable to segregation within districts.26 The

table's top row shows that, for the entire sample of 238 metropolitan areas, school segregation

increased over the nine-year period; the average value of S increased from 0.3 02 to 0.317. As

there was actually a decline in within-district segregation, this overall increase was entirely

attributable to an increase in between-district segregation. In other words, the racial

compositions of school districts tended to diverge over this period, a change that would have

been aided by systematic white losses from racially mixed school districts. Table 11 makes plain

the tendency noted in Clotfelter (forthcoming) for segregation to rise with the size of the

metropolitan area; this relationship is clear for both 1987 and 1996. The last set of columns

shows, however, that segregation grew in all but the largest metropolitan areas over this period.

When the data are classified by region, the effect of the balkanized metropolitan areas of the

Northeast and Midwest are evident: not only do those regions feature the highest rates of

 segregation, they also have the biggest increases in segregation — again attributable to growing

 disparities between districts. The South had the highest level of within-district segregation in

 both years. Overall, the picture that arises is one of entrenched segregation, caused mainly by

 racial disparities between districts rather than segregation within school districts, and steady

 increases in that segregation. This picture is very much in line with Coleman et al.'s (1975, p.

 80) statement: "The emerging problem of school segregation in large cities is a problem of

 metropolitan area residential segregation, black central cities and white suburbs, brought about

 by a loss of whites from the central cities." Barring any change in the legal status of

                                                  27
metropolitan desegregation, the only prospect for a reduction in school segregation is a lessening

of residential segregation, a possibility raised by the recent work of Farley and Frey (1994).



V. Conclusion

       This paper uses recent data to examine an old question: what factors are associated with

white losses from urban public schools? Using data covering all public schools in 238

metropolitan areas in 1987 and 1996, the present analysis suggests that much the same set of

forces were at work in the 1990s as in the 1970s. The rate of white loss is affected by the "push"

or exposure to nonwhites as well as the attraction of more predominantly white districts

elsewhere in the same metropolitan area. Since segregation within districts by 1996 was rather

mild in most districts, the key element in predicting whether whites would rapidly abandon

central city districts is the size and homogeneity of all the districts in a metropolitan area. In

particular, where the dominant districts are large, the prospects for avoiding large white losses

are good. Furthermore, these forces appear to work similarly both inside arid outside the South.

To be sure, the world of urban public schools did change over the two decades. The proportion

of nonwhites grew, in significant part due to immigration. In addition, the relative affluence of

those at the upper end of the income distribution rose at the same time that Catholic parochial

schools were in decline, probably increasing the socioeconomic gap between public and private

schools.

        Not surprisingly, the current paper leaves some important questions unanswered. For

example, the models used do not distinguish between residential location and private school

enrollment as alternative avenues for white avoidance of racial exposure. The relative cost of

                                                  28
these options surely affects their use; this relative cost is only crudely proxied by the measures

used here to reflect accessibility to white enclaves. Nor does the paper examine the effects of

contact across socioeconomic groups, as opposed to the racial and ethnic groupings used here

and elsewhere. In addition, the data used in the paper contain no information on racial contact

within schools, which is affected by the extent of academic tracking. Nor do the measures used

here distinguish between mandatory desegregation plans and the various alternative policies that

have been used to desegregate schools. Such factors as these are likely to be important

considerations for parents — both white and nonwhite — deciding where to send their children to

school. Given the implications of these decisions for the racial composition and segregation of

the public schools, research on this topic remains as important today as it was two decades ago.




                                                  29
                                         References



Armor, David J. 1995. Forced Justice. School Desegregation and the Law. New York: Oxford

       University Press.

Braddock, Jomills Henry II, Robert L. Cram, and James M. McPartland. 1984. "A Long-Term

       View of School Desegregation: Some Recent Studies of Graduates as Adults," Phi Delta

       Kappan 66 (December), 259-264.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1978. "Alternative Measures of School Desegregation: A Methodological

       Note." Land Economics 54 (Aug.):373-3 80.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1976. "The Detroit Decision and 'White Flight," Journal of Legal Studies

       5 (January), 99-112.

Clotfelter, Charles T. Forthcoming. "Public School Segregation in Metropolitan Areas," Land

       Economics.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1976. "School Desegregation, 'Tipping,' and Private School Enrollment,"

       Journal of Human Resources 22 (Winter 1976), 29-50.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1979. "Urban School Desegregation and Declines in White Enrollment: A

       Reexamination," Journal of Urban Economics 6, 352-370.

Coleman, James S. 1975. "Recent Trends in School Integration," Educational Researcher 4

       (July-August), 3-12.

Coleman, James S. et al. 1975. Trends in School Segregation, 1968-73. Urban Institute Paper

       No. 722-03-01 (Aug.).

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 1999. "The Rise and Decline of the

                                              n
       American Ghetto," Journal of Political Economy 107, 455.

DuBois, David L., and Barton J. Hirsch. 1990. 'School and Neighborhood Friendship Patterns of

       Blacks and Whites in Early Adolescence." Child Development 6 1:524-536.

Parley, Reynolds, Toni Richards, and Clarence Wurdock. 1980. "School Desegregation and

       White Flight: An Investigation of Competing Models and their Discrepant Findings,"

       Sociology of Education 53 (July), 123-139.

Farley, Reynolds, and William H. Frey. 1994. "Changes in the Segregation of Whites from

       Blacks During the 1980s: Small Steps Toward a More Integrated Society." American

       Sociological Review 59 (Feb.):23 -45.

Frey, William H. 1995. "Immigration and Internal Migration 'Flight' from US Metropolitan

       Areas: Toward a New Demographic Balkanisation," Urban Studies 32, 733-757.

Fitzpatrick, Gary L. and Marilyn J. Modlin. 1986. Direct-Line Distances. Metuchen, N.J.:

       Scarecrow Press.

Hallinan, Maureen T. 1982. "Classroom Racial Composition and Children's Friendships."

       Social Forces 61 (Sept.):56-72.

James, David R. 1989. "City Limits on Racial Equality: The Effects of City-Suburb Boundaries

       on Public-School Desegregation, 1968-1976," American Sociological Review 54

       (December), 963-985.

Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips (eds.). 1998. The Black-White Test Score Gap

       (Washington: Brookings).

Lankford, Hamilton, and James Wyckoff. 1997. "The Effect of School Choice and Residential

       Location on the Racial Segregation of K-12 Students." Unpublished Paper, University of


                                               31
      Albany (June).

Massey, Douglas S. and Zoltan L. Hajnal. 1995. "The Changing Geographic Structure of Black-

       White Segregation in the United States," Social Science Quarterly 76 (September), 527-

       542.

Orfield, Gary. 1983. Public School Desegregation in the United States, 1968-1980.

       Washington, DC: Joint Center for Political Studies.

Orfield, Gary et al. 1997. "Deepening Segregation in American Public Schools." Harvard

       Project on School Desegregation, Unpublished Paper, Harvard University (April 5).

Orfield, Gary, and Susan E. Eaton. 1996. Dismantling Desegregation. The Quiet Reversal of

       Brown v. Board of Education. New York: The New Press.

Orfield, Gary, and Frank Monfort. 1992. Status of School Desegregation: The Next Generation.

       Metropolitan Opportunity Project, Harvard University (March).

Rivkin, Steven G. 1994. "Residential Segregation and School Integration." Sociology of

       Education 67 (Oct.):279-292.

Rossell, Christine H. 1990. "The carrot or the Stick for School Desegregation Policy?" Urban

       Affairs Quarterly 25 (March), 474-499.

Rossell, Christine H. 1994. "The Progeny of Brown: From the Old Freedom of Choice to the

       New Freedom of Choice in Four Decades."Urban Geography 15:435-453.

Rossell, Christine H., and David Armor. 1996. "The Effectiveness of School Desegregation

       Plans, 1968-1991." American Politics Quarterly 24 (July):267-302.

Smock, Pamela J. and Franklin D. Wilson. 1991. "Desegregation and the Stability of White

       Enrollments: A School-Level Analysis, 1968-84," Sociology of Education 64 (October),
       278-292.

Tuch, Steven A., Lee Sigelman, and Jason A. MacDonald. 1999. "Race Relations and American

       Youth, 1976-1995," Public Opinion Quarterly 63, 109-148.

U.S. Office for Civil Rights. 1974. Directory of Public Elementary and Secondary Schools in

       Selected Districts, Fall 1972. Washington: Government Printing Office, 0CR74-5.

Welch, Finis. 1987. "A Reconsideration of the Impact of School Desegregation Programs on

       Public School Enrollment of White Students, 1968-76," Sociology of Education 60

       (October), 215-221.

Welch, Finis, arid Audrey Light. 1987. New Evidence on School Desegregation. Washington:

       United States Commission on Civil Rights (June).

Wilson, Franklin D. 1985. "The Impact of School Desegregation Programs on White Public-

       School Enrollment, 1968-1976," Sociology of Education 58 (July), 137-153.
                                              Endnotes
1. In particular, the Court in Board of Education of Oklahoma City v. Dowell (1991) and
Freeman v. PUts (1992) laid down conditions whereby districts that had been under court order
could end affirmative efforts to desegregate their schools. For discussions of the legal issues, see
Armor (1995, pp. 3-8, 17-58) and Orfield et al. (1997, pp. 6-7).

2.The sample excludes special, vocational, or alternative schools, and districts operated by the
state or federal government. In the terms defined in the Common Core ofData, the present
sample includes type 1 (regular) schools and districts of types 1-4. In addition,two districts for
which no enrollment data were reported for 1996, East Cleveland City( Ohio) and Hillsboro UHS
(Oregon) were excluded.

3. The sample of districts employed in the Office for Civil Rights surveys changed over time and
was based on several different criteria, including whether districts were under courtorder, the
coverage of minority enrollments, and the ability to project sample findings to national totals.
For a description of the sampling criteria, see, for example, U.S. Office for Civil Rights (1974).
Studies that have employed these data include Coleman et al (1975), Orfield (1983), and Welch
and Light (1987).


4. Jencks and Phillips (1998, p. 45) state, for example: "once black enrollmentin a neighborhood
school expands past something like 20%, most white parents become reluctant to move into the
neighborhood." For references to earlier studies of this phenomenon, see Clotfelter (1976).

5. For a discussion of these effects, see Braddock, Crane and McPartland(1984) or Clotfelter
(forthcoming).

6. For example, between 1968 and 1972, the percentage black in the typical white child's school
rose from 4 to 12 percent in Dallas, 9 to 14 percent in Little Rock, and 9 to 48percent in Norfolk.
Increases over the same period in cities outside the South were: 7 to 14 percent in Dayton, 6 to
14 percent in Denver, and 15 to 44 percent in Pasadena (Smock and Wilson 1991, Table 3).

7. As used by some researchers, this otherwise pejorative term does havea precise meaning. It is
the loss of white students over and above that which would have been predicted simply on the
basis of demographic factors alone.

8. For a fuller description of current patterns of school segregation, see Clotfelter (forthcoming).

9. Following the common usage of the terms, in this paper "white" refers to non-Hispanic whites;
thus "nonwhite" refers to all others.

10. These trends are illustrated by annual surveys of high school seniors done as part of the
Monitoring the Future project. The percentage of white seniors who reported that they "do
things (conversation, eating together, playing sports) with people of other races" increased from
an average of 50 percent in 1976-78 to 65 percent in 1993-95. (The percentage for blacks stayed
about the same.) The percentage of white seniors who felt it would be desirable for their
"(future) children go to schools where some of the children are of other races" increased over the
period from an average of 28 percent to 31 percent. Interestingly, the comparable average
percentage for blacks declined, from 37 to 31 percent over the period. (Tuch, Sigelman, and
MacDonald 1999, pp. 126-126, 143-144.

11. Specifically, the data were taken from Public Education Agency Universe and Public School
Universe of the Common Core of Data (http:/nces.ed.gov/ccdl and
http ./nces. ed. gov/surveys/SDDB/introd.html). Enrollment by racial group (American Indian,
Asian or Pacific Islander, Hispanic, Black, non-Hispanic, White, non-Hispanic) was available for
all schools for the academic year 1996-97. Virtually all districts reported consistent and clean
data. A few did not; the sums for schools did not match the totals reported for districts. For
those whose school-level data gave different sums, I based all calculations on the school-level
data. Some districts reported no school-level data whatsoever; these had to be dropped.
   A handful of(33) state-wide schools (such as the N.C. School of Science and Math) are listed
as districts. Since they should not be considered to be part of the metropolitan areas where they
are located, they were dropped from the sample.
12. Because one of the missing states in 1996, New Jersey, was not missing for 1987, there were
a total of 18 omitted states for the matched sample.

13. Data from the Common Core data sets for 1987-88 and 1996-97 were matched by district,
and organized by county and metropolitan area. In an effort to see if there were errors in the
data, printouts of schools by district were examined in detail. Growth in total enrollments by
county were compared to growth in population. Where they deviated significantly or where
district enrollments or numbers of schools differed greatly or where districts disappeared or
appeared from the first to the second year, school names were used in matching to determine how
the districts compared. In a few cases, schools in two districts were reorganized into two new
districts, creating for the present sample two virtual districts, defined according to the schools
each contained in 1996. Of the 875 districts with enrollments of 5,000 or more, there were 18
virtual districts created due to consolidation. Those that underwent consolidation were, on
average, smaller and had lower nonwhite percentages, but there was no significantdifference in
the change in their segregation indices.

 14. Counts of students receiving free and reduced price lunches are available in the data set, but
 this information was not used because of variations across states in eligibility criteria and the
 likelihood that existing criteria are unevenly applied.

 15. This measure, denoted R, is used by Coleman et al. (1975). For a discussion of this measure
 and its relationship to measures of exposure, see Clotfelter (1978).
         It is useful to note that the value of S is invariant with respect to which of two groups is
 used as the basis for calculating the exposure rate. That is, S can be calculated using the
 exposure of nonwhites to whites, where W, the overall percentage of students who are white, is
 the maximum for this exposure rate: S = (W - ENW) I W.

 16. Following Orfield and Monfort (1992, p. 2), I defined regions as follows: South: Alabama,
 Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, Virginia; Border: Delaware, District of Columbia, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri,
Oklahoma, West Virginia; Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont; Midwest: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Ohio, Wisconsin; West:
Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah,
Washington, Wyoming. In the 13 cases where a metropolitan area (MSA or PMSA) had
components from two regions, I classified it in the region containing the largest enrollment.

17. Tabulation based on the 975 largest districts in the current sample. 77 percent of whites
could have moved to a district with an exposure rate to nonwhites of 0.20 or less.

18. Coleman et al. (1975) include a measure of inter-district segregation to reflect racial
disparities, and Clotfelter (1979) included the percentage of the metropolitan area in the central city
district.

19. Where Li and L2 are the latitudes of the centroids of the ZIP codes corresponding to districts
1 and 2 and DL is the difference in longitude between those centroids, the distance between
district 1 and 2, measured in degrees of arc distance, is D in the equation:

        Cos D = (Sin Li) (Sin L2) + (Cos Li) (Cos L2) (Cos DL)

(Fitzpatrick and Modlin 1986, p.XI). The distance in miles is 69.16 D.
        The use of centroids for ZIP codes of the district offices generally yields locations that
are quite central to the population center of each district, but not always. An example where this
approach does not work as well is Chapel Hill, N.C., for which the centroid of the district
office's ZIP code (27516) lies altogether outside the district boundaries.

20. The correlation between Al and A2 in the three samples discussed below are 0.86, 0.85, and
0.86.

21. The estimates of Coleman et al. (1975) are discussed below.

22. For comparison, Appendix Table A4 presents equations employing a slight modification of
the Coleman et al. specification, wherein the percentage change in whites is replaced by its
growth rate. Like the estimates obtained in the 1975 study, both change in segregation and
district black proportion show up as statistically significant in all three equations. White losses
are spurred by the black proportion and declines in measured segregation.

23. Regressions using A2 rather than Al produce quite similar estimates.

24. The calculated test statistics based on the sum of squared residuals were 5.2, 0.3, 6.3, and
45.1 in the four equations. The corresponding critical value for two restrictions at the 99 percent
level of confidence ranges from 4.60 to 4.75.

 25. The variable RSMSA, which is the between-district segregation index for the metropolitan
 area based on blacks and whites, operates like Al to indicate the availability of predominantly
white districts with the metropolitan area. Whereas the coefficient on this variable reported by
Coleman et al is -21.0 and -10.2 in their two samples, it was -12.6 in the comparable equation
estimated for sample I.

26. As shown in Clotfelter (forthcoming), the segregation measure S can be decomposed in the
following way. Consider the hypothetical exposure rate for the metropolitan area that would
occur if each district were to racially balance its schools. Just as any district's racial composition
(measured by the percent nonwhite, N) represents the maximum attainable exposure rate of
whites to nonwhites, the maximum exposure rate for the metropolitan area that could be achieved
within the constraints imposed by the existing racial compositions of school districts this
hypothetical rate. Where this hypothetical exposure rate is E*, the gap that is due to inter-district
disparities between districts is S1 (N - E*)IN. The gap due to segregation within districts is
S2 = S - S = (E* - E)/N, that is, the difference between the exposure rate if all districts were
racially balanced and the actual exposure rate, as a proportion of the overall nonwhite proportion.
Are Whites Still "Fleeing"? Racial Patterns and Enrollment

         Shifts in Urban Public Schools, 1987-1996


                    Tables and Figures
                                                    Table 1

               Public School Racial and Ethnic Compositio and Growth by Group:
                         238 Metropolitn Areas anJ All United States

                                          1987                    1996         Average
238 Metroolitan Areas                                                          growth
                                                          I
                                                                                rate
           I




               White                         67.1                   60.3               0.5.
               Black                         14.5                    14.8              2.0
               Hispanic                      14.0                    19.4              5.4
               Other nonwhite                 4.3                     5.5              4.4
               Total                        100.0                   100.0              1.7


               Total enrollment       20,313,388              23,742,341


United States                             1986                    1996
                                                          t
                                       RaLornpQsitIon (%)                              0.6
               White                         70.4                    64.0
               Black                         16.1                    17.0              2.1
               Hispanic                          9.9                 14.1              5.1
               Other nonwhite                    3.7                     4.9           4.4
               Total                        100.0                   100.0              1.6



                                                                                              I


               Total enrollment        40,008,213             45,592,213


Source: Corrnmon Core of Data, auth4r's calculations; U.S. Department
of Educatidn, Digest of Education Sttistics 1996, Table 39, p. 52 and                          I


Table 44, p. 60; U.S. Department of Education, 1'4ationa Center for
 Education Statistics, Statistics in Brief, October 998, 1ables 1 and6.
:M28                                                          I



 4/28/99
                                                           Table 2

                                               Illustrative Data for 16 Metropolitan Areas

                                      A            B         C        D          E           F          G         H


Metropolitan area                 Number         Metro _jLprcejg__ 1987-1996 growth                               Segregation
                                     of     enrollment Black Other   Total _j:ate in enrollment   (5)
                                  districts   1987          nonwhite nonwhite White Nonwhite 1987     1996

Los Angeles--Long Beach, CA PMS           83 1,301780        0.14      0.57      0.71
Detroit, Ml PMSA                       109 712,284           0.28      0.03      0.31            0.1        1.0   0.73     0.72
Houston, TX PMSA                          41     591,404     0.24      0.28      0.52            0.2        4.1   0.39     0.41
Boston, MA PMSA                           113 353,727        0.11      0.09      0.21            0.2        3.7   0.46     0.47
Tampa-St. Petersburg                       4 244,906         0.17      0.07      0.24             1.4       5.5   0.13     0.19
Milwaukee, WI PMSA                        51     210,975     0.24      0.07      0.31             0.0       3.7   0.45     0.55
Portland, OR PMSA                         63 187,371         0.05      0.08      0.13             1.2       5.7   0.16     0.13
Cleveland, OH PMSA                        54 249,729         0.29      0.03      0.32             0.8       1.5   0.59     0.64
Fresno, CA MSA                            46 126,694         0.06      0.51      0.57            -0.3       5.1   0.26     0.27
Raleigh--Durham, NC MSA                    7 102,132         0.34      0.02      0.36             2.7       3.9   0.17     0.14
Providence, RI PMSA                       23      86,231     0.07      0.09      0.16            -0.4       5.4   0.44     0.55
Davenport--Rock Island--Moline,           23      62,343     0.09      0.05      0.14            -0.8       2.6   0.17     0.17
Rockford, IL MSA                          13      45,165     0.13      0.06      0.19            0.1        4.4   0.19     0.19
Eugene--Springfield, OR MSA               16      44,121     0.01      0.05      0.06             0.3       5.7    0.02    0.02
Johnstown, PA MSA                         23      36,807     0.02      0.00      0.03            -0.9       1.3    0.14    0.11
Tallahassee, FL MSA                        2      32,366     0.48      0.02      0.50             1.4       2.4    0.32    0.36

Source: U.S. Department of Education, Common Core of Data, 1987 and 1996; authors calculations.


I 23\x\metro\m3Ox
6/28/99
                                                                     Illustrative Data fo 32 Large Urban Dstricts

                                              A              B                   C                           D              E                F            G                H             I              J

iitaEnroifrnt 191 7 prc_enta
   District                Other rate of er!rollment rate (a) Num-
                                            1987            Total               Black
                                                                                                                                            growth Exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                         Al             A2
                                                       nonwhite1                            noriwhte White Nonwhit 1987                                                    ber
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA                                                                                              I
 1 LosAngeles                               582,871           0.83                0.181                      0.091          -3.9                 1.91     0.60                   41 0.24                0.18
 1 Long Beach                                66,186           0.64                0.19                       0.20           -4.1                 4.81     0.57                   31      0.76           0.46
Detoit, Ml
 2lDetroit                                  181,121           0.91                0.89                       0.01               -5.6             0.4          0.671
                                                                                                                                                                               18        0.631 054
 2 Utica Co.                                 23684            0.02                0.00                       0.02                0.4             5.8          0.02               0       0.00           0.09
Houston, TX
                                                                                  0.42                                          -3.4                                             1       0.27           0.39
 3Houston                                   188,370           0.84                                           0.031                                1.6         0.64i
 3 Aldine SD                                 37,483           0.59                0.28                       0.05               -7.1             6.3          0.55               7       2.07           0.83
Boton, MA
 4 Boston                                    59,223           0.75                0.48                       0.081              -3.9              1.8         0.63             21        1.24           0.84
                                             10,124           0.27                0.10                                                                        0.24             121 1.971                1.00
 41Lynn                                                                                                      0.071              -1.61            10.41
Tampa-St. Petersburg, FL                                                                                                               I
 5 HillsboroughCo.                                            0.32                0.21                       0.02                0.31             6.0         0.291              0                      0.191
                                            116,908                                                                                                                                      0.001
 5 PinellasCo.                                                0.20                0.17                       0.021               1.1                          0.191              0       0.001          0.09
                                             88,0071
Milaukee, WI
                                             88,128           0.65                                           0.031              -3.71             3.4         0.57             18        0.79           0.45
1__JMiIwaukee                                                                        0.541
  6 Waukesh                                  12,457           0.08                   0.00                    0.02                0.4              4.1         0.08              0        0.00           0.27
Por land, OR                        I
                                                                                                                                        I


                                             51,171            0.274                 0•16l                   0.091              -0.5              1.81        0.231              8       0.92           0.33
  7lPortland
  7lBeaverton                                21,921            0.101                 0.01                    0.07                2.0             11.2         0.10                       0.00           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                 01
TVeIand,OH                              I


  8 Cleveland                                70,099            0.76                  0.70                        0.01           -1.31             0.7         0.72                           0.95       0.65
  8Parma                                I
                                              12,141             0.03                0.01                        0.01            0.&              7.81        0.03               0           0.00       0.10
1Freno CA
  9IFresno                                   61,3651             0601                0.11                        0.161          -4.0              5.21        0.461              0           0.00       0.13
  9 Clovis                              I    17,961              0.27                0.02                        0.091           4.2              9.0         0.251              0           0.00       0.05
 Raleigh-Durham, NC
 lOWakeCo.                                    59,562             0.29                0.27                        0.021           3.6              4.9         0.28 1              01 0.001               0.10
                                              26,022             0.52                0.50                        0.01            -1.5             3.2         0.34                01 0.00                0.191
 10Durham
 Providence, RI                                                                                                                                                                                     I


 11 Providence                                19,2371            0.57                0.25                        0.121
                                                                                                                                 -4.61            5.5         0.481               6          1371 0.68
 11 Warwick                                   11,8341            0.02                0.01                        0.011           -0.1             6.3         0.021                  0       0.001 0.04
 Davenport-Rock Island-Moline, 10                                       1




 12Davenport                                  18,019                                 0.14                                        -1.6                         0.17                   5       0.76        0.25
                                                                 0.191                                           0.021                             3.0        0.101                          O.OOI 0.23
 12 Moline                                     7,932             0.11                0.03                        0.021           -0.91            4.91                               1

 Rockford, IL                                           I
                                                                                             I


 l31Rockford                                  26,669             0.28                0.21                        0.031           -1.8              4.01        0.24                  21 0.49 0.23
 l3lHarlem                                     6,244             0.04                0.01                        0.01             0.4              7.91        0.041                 0 0.00              0.10
 Eugene-Springfield, OR
 14 Eugene                                    17,250             0.07                0.021                                       -0.71             4.9         0.07,                 0       0.00           0.11
                                                                                                                 0.041
  l41Springfield                               9,894             0.061 0i± 0.04!                                                  1.0              6.2         0.06                  0 0.00                 0.08
                                                                                                                                                                       I
 Johnstown, PA                                                                                   I


  15'GreaterJohnstown                          4,072                fftThdT1                                     0.18            -1.9             -0.7t        0.171                 7       1.501          0.59
  15 Somerset                                  3,104             0.00                01I 0.01                                    -0.51            14.61        0.011                 0       0.00           0.08
 TaHahassee, FL                                    -                        I


  16 LeonCo.                                  23,983                                 0.36                         0.01           1.80             3.70         0.31                  0! 0.00                0.00
                                               8,383
                                                                 0.38
                                                                 0.86                0.85                                                         0.40         0.73                  01 0.00                0.51
  16 :Gad5                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                  0.00 I        -5.90 1




                                                      -I
  (a)Exposure rate of whites to nonwhites. Se text. J
 (b)Measures of accessibility Al and A2 are defined in he text. Number refers to tl1e number of district less than 10 miles
 away and with an exposure rate of whites to nonwhites at least oLio less than the listed district.
 Source: Common Core of Data; authoscaulation

  M3OA
               ___________                        •                                                      I
                                            Table 4

                     Growth Rate in White Enrollment at Larger Urban Districts

                                 EmpLofts in                                 Growth
                     N            Btack Hispanic
                                           Other                   Total     rate of
                                                        nonwhite nonwhite whites,
                                                                             1987-96

All                        875       0.18        0.17       0.05     0.40        -1.06


By size of metropolitan area enrollment

5,000-50,000               187       0.14        0.09       0.03      0.25        0.12
50,001-150,000             240       0.19        0.15       0.03      0.37       -0.45
150,001-350,000            241       0.16        0.14       0.06      0.36       -0.82
>350,000                   207       0.22        0.26       0.07      0.54       -2.54


By region

Border                      24       0.19        0.02       0.04      0.24       -0.60
Midwest                    255       0.27        0.05       0.03      0.35       -1.26
Northeast                   78       0.19        0.11       0.03      0.33       -1.53
South                      200       0.22        0.19       0.02      0.43       -0.29
West                       318       0.09        0.24       0.10      0.42       -1.58

Source: U.S. Department of Education, Common Core of Data, 1987 and 1996; author's
calculations tablem36.sas 5/12/99 13:03

M36
6/28/99
                                                           Table 5

H                               Illustration o Data Items or Three Me ropolitan Arias and their L rgest Distri s




Metropolitanarea                    Total        Pere      tacieof enro merit.   17       Segregation,        Distance    _Grwth4
DISTRICTS                       I enrollment    Black       Hispanic       Other NW          1987)           to largest   Nonwhites   Whites
                                                                                                               district

Detroit MI PMSA                 r'-
DETROIT CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT        18i,121         88.8             2.0          0.6                 26.6          0.0        0.40      -5,57
UTICA COMMUNITY SCHOOLS                              0.3             0.5          1.6                  1.3         13.2        5.76       0.39
WAYNE-WESTLAND COMMUNITY S D          1r44j          8.9             0.9          1.3                 11.3         14.5        1.96      -2.63
LIVONIA PUBLIC SCHOOLS                166            0.4             0.4          1   .                0.3         14.0        7.42       0.83
WARREN CONSOIJDATED SCHOOLS           15,784         0.7             0.4          3.4     _________    1.1         11.0       -0.34      —1.11
PLYMOUTH CANTON COMM SCHS            15,542          1.3             0.4          2,9                  0.7         19.9        7.42      -0.38
PONTIAC CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT         15,149         51.6             8.7          2.4                  4.1         20.7       -0.22      -6.18
TAYLOR SCHOOL DTRICT                j23              6.1             1.6          2.4                  4,          13.4        3.04      -2.32
All Others                          415,846          6.1             0.9          2.2                 36.                      3.07       0.46


Anaheim, CA PMSA

SANTA ANA UNIFIED                    36              3.0         75.3            10.3                 17.3          0.0        4.66      -8.94
GARDEN GROVE UNIFIED                 36231           1.5         27.6            24.1                 16.9          4.3        6.11      -5.12
ORANGE UNIFIED    —______            24,524          1.8          17.6           10.9                  8.l          2.4        7.16      -2.65
SADDLEBACK VALLEY UNIFIED            22,197          1.2          6.2             7.5                              15.3       10.53       2.11
CAPISTRANO UNIFIED                   21844           0.8          8.9             3.6                  6.2         19.6       12.73      4.45
ANAHEIM UN!ON HIGH                   214             2.3         23.9            14.3                  6.3          7.5        6.76      -5.01
IRVINE UNIFIED                       19,367          2.3          5.4            15.7                  2.1          5.1        6.52      -0.54
PLACENTIA-YORBA LINDA UNIFIED        19,326          1.7         15.5             8.1                 12.7          8.8        6.44       0.60
All Others                          137,658          1.9         19.1            13.0                 13.6                     6.95      -1.78



Raleigh-Durharn NC MSA

WAKE COUNTY                          59,562        26.7              0.5         2.3        4.4                    0.0         4.92       3.60
DURHAM PUBLIC SCHOOLS                26,022        50.3              0.3         1.3       33.7                   24.1         3.15      -1.49
CHAPEL HILL-CARRBORO                  5r452        22.2              1.1         4.6 —      1.2                   24.7         4.32       4.48
ORANGE COUNTY                                      27.6              0.6         0.7        0.6                   32.1         0.84       2.19
FRANKLIN COUNTY                       5,963        48.5              0.2         0.1 ______ 7.5                   27.4         0.97       2.72


 1   23\xmetro\m33
6/28/99
                                                                                            -j
                                              Table 6

                     Racial Composition, Accessibility to Whiter Districts, and
                      White Enrollment Growth, 1987-1996, 374 Urban Districts



                            AccesIlltyJo districts with Ioweiexp_ure rates (Al)
District exposure               NONE           MEDIUM         HIGH        ALL
rate of whites to                 0            0.8 or less      Greater
nonwhitesj9Bi                 (No such                         than 0.8
                              districts)


LOW
10% or less                           1.10              (b)         (b)      1.10
                                        99                                     99

MEDIUM
Greater than
10%, less than
or equal to 30%                       1.31          -0.99        -1.45       0.46
                                        69             39           22        130

HIGH
Greater than
30%                                   -1.53         -2.92         -3.20     -2.68
                                         35            45           65        145


ALL                                   0.50          -2.52         -2.84     -1.15
                                       203             84            87       374

Note: The sample consists of districts in the 238 metropolitan areas which had
enrollments in 1987 of 5,000 and which had a least 10 percent of the
metropolitan area's growth rate of white enrollment, weighted by district enrollment.
The top number in each cell is the weighted average annual growth rate of white
enrollment, weighted by district enrollment. The number of districts in each cell
is below the mean in italics.

(a) For each district, Al is positive only if there existed other districts in its
metropolitan area not more than 10 miles away with a white-nonwhite exposusre rate
at least 0.10 less than the district in question. Al is the square root of the ratio of the
enrollments of all such districts to the enrollment of the district in question. See text.

 (b) No districts.

5/26/99 13:12
M39
6/28/99
                                       Table 7

                  Sample Means of Variables for Districts, Weighted by Enrollment

Sample                                           I             II              Ill           IV

Metropolitan enrollment                   50,000 or          Under          50,000 or        All
                                            more             50,000           more

District enrollment                    5,000 or more 5,000 or more 5,000 or more Less than 5,000

District share of metro enrollment     10% or more 10% or more Under 10%

N                                                     187            187              501         3,058


Growth rate of white enrollment,
 1987-1996                                           -1.54          0.12             -0.90         0.56

1987 exposure rate of whites to:
  Nonwhites                                          0.41           0.23              0.28          0.14
  Blacks                                              0.19          0.12              0.07          0.05
  Hispanics                                           0.17          0.08              0.14          0.07
  Other nonwhites                                     0.05          0.03              0.06          0.02

Accessibility to other districts
 with lower exposure rates
    Al                                                0.40           0.24             0.72          0.55
    A2                                                0.28           0.14             0.58          0.57

Change in segregation (S)                            0.001          0.005            0.013         0.001

Metropolitan area growth rate,
 1980-1990                                            1.59           1.27             1.74          0.79

Region
 South                                                0.38           0.41             0.20          0.12
 West                                                 0.33           0.18             0.49          0.20
    Midwest                                           0.21           0.31             0.24          0.43
    Border                                            0.03           0.01             0.02          0.02
    Northeast (excluded category)                     0.05           0.09             0.05          0.23


 5/26/99 10:49; 6/10/99 19:40
M35
 6/28/99
                                                      Table 8

                                     Estimated Equations Explaining Growth Rate in White
                                                 Enrollment, 1987-1996

Sample                                    I               II            Ill     l\f           I           II            Ill
Equation                                 (1)             (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)       (8)
Estimation                               OLS            OLS           OLS       OLS          l.V.         IV.         l.V.      l.V.


Variable

Intercept                                     1.59             0.91      1.15     1.25            1.35     0.86         1.55     1.22
                                              0.55             0.31     0.45      0.11            0.61     0.33         0.56     0.13

Percent nonwhite, 1987                        -6.99       -5.60         -9.67    -9.59        -7.46       -5.51       -11.32 -10.02
                                               0.62        0.65          0.79     0.37         0.67        0.68         1.27     0.45

Accessibility (Al)                            -0.94       -0.95         -0.58    -0.12        -0.99       -0.93        -0.56     -0.13
                                               0.29        0.26          0.13     0.04         0.31        0.27         0.15      0.04

Change in segregation (S)                     8.31             3.13     -2.55    -1.54        -1.97        7.46       -34.48    -62.71
                                              2.04             1.83      2.46     2.00         7.56        9.07        17.26     25.19

Metropolitan area growth rate,
 1980-1 990                                   0.38             0.79      0.30     0.81            0.43     0.76          0.29     0.88
                                              0.14             0.08      0.12     0.06            0.15     0.10          0.14     0.08
Region
 South                                         0.10        -0.28         1.72     1.17            0.22     -0.21         2.51     1.09
                                               0.60            0.37      0.57     0.22            0.64      0.41         0.78     0.25

 West                                         -1.03        -0.52         0.60     0.31            -0.62    -0.50         1.18     0.60
                                               0.59         0.37         0.55     0.22             0.69     0.38         0.71     0.27

  Midwest                                     -0.66        -0.29         0.05     -0.05           -0.16    -0.28        -0.01     0.03
                                               0.54         0.31         0.49      0.14            0.68     0.32         0.57     0.16

  Border                                      -0.94        -0.31         0.30     0.09            -0.71    -0.28         0.57    -0.49
                                               0.77         0.75         0.82     0.32             0.84     0.77         0.97     0.44



 Adjusted R-square                             0.63            0.64      0.55         0.31         0.59        0.63      0.47     0.25

 Note: Numbers below coefficients are standard errors. Bold signifies coefficients that are significantly
 different from zero at the 95 percent level. Regressions are weighted by the square root of 1987
 district enrollment. For definition of samples, see Table 7.

 5/19/99 19:29; 6/10/99 19:40; 6/1 1/99 17:11
 M29
 7/27/99
                                             Table 9

                           Estimated Coefficients for Selected Variables


Equation                        (1)              (2)      (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
Sarrple                          I                II      Ill                        I            II           Ill          I\/
Variable

1987 exposure rate of
whites to:

 Blacks                              -8.34        -5.92   -10.39       -14.19
                                      1.00         0.93     1.31         0.58

 Hispanics                           -6.48        -5.35     -9.43       -8.20
                                      0.70         0.72      0.85        0.40
 Other nonwhites                     -6.98        -9.38   -10.19        -3.58
                                      2.32         3.55     2.12             1.20

Exposure rate to nonwhites                                                               -2.94         -4.95     -3.68       -3.07
                                                                                          4.83         3.77       3.95        1.75

Exposure rate squared                                                               -17.17          0.29       -23.22       -19.25
                                                                                     11.73         10.44        10.28         5.10
Exposure rate cubed                                                                  16.12             -1.43    20.55        13.86
                                                                                          8.28          7.82     7.52         3.90


Adjusted R-square                     0.64         0.63         0.55         0.33         0.65         0.63          0.56     0.31




Note: Coefficients taken from regressions explaining growth rate in white enrollment. Other
explanatory variables included were: the intercept, metropolitan growth rate, accessibility (Al),
change in segregation, and regional dummy variables.
  Numbers below coefficients are standard errors. Bold type signifies coefficients that are significantly
different from zero at the 95 percent level. Regressions are weighted by the square root of 1987
district enrollment. For definition of samples, see Table 7.

5/19/99 19:29; 5/26/99 10:49
M29A
7/27/99
                               Table 10

            Comparison of Estimates with Coleman et. al (1975)

Equation                            (1)               (2)               (3)

Period                            Annual            Annual          1987-1996
                                 changes           changes
                                 1968-73           1968-73

Sample                          21 largest         Next 46         Metro districts
                                central city      central city     at least 5,000
                                 districts,        districts,         and 10%
                                  pooled            pooled              share
                                                                     (Sample I)

Observations                               105              226                187

Intercept                                  1.3              45.2              -0.68
                                                                               1.79

Change in segregation                     27.9               5.6              6.17
                                           6.2               2.6              1.32

Proportion black in district              -13.3             -9.0              -6.21
                                            2.8              1.4               0.85

In (district enrollment)                    0.0             -4.2               0.08
                                            0.8              1.0               0.17

R-square                                   0.29             0.26               0.28


Note: coefficients of Coleman et al. are multiplied by 100 to reflect a dependent
variable measured in percentages rather than proportions, for comparability to
equation (3).

 Source: equations (1) and (2): Coleman et. al (1975), "Insert," Revised
  Table 14; equation (3): Common Core of Data, author's calculations.

 6/14/99 19:47.
 M45
 6/28/99
                                                                Table   11


                                           Segregation in Metropolitan Areas, 1987 and 1996,
                                                   by Size and Region




                          N          1987 segregation              1996 segregation                  Change in segregation--
                                   Total Between Within          Total       Between Within          Total Between Within
                                          districts districts                districts   districts            districts districts




All                       238      0.302     0.222     0.080      0.317        0.240       0.077     0.014      0.017 -0.003


By sizeof metropolitan
 area enrollment

50,000orless              139      0.149     0.083     0.065      0.173        0.107       0.066     0.024      0.024 0.001
50,001-150,000                66   0.283     0.179     0.104      0.293        0.200       0.093     0.010      0.022 -0.012
150,001-350,000               25   0.311     0.243     0.068      0.335        0.261       0.074     0.024      0.019 0.006
Over 350,000                   8   0.427     0.350     0.077      0.428        0.357       0.071     0.000      0.007 -0.006

By region

Border                        7    0.187     0.113     0.073      0.184        0.121       0.063     -0.003     0.007    -0.010
Midwest                    76      0.403     0.340     0.062      0.426        0.367       0.059      0.023     0.026    -0.003
Northeast                     36   0.349     0.303     0.046      0.375        0.341       0.034      0.026     0.038    -0.011
South                      70      0.259     0.135     0.124      0.260        0.144       0.116     0.001      0.009 -0.008
West                       49      0.242     0.172     0.070      0.257        0.183       0.075     0.015      0.011 0.005

Note: segregation is measured by S. See text.

Source: U.S. Department of Education, Common Core of Data, 1987 and 1996; author's
calculations. 6/1/99 13:46.

M41
6/28/99
                                            Table A1

                                       MetopoIitan Areas
                                                           i   the SampI

    Metropolitan area                       RegionPMSA               1987                1987-96----
                                                    code      Enrollment Percent Growth rate
                                                                           nonwhite

1 Abilene, TX MSA                           S           40       21,692          29.4         1.21
2Akron, OH PMSA                                         80      104,5791         16.0         0.41
3Altoona,PAMSA                              N          280       2l,l9&           1.7        -0.16
4 Amarillo, TX MSA                          S          320       35,331                       1.09
                                                                                 25.9k
5 Anaheim--Santa Ana, CA PMSA               W          360      339,314                       2.56
6 Anderson, IN MSA                          M
                                                                                 38.4
                                                                                 11.8        -1.35
                                                       400J      23,085
 7 Anderson, SC MSA                         S          405       25,145          23.7         0.34
 8 Ann Arbor, MI PMSA                       M          440       37,402          21.5         1.21
 9 Appleton--Oshkosh--Nee nah, WI MS        M          460       46,609           4.5         2.18
10 Asheville, NC MSA                        S          480       26,406          12.5         0.80
11 Aurora--Elgin, IL PMSA                   M          620       76,309          22.3         2.60
12Austin, TX MSA                            S          640      124,237          40.7         3.50
13 Bakersfield, CA MSA                      W          680      102,653          41.8          3.01
14 BattleCreek,MIMSA                        M          780       25,177          17.5         -0.10
15 Beaumont--PortArthur, TXMSA              S____      840       71,516          36.3
16 Beaver County, PA PMSA                   N          845       29,150           9.4         -0.01
17 Bellingham,WAMSA                         W          860       18,939          11.0          2.64
18 Benton Harbor, MI MSA                    M          870       29,969          27.8         -0.42
19 Bismarck, ND MSA                         M          1010      1 5,161          3.0         0.81
20 Bloomington, IN MSA                      M          1020      1 2,441          5.5         0.40
21 Bloomington--Normal, IL MSA              M          1040      1 8,854          8.0          1.71
22 Boston, MA PMSA                          N          1120     353,727          20.6          1.01
23 Boulder--Longmont, CO PMSA               W____      1125      35,721          13.8          1.99
24Bradenton, FLMSA                          S       1140         23,574          21.9         3.35
25iBrazoria, TX PMSA                        S          1145      38,975          29.0          1.89
26Bremerton,WAMSA                           W          1150      32,173          13.8         2.78
27EBt1dgeportMilford, CT PMSA               N          1160      5926            32.2          1.61
28 [Bristol, CT PMSA                        N          1170      11,889           5.7         0.84
29 Brockton, MA PMSA                        N          1200      29,045          14.0         0.30
30 Brownsville--Harlingen, TX MSA           S          1240      68,427          91.8         1.65
31 Bryan--College Station, TX MSA           S          1260      15,335          39.5         2.30
32BurIington, NCMSA                         S          1300      16,871          26.2          1.28
33BurIington,VTMSA                          N____ 1305           19,794           2.0          1.40
34Canton, OH MSA                            M          1320      69,689          10.4          0.04
35 Cedar Rapids, IA MSA                       M        1360      28,941           5.4          0.78
36 Champaign--Urbana--Ra        ntoul,  IL M  M        1400      23,253          21.4          0.13
37 Charleston, SC MSA —_____________ S                 1440      81,952          44.1          0.49
38 !Charlotte....Gastonia....Rock Hill,       S        1520 183,793              29.6          1.84
39 Chicago, IL PMSA                           M        1600     854,879          52.1          1.18
40 Chico, CA MSA                              W        1620      25,743          14.8          3.02
41 Cincinnati, OH--KY--IN PMSA                M        1640     218,638,         19.9          0.80
42 Clarksville--Hopkinsville, TN--K          TS        1660      24,410          27.6          2.53
4                                                      1680249,729               32.4          0.99
44,CoradoSprings,COMSA                      W1720 69,725                    --   21.126
    45Columbia, SC MSA                       5              1760'    74,384,      39.6,     1.31
    46Columbus, OH MSA                                      1840     204,921      15.31     1.90
    47 Corpus Christi, TX MSA                 S             1880      76,308      66.5       0.32
    48 Dallas, TX PMSA                       Is             1920     425,508      39.9       2.67
    49Danbury,CTPMSA                          N             1930      28,0301     10.8       0.99
    50 Davenport--Rock Island--Moline,        M             1960      62343       13.8      -0.23
    51 Dayton--Springfield, OH MSA            M                      155,578      19.41     -0.12
                                                   - 2000                         20.6       3.58
    52 Daytona Beach, FL MSA                  S             2020      41,400
    53 Decatur, IMSA                          M             2040      21,149      20.5      -1.07
    54Denver,COPMSA                           W             2080     262,862      26.6       2.08
    55 Des Moines, IA MSA                     M____ 2120   64,701                  9.8       1.41
    56Detroit, Ml PMSA                        M      2160H712284                  30.7       0.34
    57Dubuque, IAMSA                          M             22001     12,738       1.5      -0.30
    58,Duluth, MN--WI MSA                     M             2240      41,349       5.2      -1.11     —
    5gIEauClaire,WIMSA                        M             2290      21,611       3.3       1.12
    601E1 Paso, TXMSA                                       2320     130,9471     80.5       1.42
    61 Elkhart--Goshen, IN MSA                M             2330      26,996,      9.3       1.48
    62Enid,OKMSA                              B             2340      10,4971     10.2      -0.27
    63Erie,PAMSA                              N             23601     40,669      io.iI      0.67
    64 Eugene--Springfield, OR MSA            W             2400T     44,121       6.2       0.73
    651Evansville, IN--KY MSA                 M             2440      44,307,      9.4      -0.09
    66 Fall River, MA--RI PMSA                N             2480      21,972       2.8      -0.14
    67iFargo--Moorhead, ND--MN MSA            M             2520      24,1841      3.71      1.541
    68 Fayetteville, NC MSA                   S             2560      44,039      45.3       1.60
    69 ,Fayetteville--Springdale, AR MSA      S             2580      19,377       3.6       2.54
    70 Fitchburg--Leominster, MA MSA          N             2600      12,268      14.1       2.38'
    71 Flint, Ml MSA        -______________   M             2640      87,0991     31.1      -0.57
    72Florence, SC MSA                                      2655      22,471      51.5       0.37
    73 Fort Collins--Loveland, CO MSA        J_W            2670      29,921      10.1       2.31
    74 Fort Lauderdale--Hollywood--Pomp       S             2680     136,139      36.7       4.821
    75 Fort Myers--Cape CoraL, Fl MSA         S             2700'     37,202      21.3       3.45
     76lFortPierce,FLMSA                      S             2710      28,7331     30.6       4.11
     77 Fort Smith, AR--OK MSA                5             2720      33,151       14.0      1.27
     78Fort Walton Beach, FLMSA               S             2750      24,4671      16.7      2.08.
     79lFortWayne,INMSA                       M             2760                   16.41     0.34
     80 Fort Worth--Arlington, TX PMSA        S             2800     219,478       29.3 1    2.40
     81 FresnoCAMSA                           W             2840      126,694      56.9      3.09,
     82 Gainesville, FLMSA                    S             2900       27,483:     34.2       1.96
     83 Galveston--Texas City, TX PMSA        5             2920       54,427      34.5       1.87
     84Gary--Hammond, IN PMSA                 M     ,       2960      113,6341     37.1      -0.31
     85 Grand Forks, ND MSA                   M     1       2985       11,384 1     8.2      0.64
     86'GrandRapids,MIMSA                     'M             300O     103,545      16.0      2.44
     87 Greeley,COMSA                         W         1
                                                             30601     2240        29.4       1.98.
     88 Green Bay,WI MSA                                     3080      30,5521      6.2       1.98     -
     89 Greensboro--Winston-Salem--High       Fs             3120 144,2521         27.1       1.15
     90 Greenville--Spartanburg, SC MSA       ,S        1
                                                             3160 101,783          24.8       0.85
     91 Hamilton--Middletown, OH PMSA         IM             3200      47,5251      7.3,      1.36,
1
     92   Harrisburg--Lebanon--Carlisle, P     N             32401     91,204      13.2:      0.92
     93Hartford,CTPMSA                        N              3280 112,5951         27.5       1.06
     94 Hickory--Morganton,NCMSA                             3290      36,791      12.2       0.92    -—
     95Houston,TXPMSA                         L              3360     591,404      52.0       2.39
     96lndianapolis,INMSA                    jM         1
                                                             34801    204,616      19.4       0.96
                                                                                              2.07
     97 Iowa City, IA MSA                                    35001     10,581        8.21
 98Jackson,MIMSA                           M       3520       23,759      10.9,   027
 99Jackson,TNMSA                           S       3580       13,581      44.3    0.22
100 Jacksonville, FL MSA                   S       3600       141,815     32.5    2.43
101 Jacksonville, NC MSA                 — S       3605        17,201     27.0    2.15
102 Janesville--Beloit, WI MSA             M       3620       24,556      10.0    1.21
103 Johnstown, PA MSA                      N       3680       36,807       2.6    -0.82
104 Joliet, IL PMSA                        M       3690        66,551     21.7     1.70
105KaIamazoo,MlMSA                         M       3720        32,194     19.1     0.60
106 Kankakee,ILMSA                         M       3740        17,635     27.8     0.08
107   Kenosha, WI PMSA                     M       3800        19,979 L   15.1    2.71
108   Killeen--Temple, TX MSA              S       3810       46,7121     37.4    2.57
109   Knoxville, TN MSA                    S____   3840       95,561       9.0     1.12
110   Kokomo,INMSA                         M       3850       18,698       7.6    -1.01
111   LaCrosse, WI MSA                     M       3870       13,466       7.2     1.56
112 Lafayette--WestLafayette, IN MS        M       3920       16,859       4.8    0.87
113 Lake County, IL PMSA                   M       3965       85,011      19.6    2.78
114 Lakeland--Winter Haven, FL MSA         5       3980       59,331      25.8    1.95
115 Lancaster, PA MSA                      N____   4000       56,470      11.8    1.99
116 Lansing--East Lansing, MI MSA          M       4040       74,596      16.8    -0.07
117 Laredo,TXMSA                           S       4080        31,642     95.5    3.86:    —
118 Las Vegas,   NVMSA                             4120        96,346     26.8    6.60
119 Lawrence, KS MSA                       M____ 4150       9,792         14.4    2.62
120 Lawton, OK MSA                         B       4200    22,558         34.0    0.27
121 Lexington-Fayette, KY MSA              B       4280    53,337         16.1    0.23
122  Lima, OH MSA                          M       4320    29,320         12.4    -0.26,
123  Lincoln, NE MSA                       M       4360    29,774          6.3     1.82
124  Little Rock--North Little Rock,       S       4400    87,065         33.0    0.39
125  Longview--Marshall, TX MSA            5       4420    34,564         30.9    0.52
 126 Lorain--Elyria, OH PMSA               M____   4440    48,707         19.4    0.60
 127 Los Angeles--Long Beach, CA PMSA      W____   4480 1,301,780         71.1     1.56
1128 Louisville, KY--IN MSA                B____   4520   146,569         21.9    -0.05
 129 Lubbock, TX MSA                       S       4600    40,666         46.0     0.17
 130Madison, WI MSA                        M       4720    49,076          8.9    2.31
 131 Mansfield, OH MSA                     M____   4800        23,236     11.1    -0.41
 132'Mcallen--Edinburg--Mission, TX M      S____   4880       101,340     94.1    2.73
:133 Medford, OR MSA                       W       4890        24,061      6.0     1.82
 134 LMelbourne--Titusville--Palm Bay,     S       4900        49,288     16.8    3.26
 135 Merced, CA MSA                        W       4940        36,140     52.2    2.87
 136 Miami--Hialeah, FL PMSA               5       5000 —     251 740     77.3     3.01
 137 Middletown, CT PMSA                   N       5020        11,927     13.6     1.70
 138 Midland, TX MSA                       S____   5040        20,758     37.7     1.70
 139MiIwaukee,WIPMSA                       M____   5080       210,975     31.1     1.52
 140 Minneapolis--St. Paul, MN--WI MS      M       5120       362,338     11.6     1.97
 141 Modesto, CA MSA                       W       5170        66,324     31.9     3.05
 142 Muncie, IN MSA                        M       5280 -      17,973     10.2    -0.58
 143 Muskegon, Ml MSA              —______ M       5320        30,037     22.6     0.97    —
 144 Naples, FL MSA                        S       5345        17,503     29.8     5.16
 145 Nashville, TN MSA                     S       5360       151,621     22.2     1.82
 146New Bedford, MAMSA                     N       5400        26,377     13.5    -0.82
 147 New Britain, CT PMSA                  N       5440        16,931     25.0     2.71
 148 New Haven--Meriden, CT MSA            N       5480        68,638     27.2     1.49 —
 149 New London--Norwich, CT--RI MSA               5520   —    35,881     i1.0     0.81
 150Norwalk, CT PMSA                      IN
                                           N       5760                   25.3E    1.53
                                                               16,551
                                                     60,290     7.6     1.93
204Spokane,WAMSA                             7840
                                       M     7880    28407     144      087
205 Springfield ILMSA
206 Springfield, MA MSA
207Stamford,CTPMSA
                               —
                                             8000
                                             8040
                                                     74,385
                                                     23,391
                                                               25.4
                                                               27.6
                                                                        1.00
                                                                        2.04,
                                                                                     -
208 State College, PA MSA                    8050    12,626     3.9     1.31
209Stockton,CAMSA                      W     8120    85,946    48.2      2.17
210Tacoma,WAPMSA                       W     8200    95,768    19.5      2.36
211 Tallahassee, FLMSA                 ,S    8240    32,366    50.1      1.88
212 Tampa--St. Petersburg--Clearwate    S    82801 244,906     23.8      2.53
213 Terre Haute, IN MSA                      8320    21,820     6.2     -0.30
214Texarkana, TX--Texarkana, AR MSA    S
                                             8360    23,913    30.6     -0.20        -—
215Toledo, OH MSA                      M     8400'   97,212    21.8      0.02
216Topeka,KSMSA                        M     8440    25,694    18.T      0.47
217Tucson,AZMSA                              8520 lO3,l48      39.7      2.08
218Tsa,OKMSA                           B     8560    123,726   23.5      1.03
                                       S     8640    28,197    33.7     0.57
219Tyler,TXMSA                                                           2.43
220 Vallejo--Fairfiek--Napa, CA PMS          8720J   67,876    36.1
221   Vancouver, WA PMSA               W     8725    42,947     8.4      3.39
222Victoria,TXMSA                      S     8750    15,019    52.7      0.41
223 Visalla--Tulare--Porterville, CA   W     8780    64,071    52.7      2.58
224Waco,TXMSA                          5     8800    32,315    39.1      1.77
225Waterbury,CTMSA                      N    8880    29,709    23.6      1.90
Waterloo--Cedar Falls, IA MSA           M    8920    24,495    11 .9    -0.49
227Wausau,WIMSA                         M    8940     17,601    4.0      1.38
228 West Palm Beach--Boca Raton--Del    S    8960     89,458   36.8      4.66;
                                        M    9040,    79,865   18.9      1.46
 229Wichita,KSMSA                       S    9080              26.0      0.58
 230 Wichita Falls, TX MSA                            21,188
 231 Williamsport, PA MSA              IN    9140     19,850    2.7      0.27
 232 Wilmington, NC MSA                 S     9200    19,192   30.9      1.31
 233 Worcester, MA MSA                  N     9240    62,348    11 .2    1 .85
 234 Yakima, WA MSA                     W     9260    36,279   35.4      2.64
 235 York, PA MSA                       N     9280    58,544     7.5     1.79
                                                                        -0.74
 236Youngstown--Warren,OHMSA
 237 Yuba City, CA MSA
                                        M
                                        W
                                            j320
                                              9340
                                                      82,795
                                                      22,348
                                                                18.1
                                                                30.7     2.19
 238_Yum AZ MSA             -           W     936O    20,713    57.0     3.25
                                                                                 ;

 c:\123\x\m26
7T799
                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                           PredictedResponse of White Enrollmentto Exposure Rate
                                                (Predicted Rate by ExposureRate. Calculated at Mean Values of Other Variables)




          -
              lgn' ¶'4tf,'h$Y                                                                                       H--
              I
                  tVr
              i—rd --'r —'---
                            ,              -&     S/
         o
                        -
                                                                                                                        ______
              .   "Sr                                                               SampleI                                                         Sample 2




                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                             y      r3   r
                                                                                                     .                                       v:;j
                            tsp.:SwefaSt                                                                             Exposurerat.




                                                                                    Sample3                                                         Sample4




                            Exposurstat.




Source: Table 9
                                                     Figure 2


              Number of Metropolitan Areas by Segregation Index (S)

  45
   40
   35
   30
   25
   20                                                                                               [m96
   15
   10
     5
     0


   c'•                          ¶:19'
                                                                D                    #•       ,\c
                         D'             ''
                                                                     .10 and less than .15.
Note: Data ranges exclude lower bound, i.e., .1O-.15 is greater than
Source: Common Core of Data; author's calculations.
