NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GREEN TAXES AND
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
THE CASE OF CARBON TAXATION
Sjak Smulders
Herman R.J. Vollebergh
Working Paper 7298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7298

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

We thank participants of the FEEM/NBER (pre-)conference “Distributional and Behavioral Effects of
Environmental Policy” in Milan, January and June 1999, as well as Dallas Burtraw, Jan Pieters, and especially
Don Fullerton for their detailed comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Sjak Smulders and Herman R.J. Vollebergh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to

exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Green Taxes and Administrative Costs:
The Case of Carbon Taxation
Sjak Smulders and Herman R.J. Vollebergh
NBER Working Paper No. 7298
August 1999
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the trade-off between incentive effects and administrative costs associated with
the implementation of various environmental tax instruments, with special reference to carbon taxes. In a
simple model, we show under what conditions it is optimal to use input rather than emission taxes to
internalize environmental externalities. Mixed tax regimes are also studied. If linkage of emissions to inputs
is close, if abatement possibilities are costly, and if administrative costs of emission taxes are high, emission
taxes should not be introduced. It is shown that these conditions directly apply to current tax policies
toward CO2 emissions in several European countries that harness pre-existing energy taxes. First, there is
a one-to-one correspondence between carbon content of energy and CO2 emissions. Second, only few
possibilities exist to abate CO2 emissions separately. Third, “piggy-backing” on existing administration for
energy excises allow to save on administrative costs. Broadening the carbon tax base by removing certain
widely-used exemptions for energy production (and possibly adding emission taxes or abatement subsidies
for selected industries) is likely to increase incentives for carbon reduction without significant additional
administrative costs.
Sjak Smulders
Herman R.J. Vollebergh
Department of Economics and CentERDepartment of Economics
Tilburg University
Erasmus University Rotterdam
5000 LE Tilburg
P.O. Box 1738
The Netherlands
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands

1

1. Introduction

Implementing enviromnental policies -- through standards, tradable permits or
environmental taxes alike -- is far from costless. For instance, when
implementing an
environmental tax, the tax department has to run a special unit to enforce and collect taxes

and to monitor compliance. In practice, the costs of implementing environmental policies
plays a significant role in the choice between different policy options. The proposals of the

European Commission for a European wide energy/C02-tax provide clear examples
(Vollebergh, 1995). Instead of proposing a totally new tax on C02-emissions, the European
Commission employed the close linkage between C02—emissions and the implicit taxation of

carbon by the existing taxes on energy products (which are usually intermediate inputs).
Indeed, using existing instruments rather than introducing new ones to address new policy
areas may save considerably on administrative costs.

However, just minimization of transaction costs might come at a cost for society. A
strategy based on input taxes, for example, foregoes the gains that are potentially reaped by
a more direct way of taxing the externality through emission taxes. Any deviation from the

principle of taxing externalities at the point where they arise, introduces an incentive to
misallocate resources. Thus a trade-off arises between minnnizing transaction costs and
directly inducing incentive effects. The optimal tax structure has to balance the burden of
complex and expensive-to-run tax systems against the incentives it induces to internalize the

externality that is aimed to be addressed.

This paper investigates the potential trade-off between administrative costs and
incentives of environmental regulation, in particular if the government aims to reduce CO2

2

emissions. We analyze how the optimal choice of carbon taxes is affected by the
administrative cost incurred by the regulator (government). Using a simple model, we
determine the optimal rates for emission and input taxes in the presence of administrative
costs and which of these taxes should optimally be introduced. Moreover, we explore and

interpret the scarce empirical evidence on administrative costs of taxation in the light of
optimal carbon taxation. As empirical information on the role of implementation cost in the

design of environmental policy is almost entirely lacking, we concentrate on what factors

might be expected to determine those costs, based on studies about administrative costs
outside the environmental policy area.

Although most formal analysis of environmental regulation ignores administrative

costs, compliance costs, or transaction costs in general, a growing literature takes these

issues seriously (see overview of Krutilla, 1999).1

Several

papers recognize that

administrative costs may be important and rule out the use of emission taxes on these

grounds. It is typically investigated which taxes could best replace or 'approximate'
emission taxes (Smith, 1992). Moreover, under some circumstances other taxes or tax
combinations are even equivalent to perfect emission taxes (that is, emission taxes in a
world without transaction costs). For instance, Xepapadeas (1999) reviews the conditions
under which input taxes and emission taxes are equivalent. Eskeland and Devarajan (1996)

show how the combination of mandated technology and output taxes approaches the ideal

emission tax. Fullerton and Wolverton (1997) propose to combine output taxes and
subsidies on clean goods, or more general two-part instrument systems of a deposit-refund
nature, to replace the monitoring-costly emission tax.

The implicit assumption in these papers, however, is that emission taxes are

3

prohibitively costly to administer and that other taxes have negligibly low administrative
costs. We extend this approach by more explicitly taking into account administrative costs

of all type of taxes, without assuming beforehand that emission taxes will always be the

most costly type of tax from the administrative point of view. In particular we allow
different tax instruments to feature differences in administrative costs, which, in addition,
are endogenously dependent on the tax rates. Once other taxes as well as emission taxes are

subject to significant administrative costs, it becomes unlikely that the first-best optimum

can be reached. Hence, alternative tax systems should be considered that are no longer
equivalent to perfect emission taxes.

Shortle, Horran and Abler (1998) study to what extent input taxes can approach
perfect emission taxes if not all inputs that directly affect emissions can be taxed. We
extend their analysis by explicitly taking into account administrative costs and allowing for
the simultaneous use of emission and input taxes. We find that a mixed tax system might be

(second-best) optimal. Schmutzler and Goulder (1997) arrive at a similar result in a model

of mixed output and emission taxation that incorporates monitoring. We complement their

analysis by investigating input taxation and by exploring in more detail how optimal tax

rates in the presence of administative costs differ from Pigouvian taxes. Administrative
costs in our model mainly represent costs stemming from monitoring, and thus our paper is

related to the literature on monitoring and enforcement of environmental policy (see Cohen

1998 for a survey). As we are primarily interested in optimal taxation rather than optimal
monitoring, we do not model monitoring in an explicit way.

The theoretical part of this chapter is also closely related to the chapter by Fullerton,

Hong and Metcalf (1999) in this volume. The two chapters complement each other in

4
various respects. Both chapters compare ideal emission taxes with alternative taxation, but

differ with respect to the production structure and the government budget constraint. First,
Fullerton et al. analyse a model in which there is a on-to-one correspondance between input
use and emissions. Input taxes and emission taxes are therefore equivalent, but output taxes

provide an (imperfect) substitute form of taxation. In contrast, our model separates input
use from emissions, and considers abatement explicitly. Accordingly, we allow for three

ways to reduce pollution, viz, output reduction, input reduction and abatement. We study
input taxation as an (imperfect) substitute for emission taxes. Second, whereas Fullerton at
al. consider a second-best world with a distortionary labor tax for revenue-raising purposes,

the second-best nature of policies considered here arises because of administrative costs.
Thus, the present chapter abstracts from tax-interaction effects due to recycling effects.

The structure of our paper is as follows. First, we explain the nature of the trade-off
involved if the implementation cost of corrective taxes, in particular administrative costs,

are considered explicitly. Second, we analyze a stylized model that incorporates both
emission and input taxes to sort out critical determinants that shape this trade-off. Finally,

we evaluate both explicit and implicit carbon taxation in OECD countries in terms of the
trade-off and suggest some opportunities for welfare improving carbon tax policies. Note in

advance, that taxing carbon inputs is not equivalent to taxing CO2 emissions as is
sometimes suggested. Although a close linkage exist between the carbon content of energy
products and C02-emissions, this is not a fixed chemo-technological relationship as several
opportunities for carbon abatement or removal exist (Holloway et.al., 1996).

2. The trade-off between incentives and administrative costs

5

In this section we argue that the administrative cost argument per se is not sufficient to rule
out the implementation of emission taxes. In the presence of administrative costs, the costs

and benefits associated with each specific type of tax should be compared. First, we
hypothesize which factors influence the shape of the administrative cost curve. Next, we
show why administrative cost introduce such a general trade-off between cost and benefits
of different implementation strategies. We also develop some useful terminology.

2.1. Administrative costs

We defme transaction costs as the costs associated with the tax assessment, collection and

enforcement, and all other costs incurred by any party to enable, faciliate, and ensure
transactions from tax payers to tax authorities (Vollebergh, 1995). An alternative term that
we will use is implementation costs. The terms include ex-ante costs (e.g. cost of exclusion)

and ex-post costs (e.g. monitoring cost). It is conmion to categorize these costs further into

cost for the government (tax receiver), or administrative cost, to handle forms and enforce

compliance, and the cost for the tax liable agent (tax payer), or compliance cost, to carry

out the obligations of calculating and paying the tax (see Sandford et al. 1989). In our
analysis we concentrate on administrative cost.2

Administrative costs of a particular tax are closely related to the base to which the tax

is applied. The tax base usually varies with the type of tax. For example, an emission tax
taxes physical volumes of hazardous substances, while an input tax taxes such substances

indirectly, for instance through its use as (intermediate) inputs. In turn, these differences

induce both tax authorities and tax payers to set up and maintain different systems for

6
collecting and processing information about the tax, that is, to record how much is emitted
or how much input is used, in order to be able to calculate total tax payments due.

One important characteristic of the tax base that determines (differences in)
administrative costs is the number of agents liable to the tax. A large number of taxable
legal units implies a large implementation cost for the tax agency since each unit requires
separate treatment. Taxing a particular pollutant that is emitted by many producers may be
associated with large administrative costs. Taxing the inputs from which the pollutant arises

as a by-product may be associated with significantly lower administrative costs. For
instance, inputs need no longer be taxed at the points of consumption, but can also be taxed

at the point of delivery, such as gas stations or distributors of electricity. Hence, switching
from emissions to inputs as the tax base could change administrative costs.

Note that the difference in administrative costs is independent of the induced
regulatory effect. It is a difference in the fixed cost component of administrative cost. This

regards the set-up cost and part of the cost to run the information system. Each liable unit

submits its own tax form. The cost of processing forms depends on the number of forms
rather than the tax amount due. Nevertheless, this still leaves the possibility of economies
of scale for a given type of tax. If the tax base can be broadened across a larger number of
tax payers, the overall administrative cost per tax payer

can be reduced. A s e c o n d

important determinant of administrative costs is measurability of the base. In most cases
emission levels are likely to be more difficult to measure, report and record than input or

output levels. Heterogeneity across industries and their technologies compounds to the

complexity of a tax system. For instance, a tax base in terms of weighted units of

7
measurement, rather than in terms of a single unit, may be expected to create higher

administrative costs if firms use highly firm-specific technologies. One well-known
example is NOR-emissions from road transportation which depends on vehicle type,
equipment, fuel type, driving patterns, etc. (see also Hoel, 1998, p.89).

Administrative costs are also likely to vary with the tax rates and the revenue raised. The

possibility of evasion by tax payers asks for monitoring expenditures by regulators. The
remark by Fullerton (1995, p.7) that many of the administrative costs "are 'fixed' costs of
calculating the tax base, not marginal costs of collecting more revenue by raising the rate of

tax on a given tax base" seem to call for a qualification in this respect. The larger is the tax

bill, the larger are the incentives to evade tax payment and the more attractive it is for the
regulator to spend resource to reduce tax evasion.

Regulators usually have various strategies for monitoring and need to sort out the
efficient choice of monitoring levels and techniques. A large literature on monitoring and
enforcement studies this policy in detail (Cohen 1998). Here, we do not need to dig into

this level of detail. With respect to environmental monitoring, we can safely assume that

when the optimal mix of monitoring instruments is chosen, total cost of monitoring is
increasing in the extent to which stochastic elements determine actual pollution, in the
number of polluters, the variety of production and abatement techniques used, and in the
difficulty of measuring emissions.

To sum up, no general shape can be assumed cx ante for different type of taxes.
However, it seems fruitful to assume that both fixed and variable costs (varying with the tax

rate) play a significant role. Both in theory and practice, we need a case-by-case approach

8

to study the nature and implications of administrative costs.

2.2. The role of linkage

Efficiency of instruments to reach a certain policy goal is usually defined in terms of the
extent to which the instrument increases social welfare. The most efficient instrument to hit

a given target has the smallest gross welfare cost, where gross welfare cost3 refers to the
change in welfare apart from that arising from the reduction in the externality .
In a first-best world without transaction costs, different instruments can be ranked in

terms of efficiency by investigating their effect on private welfare. Things become more
complicated in a world with transaction costs as both administrative cost and the linkage
between regulatory aim, emission reduction, and the type of tax used to regulate play a role

(Smith, 1992). First of all, different type of taxes usually differ with respect to the
directness of the incentive they provide to reducing emissions (assuming emission reduction

reflects the goal of the government). Less direct taxation of the marginal damages caused

by an individual pollutor causes an efficiency loss but may lower administrative costs.
Furthermore, different instruments not only differently distort private welfare directly, but
also indirectly through their implications for transaction costs. The usual gross welfare cost
of taxation has to be supplemented by the transaction cost of the tax.

Before turning to how welfare analysis of environmental taxation is influenced by
transaction cost, it is useful to clarify and precisize our terminology. We explicitly separate
out the transaction costs from the total change in welfare associated with the use of a certain

(tax) instrument. Hence, in our case of environmental taxation, we distinguish (i)

9

administrative (transaction) costs, (ii) the welfare gain from an improvement in the
environment, (iii) the "residual" welfare change, that is the gross welfare cost ignoring
transaction costs. The latter component will be called "private gross welfare cost" •6 Au
instrument that has relatively low private gross welfare costs is called relatively privately
efficient. Of course, in a world without transaction costs, efficiency just coincides with this
notion of private efficiency, since gross welfare costs do not contain transaction costs.

Thus, the relative efficiency of different type of taxes can be measured with the
following formula:

U= Y-T--D(E)

(1)

where U is social welfare of the representative agent, V is gross private welfare, T is the
welfare loss due to transaction (administrative) costs, and D is the damage from pollution.
Let t1 and t2 be two different tax regimes that yield the same aggregate emissions: E(t1) =
E(t2). The private costs of t1 are lower than those of t2

if: Y(t1) >

Y(t2).

We do not need to discuss extensively the determinants of "private efficiency" here,

since they are well-known from analyses without transaction costs. For example, the
efficiency of a tax to internalize pollution externalities is larger if the individual's tax bill is

more directly linked to the externality. Hence emission taxes are more (privately) efficient

than input taxes. Also, efficiency requires that the effective tax rate on marginal
contributions to damage (D) is equal across pollutors. Hence, an emission tax that applies to

all polluters is (privately) more efficient than an emission tax with exemptions or a nonuniform emission tax.

10

As noted in the introduction, it is often argued that emission taxes are too costly to

implement and that administrative costs provide a basic motivation for other (tax)
solutions.7 However, instead of simply assuming that such a shift away from emission taxes

is optimal, we aim at explicitly deriving such a conclusion within a comprehensive welfare

framework. A first step in this direction has been taken by McKay, Pearson and Smith's
(1990) who hypothesize that a clear trade-off exists between shifts in the tax system to save

on transaction costs on the one hand, and tax reforms that harness incentives and promote

(private) efficiency, on the other hand. They assume that regulation that is linked less
directly to the externality indeed saves on administrative costs, but that it comes at a cost
for society by distoring private decisions more.

Figure 1 illustrates. The horizontal axis measures different tax systems with respect to

the directness with which they address incentives to reduce damage. For example, an
emission tax ranks high, an input tax ranks low. Taxes on different inputs rank differently,

depending on the closeness of the linkage between input use and emissions subject to
regulation. The vertical axis measures two components of utility. The figure compares a
continuum of different tax systems. It is assumed that all of them yield the same level of

damage D by appropriate choice of tax rates. The two curves represent the other two
components of overall utility, transaction costs T and private utility Y, for each of the tax
systems. Administrative costs T increase when taxation is better linked to emissions. The
idea behind this is that more direct taxation implies less links to already existing procedures

of the existing tax system. The (private) utility loss Y also increases with the linkage of
taxation to emissions. The more direct taxation is, the larger (private) utility is for a given
level of emissions.

11

INSERT Figure 1

The optimal tax system balances transaction costs and efficiency. In the figure, welfare is
maximized by choosing an indirect tax that corresponds to points A and B. The complete
switch to emission taxes is too costly: the associated increase in administrative costs would
outweigh the gains from having a more direct tax with better incentives.

Figure 1 is hypothetical and suggestive. As noted before, we have to assess different

tax proposals case-by-case. For example, if marginal administrative costs increase only

slowly, emission taxes may be optimal despite the presence of administrative costs.
Moreover, it is not guaranteed at all that the curves T and Y have nice convex and concave
shapes respectively. Smulders and Vollebergh (1998), for instance, represent the linkage to

pollution by the fraction of (symmetric) sectors that is liable to an emission tax, and fmd in

a very simple setting that the Y curve first declines and then increases. In general,
administrative costs introduce non-convexities because of their fixed-cost nature, and the
conventional marginal approach to optimal taxation has to be extended.

Administrative costs have many dimensions. The government may affect
administrative costs by varying the number of firms or sectors subject to the tax, the tax

rates chosen for input and emission taxes, accuracy of measurability aimed for, and
enforcement spending to reduce the (probability of) tax evasion, and so on. Each of these

dimensions can be measured along the horizontal axis in a figure similar to Figure 1.
Needless to say, each of these factors directly influences the overall welfare effect of
implementing environmental taxes.

Not only the multi-dimensionality of administrative costs makes the simple diagram of

12

Figure 1 problematic. As Feldstein has pointed out long ago (Feldstein, 1976), a careful
distinction should be made between the design of a tax system de novo and the reform of an

existing tax system. This is true for its associated administrative system as well. Indeed, in

practice every tax reform starts from a given tax and administrative system inherited from
the past. This system determines the (short run) scope for welfare improving tax reform at
low administrative cost (Smith, 1992; Vollebergh, 1995).

For instance, increasing existing taxes, rather than introducing new taxes might save

on the "fixed costs" of administration and therefore on total administrative costs. Such
economies of scale and scope are also attractive to exploit when designing enviromnental

taxes. Levying environmentally motivated taxes on a base that is already taxed for other

purposes, rather than introducing an entirely new emission tax, would certainly save on
administrative costs. Furthermore, also economies of scope with the administrative system
used for other regulatory instruments may arise. When implementing environmental taxes,

the regulator could benefit from experience in related administrative procedures for

operations already undertaken. Like Smith (1992), we label this use of existing
administrative procedures and experience for new purposes "piggy-backing".

3. Critical determinants shaping the trade-off

This section develops a simple model along the lines of Kaplow (1990) and Shortle, Horran

and Abler (1998) to compare emission taxes and input taxes in the presence of
administrative costs. The aim of the regulator is to correct externalities from pollution. The
presence of administrative costs implies that the regulator should deviate from the first-best

13

Pigouvian tax. Hence, administrative costs in itself cause policies to be second best. We
abstract from other second-best issues. In particular, we assume that lump-sum taxes and

transfers are available to the government, so that there is no revenue requirement that
affects tax rates and we can ignore labour taxes.8

3.1. The model

We assume a given number of heterogenous sectors, indexed i. Production of one unit of
fmal output q. requires labour I, and a single homogenous intermediate input x (in amount

xj. Moreover, firms can spend labour services on abatement a, which reduces emissions
per unit of output e•. The minimum labour requirement per unit of output equals 1(x1).

Labour and inputs are substitutes: I, '3i,Ix1 <0. Emissions per unit of output depend
negatively on abatement effort and positively on inputs: e1(a,x1) with e7, 'ae1Iaa <0 and

'ae,/ax1>
Final good producers face a (sector-specific) emission tax and a (per unit) input tax
(tfl). Perfect

competition prevails, and firms take the output price P as given. They

maximize profits by choosing output, abatement and input levels. We normalize the wage to

unity. The first order conditions can be written as:

p1 =

1

I,

+ a1 +

e•

(—eaj')c and

(p + t1)x1,

(2)

waloe,'°

(3)

14

+ t + r1e '

— l' and

waloe.

(4)

Equation (2) says that price equals cost which in turn equals labour cost for production,
labour cost for abatement, and taxes due per unit of output. Condition (3) states that with
positive abatement levels, the marginal cost of abatement (on the left-hand side) equals the

marginal benefits in the form of reduces emission tax payments (on the right-hand side).

Condition (4) equates the marginal cost to the marginal benefits of input use. Marginal
input costs consist of price of the input p, the sector-specific input tax t and the induced

additional emission tax payments. Marginal benefits consists of the labour saving in
production.

The intermediate good is produced with labour only and subject to constant returns to

scale. We choose units such that one unit of labour produces one unit of the intermediate.
For simplicity we assume that the production of the intermediate input is non-polluting (but

this can be easily modified in a way that is completely analogous to pollution in the final
goods sector). Intermediate good producers face a price p which they take as given. Hence,

their first order condition for profit maximization simply states that the price equals the
wage which is normalized to one:

(5)

Equilibrium in the market for the input requires:11

X=x1q1

15

where X is total supply of the intermediate good.

We impose a very simple demand structure by choosing a quasi-linear utility function

with no cross-demand effects, and where the opportunity cost of labour is constant (and
normalized to one). The utility function is:

U = u(q1) + 1 - D(E)

(6)

where l is leisure, D is damage from emissions, and E is aggregate emissions defined as

E=

(7)

Consumers take prices and emissions as given and maximize utility, subject to their budget

constraint p1q1 =L —10+Z, where Z are transfers from the government. The first order
conditions read:

(8)

The government collects tax revenue, pays civil servants for the tax administration (I) and

rebates the remainder of tax revenue to households in a lump-sum fashion (Z). The tax
administration employs T units of labour at wage w =1. The required administrative costs
are sector-specific and depend on sectoral taxes and output levels.12

T=

F1(I, Ia,) + V( z, t, q)

(9)

16

where F represents the fixed cost of the tax system, and V represents the administrative

costs varying with the size of the rates and bases of the tax system. Fixed costs are
determined only by certain taxes being implemented or not. This is modeled by the
dependence of F on indicator functions ) each of which takes a value 1 if tax t'(e.g.

is

positive and a value zero if the tax is zero. The natural restrictions we impose are sign %'

= sign f for any tax t that is both taxes and subsidies are costly to implement, and
V(0,0,q1) = 0, that is, all fixed costs are excluded from VQ.

The labour market clears. Labour endowment is fixed and given by L. Hence, we
write:

L=

l + (l+a+x1)q1 + T

(10)

Substituting (7) and (10) into (6), we may write utility as:

U = u1(q1) + L - (1+a1+x1)q1 - T - DQeq)

(11)

Totally differentiating utility, and substituting the first order conditions for firms' and
households' maximization problems (2), (3), (4), (5) and (8), we obtain:

dU =

dT

-

(D' - r,)dE,

(12)

where E—eq is total emissions in sector i and Xx1q1 is total input use in sector i. Equation
(12) shows the welfare impacts associated with changes in input demands, transaction costs,

17

and environmental quality. The first term on the right-hand side of (12) stand for the
distortionary effect of excises on the goods market associated with input taxes. The last
term reveals that a reduction in emissions ceteris paribus improves utility as long as the
marginal damage is larger that the emission tax.

3.2. Optimal taxation

We can rewrite (12) so as to separate the three components of welfare as in (1):

dU=> [1dE1+t1dx,]—dT-D"dE

(13)

Equation (13) categorizes the welfare effect of any policy in the three components
mentioned in section 2.2. The bracketed term on the right-hand side is the private gross
welfare effect of the policy (in line with (1) to be denoted by dl'), dT is the transaction cost

of the policy, and -D 'dE=-dD is the environmental welfare gain. Note that the private

gross welfare cost is a tax base effect. The change in each tax base times the tax rate
corresponding to that tax base together determine this effect.'3

In the presence of administrative costs, a necessary condition for optimality of the tax

system is that the expression in (13) is zero. The government maximizes welfare, taking as

given the reactions of households and firms to changes in taxes. It faces a two-stage
decision problem: i) deciding which taxes to use (tax base decision), and ii) setting the
appropriate tax level (tax rate decision).

Concerning the tax rate decision, we find conditions for optimal taxation by rewriting

18

(12) in terms of the total derivatives with respect to each of the taxes, and setting these
expressions equal to zero.14 For any tax (this condition reads:

dU

di

=

dx.

dE.

dT - (D'-t.)__L
t .—. - —
XIdi'
di

'di

0

A

1

=

0

waloe

(14)

Equation (14) guides the tax rate decision, conditional on the tax being implemented.

Concerning the tax base decision, the regulator should compare utility levels
associated with any combination of taxes implemented at the rate implied by (14). The
optimal tax system may include non-zero taxes, set at the level implied by (14), as well as

zero taxes, that is, taxes that are not implemented. For the latter taxes, equation (14) may

be violated, that is, utility may marginally increase in this tax. Yet it is optimal not to
implement these taxes. The reason is that, by construction, in an optimally designed tax
system, setting any tax belonging to the latter catagory at the level implied by (14) -- and

adjusting all non-zero tax rates such that they satisfy (14) --

decreases

welfare (non-

marginally) because of fixed administrative costs. Similarly, in an optimally designed tax
system, switching the rate of any non-zero tax from the rate implied by (14) to a zero rate -and adjusting all other non-zero taxes such that they satisfy (14) -- decreases welfare (non-

marginally). Since fixed administrative costs play a role, the tax base decision is subject to
non-convexities and no simple "smootht' optimality condition can be written down.

Instead of optimizing the overall tax system, a more practical issue is to find a welfare

19

improving tax reform. Such an approach takes account of the fact that actual changes of the

tax system are usually slow and piecemeal due to the role of the existing tax system
(Feldstein 1976), and, as we like to add, its associated administrative costs. A change in an

existing tax system is worth pursuing if this change entails an increase in welfare even if
not the maximum level of welfare is reached. In particular, we are interested in the welfare

effects of the introduction of a new tax, if some taxes already exist (as well as their
associated tax administration). The obvious rule for a welfare-improving introduction of a
new tax is that the net welfare gain from exploiting the newly introduced tax should exceed
the fixed cost of introducing the tax. For any tax t this condition can be written as:'5

= j'O

f [ f_dI
dt

]

F

(15)

where tv is the level of the tax that corresponds to (14) (that is the solution to dU/c=O, or

the corner solution 0), F dTIdI(t) is the 'fixed cost" (set-up administrative cost) associated
with introducing tax 1, t' is the (second-best) optimal tax rate,16 and we evaluate all total

derivatives taking into account changes in other taxes so as to satisfy (14) for all other
taxes.

As a benchmark, consider the (first-best) case without transaction costs, i.e.
T=dT=0. As is well-known, the optimal emission tax then equals the marginal damage D'
in each sector and all other taxes should be zero.'7 This can be immediately seen from (12).

Indeed (14) is satisfied for these tax rates. Under the usual conditions on utility and

20

production functions, the tax base optimality condition is automatically met since fixed
costs do not play a role and the maximization problem is convex. Starting from a situation
without any taxes, introducing the emission tax improves welfare.18

The first-best outcome may be realized in some special cases even if transaction costs

play a role. Obviously, if transaction costs are associated with other taxes, but not to
emission taxes, the Pigouvian tax should still be implemented. The other way around, if
transaction costs apply to emission taxes only, and other taxes can be implemented without

such costs, a first-best outcome may arise provided that other taxes (or tax combinations)
are equivalent to emission taxes with respect to their incentive effects ("private efficiency").

For example, if the emission input ratio is fixed, an input tax can bring about the first best
outcome.19

A second-best situation arises when other taxes also involve transaction costs or when

other instruments are privately less efficient than emission taxes. Once transaction costs

play a role, it is no longer guaranteed that emission taxes should be uniform, nor that
output or input taxes should be excluded. Most of the literature on second-best optimal

environmental taxation concentrates on cases in which other taxes (taxes on output or
inputs) can replace emission taxes without loss of incentives and without administrative
costs (see, for example, the double dividend literature, De Mooij 1999).

If administrative costs are mentioned as a reason not to use emission taxes, the most

common case in the literature is the one where emission taxes are too costly to be
implemented because of transaction costs associated with emission taxes but not with other

taxes (the most discussed case is non-point pollution, see Xepapadeas 1999). Our model
allows for more subtle impacts of administrative costs by considering administrative costs

21

throughout the entire tax system and taking into account that administrative costs may
endogenously vary with tax rates. To investigate these in more detail, we consider some
special cases.

3.3. Pure emission taxes

Let us first focus on emission taxes by considering the case where all other taxes are ruled
out. Note that we caimot simply suppose that only emission taxes are used, but that we have

to explain whithin the model why this is so. We will give this explanation in the next
subsection and concentrate here on the optimality conditions for emission taxes only.

Evaluating (14) for an emission tax in sector i, we find that the following optimality
conditions should hold:

dU

dt.
I

=

dE.

— dT
— — (D"—t)—--—

' dt.

dt.
1

0

A

t. 0

waloe

(16)

1

Hence, if implemented, the optimal emission tax reads:

=

max { 0 ,

D'

d T/d.
—

—dE./dt

(17)

This tax should be implemented if the total welfare gain exceeds the fixed administrative

22

cost, see (15). We approximate the welfare gain by a second order Taylor expansion,
evaluated at

=

z°. The optimal tax

if

1

—

is given by

dE.
1 (TO)2 +

('lEI

+

dT.

F.

(18)
*

= 0 otherwise

where TiE and

are the positively-defined elasticities of dE/d r and dT/d i with respect to

Conditions (17) and (18) reveal two cases in which it is optimal not to use emission taxes in

a particular sector because of administrative costs. The first case is the case in which the
fixed costs of administering the tax are large relative to the total potential gains, see (18).

The gains are small indeed if emissions are insensitive to the emission tax, that is, if
abatement and changes in the input mix are expensive (dE1/d small), if the marginal
damage (D) is small, and if marginal administrative costs (dT/d z) are large.2° A second
case in which a sector should be optimally exempted from an emission tax is the case that

marginal administrative costs for the sector are relatively large, such that, for any small
increase in the sector-specific emission tax, higher administrative costs more than offset
gains from the induced emissions reduction (dU/d <0 for any z so that rf—O).

Figure 2 illustrates the case of emission taxes in terms of the trade-off between

23

efficiency and administrative costs (see section 2). Private gross welfare, Y, is maximized

for zero emission taxes, since -- loosely speaking -- emission taxes impede free market
forces. However, they reduce damage D and hence improve social welfare. In a first-best
world without administrative costs, the Pigouvian tax

maximizes welfare Y-D. In the

presence of administrative costs T, the gross welfare cost of emission taxation (that is, the
effect on U—D) is higher and rises more steeply with tax rates. The (second-best) optimal

tax maximizes Y-T-D and it can be easily seen that this tax is below the first-best tax. In

panel b of Figure 2, transaction costs rise steeply with the tax rate and the fixed cost
component is large. As a result the second-best optimal emission tax is zero.

INSERT Figure 2

How emission taxes should be optimally differentiated across sectors is also revealed by
condition (17), conditional on being implemented. Note that the optimal tax equals marginal

damage minus a correction term that is proportional to marginal administrative costs. The
optimal tax equals the Pigouvian tax if marginal administrative costs are zero (dT/dç=O).

The gap between optimal taxes and the Pigouvian tax widens if administrative costs rise

steeply with tax levels and if emissions are not very sensitive to emission taxation. The
latter may arise because of a low elasticity of demand (it is hard to accomplish emission

reductions by cutting demand) or because the emission intensity is not very sensitive to
emission tax changes (steeply rising abatement and input substitution costs). To clarify this,
we decompose the emissions reduction effect of the tax, that emerges as the denominator in
(17), into these three effects:

24
= €. + c

+

(19)

where
dq.

—-—-fe. =

dt1'

a. =

—q.

e'.

dq.

———-i e.e.

dp,

(20)

da.
(21)

e. dx.
(22)

A. = e1x./e.

(23)

that is, E represents the effect of emission taxes on emiss ons through changes in demand, a

measures the direct effect of emission taxation on emissions through abatement, and A
measures the analogous effect through input reduction (the reason to separate

and A

becomes clear in the next subsection).

So far, we have assumed that administrative costs rise with tax rates because

25

incentives to evade increase with the tax rate, thus raising the cost for the tax authority to
administer the tax. The opposite, however, is possible as well. Using a partial-equilibrium

model, Polinsky and Shavell (1982) find that the optimal emission tax in the presence of
administrative costs may be larger than the Pigouvian tax. The argument is that a higher
emission tax saves on transaction costs if administrative costs depend on the number of tax
paying finns and if an increase in the emission tax reduces market demand and the number
of firms. In our set-up the number of firms is indeterminate because of the constant returns

to scale production functions, but the equation immediately shows that Polinsky and
Shavell's result also applies here if administrative costs decrease with the tax rate, that is if

dT/d<O.

3.4. Input taxes: the role of linkage

To investigate the trade-off between emission taxes and input taxes, we first consider
sector-specific taxes on emissions (z) and on the use of input x (ç,). Evaluating (14) for
these taxes, we find:2'

dT/dr.

D'— ______
t°=max{O,
I

I ii

e.I
I

x.

/

I

1

—

1

x.

'

—

I

dT/dt.Xl

Ii

I

e.I x

(24)

25

26
where

e. dx./dt.XI

p=L
I

x.

Note that

dx./dt.1

-et

=

.

+ —-- e"
e" e.

(26)

aa,

measures the direct effect of input taxation on emissions,22 X measures the

elasticity of the emission function with respect to input use, and 3 measures how much
input use is more sensitive to input taxation than to emission taxes.

According to (24), input taxes can serve as environmental taxes and reduce the need

for explicit emission taxes. Note that the first two tenns are the same as in (17) after
substitution of (19). The smaller is the direct emission tax effect

A. + c = — dE/d r; the

larger is not only the effect of marginal administrative costs on optimal emission taxes, but

also the larger is the scope for input taxes to replace emission taxes as appears from the
third term in (24). Indeed, with high marginal administrative costs of emission taxes, input

taxes only should be used as environmental tax and should be set according to (25) with
z=O, which can be written as:

- dE./dt.Xl D'—
—

xi

I

dX/dtxi
I

dT/dt.Xl
-dX/dt
I xi

27

Note that inputs should then be taxed according to their marginal emission content dE1/dX,

times marginal damage D 'corrected for administrative costs as a result of changes in input

27

use. (Of course we must make the provision that in the presence of large fixed
administrative costs, such that (15) is violated for t,, the input tax should not be
implemented.)

Replacing emission taxes by input taxes reduces efficiency. Input taxes distort the
input mix and fail to provide direct incentives for abatement. Only if the input to emission

ratio is constant and there are no abatement possibilities, then input taxation and emission

taxation are equivalent in the absence of transaction costs. This corresponds to e./x, =
constant, A =

=1, and a =0. With an interior solution, conditions (24) and (25) can then

be rewritten as:

D /—

—t
1

.x./e. =

XI

1

_____

dT

e.+. dt.

=

1
dT .
_____
_________

€+.

d(tx/e.)

(28)

With a fixed emission input ratio, input and emission taxes would be equivalent in the
absence of administrative costs (as is well-known, see e.g. Xepapadeas 1999). Indeed,
according to (25), with zero marginal administrative costs, any combination of taxes such

that z+tx/e1=D 'would achieve the first best optimum. This implies that the two taxes are
equally efficient in terms of the sum of gross private welfare and the enviromnental benefit

(see section 2). Hence, transaction costs considerations entirely determine the choice
between the two taxes.

Differences in (fixed and/or variable) administrative costs across tax instruments
remove the indeterminacy in the optimal tax choice. First, if fixed administrative costs
differ across the two taxes but administrative costs are not affected by tax rate levels, to

28
satisfy

the "entry-condition" only the tax with lowest fixed administrative cost should be
or t,x1/e=D'. Note that the effective tax on pollution equals

introduced, either

marginal damage (the Pigouvian tax). Second, when both tax rates increase administrative

costs, the effective tax on pollution (z + tx/e) should be smaller than marginal damage D'.
When, in addition, the sum of fixed costs of administration for the two taxes are sufficiently

small to justify the introduction of both taxes, the taxes should be set so as to minimise
variable administrative costs, as appears from the second equality in (26).

In the general case of variable and sector-specific emissions per unit of input, input
taxes are less efficient than emission taxes. Hence, if at the same time administrative costs
for emission taxes are higher, efficiency and administrative costs may be optimally traded

off by choosing a mixed system of input and emission taxes. Solving (24) and (25) for an
interior solution, and for simplicity assuming that abatement and input use separately affect

emission (e"=O so that =1/?.), we obtain:

tOD/ht+1dtT+ul÷idlT
. €. djr. & . €. dt.

10
xi

where

=

e.

,'L

x.

1
1 dT
—+—

l,

=

(A—i)2

dt.

+

-

1

. . c. g.e. d.
• a. dT
1
_÷L+_f_

(30)

A.

l

—----- a.>0.
El

(29)

(31)

29

4 measures the "efficiency edge" of emission taxes over input taxes. Indeed with a constant
emission input ratio (a=O and ?= 1), we have i0, and (29)-(30) collapse to (28). The
efficiency edge of emission taxes increases in abatement possibilities c and in I A— 1 . We
call this latter expression the extent of linkage between emissions and inputs. The closer is

the elasticity of emissions with respect to inputs (A) to unity, the closer is the
correspondence between inputs and emissions and the more efficiently can input taxes
mimic emission taxes. Equations (29) and (30) reveal that marginal administrative costs are

less important to determine the optimal tax rates if the efficiency of emission taxes relative

to input taxes () is larger, i.e. if the more abatement possibilities abound (c larger) and
emissions are more closely linked to inputs (A closer to one).

3.5 Conclusions

To internalize environmental externalities in the presence of administrative costs, pure
emission taxes are optimal only under specific conditions. These conditions include (i) low

fixed administrative costs, (ii) not too steeply rising administrative costs (as a result of
increases in emission taxes) relative to marginal damage and direct emission reduction

effect of emission taxes, and (iii) relatively low incentives effects from alternative
environmental taxes (taxes on polluting inputs) to reduce emissions. The optimal second
best rate of emission taxes falls short of marginal damage.

Input taxes may serve indeed serve as (optimal) environmental taxes. With close
linkage between input use and emissions, and if abatement of emissions (as an alternative

means to reduce the pollution intensity of production besides changing the input mix) is

30
relatively costly, taxes on polluting inputs may supplement emission taxes that fall short of

marginal damage to internalize pollution externalities more fully. In this case a mixed

system of emission taxes and input taxes is optimal, essentially because it saves on
administrative costs with only moderately affecting incentives to reduce emission. If linkage

is close and abatement expensive, and if also administrative costs associated with input

taxation are sufficiently low relative to administrative costs associated with emission
taxation, input taxes should fully replace emission taxes.

4. Carbon taxation and administrative costs

In this section we assess existing and potential environmental taxes relevant for climate

change policy, in particular through carbon taxation. We argue that current policy
(proposals) can be substantially improved if the trade-off between incentive regulation and

administrative costs is explicitly taken into account. We concentrate on the explicit carbon

taxes introduced in a number of European countries since the beginning of the 1990s. We
first review relevant facts on existing carbon taxes, then present evidence on administrative
costs, next assess current carbon taxes, and, finally, discuss scope for improvement.

4.1 Carbon taxes in practice

Since the early 1990s, taxes are considered seriously to combat climate change, in
particular carbon taxes that would curb C02-emissions (e.g. Pearce, 1991; Cnossen and

Vollebergh, 1992; Poterba, 1992). The debate in Europe was strongly influenced by a

31

proposal of the European Commission (see COM(92)226) for a hybrid EU-tax on
energy/CO2 to be implemented at the European level. The basic idea behind this proposal is

to bring the (minimum) rate structure more in accordance with the carbon content across
currently taxed energy products, mainly hydrocarbon fuels, as well as to extend the carbon

tax base to energy products that are not yet subject to an excise. The same idea is also
behind the carbon taxes actually implemented in several European countries.

INSERT Table 1

Thus the aim is to raise the implicit taxation of carbon at the margin. As is well-known CO2

emitted per kind of fuel differs considerably (see Table 1). Clearly, oil emits less carbon

than coal does. Natural gas, in turn, is cleaner than oil. The obvious implication is that
emission intensities also can be reduced by internalizing the respective carbon contents in

the price of each kind of fossil fuel. By differentiating the fossil fuel excise by carbon
emission coefficient instead of energy content coefficient, or even a hybrid coefficient, the

consumption of carbon is put at a disadvantage at the margin. Thus, users would be
induced to substitute oil for coal and natural gas for coal and oil, and, further, nonfossil
fuels for fossil fuels.

However, the EU proposal was never implemented due to considerable resistance of
industry and specific countries like the UK. Despite this failure to implement an EU-wide
carbon tax, several individual European countries have introduced explicit carbon taxes (see

also Table 2). Finland, at that time not a Member State, was the first country to impose a

C02-tax in 1990. This environmental tax is additional to an excise tax (basic duty) and

32

calculated according to the carbon and energy content of the energy products. Furthermore,

it is imposed on primary energy inputs, including heavy fuel oil, LPG, coal and natural
gas.

INSERT Table 2

Other Nordic countries followed soon: Norway and Sweden in 1991, and Denmark in

1992. The C02-tax in Norway affects the use of mineral oils, coal, natural gas and
petroleum on the continental shelf. Interestingly, CO2 tax rates differ between these
products with petroleum and natural gas (sic!) taxed most heavily (per unit C02) and heavy

fuel oil and coal at a much lower level. Also electricity production and consumption is
taxed. The CO2 tax of Sweden applies to primary energy inputs, such as natural gas and

coal, but also includes heavy fuel oil and gas oil. The Danish tax is levied on all energy
products with the exception of petrol and amounts to a tax rate reform from $/liter to $/unit

carbon. A tax reform in 1996 explicitly distinguishes energy consumption in industry
according to categories of room heating, light processes and heavy processes with tax rates
varying accordingly.

The Netherlands already have an environmental tax on fuels (hydrocarbon oils) since
1988, with the C02-component added in 1990. However, only the regulatory tax on energy
from 1996 was specifically aimed to achieve carbon emission reduction by households and

small firms. The tax base included primary energy products while the tax rates correspond

to the proposed C02-energy tax of the EU. Also Austria imposed an energy tax on
electricity and natural gas in 1996.

33

In a recent analysis of these carbon taxes, Ekins and Speck (1999) show how
exemptions for industry are used to provide considerable tax relief for certain sectors facing

considerable 'competitive pressure'. Tax relief is usually established by applying lower or
zero carbon tax rates or systems of rebate for specific industries which use these products

as inputs (often in addition to exemptions already provided for already existing energy

excises). Sometimes a maximum is set to the tax liability for specific energy-intensive

industries, like the steel industry, usually in terms of a percentage of sales value (this
provision was also envisaged in the hybrid EU-tax). Finally, improvements in energyefficiency are promoted by explicitly targeted tax reliefs. As a result, nominal and effective
tax rates for specific industries tend to differ considerably.

INSERT Table 3

Table 3 shows for several energy products that both Sweden, Denmark and Norway apply
much lower effective rates for specific industries. Only Finland does not apply lower rates,

although this heavily debated now. Furthermore, it is remarkable that considerable
differences exist in tax rates per ton CO2 across energy products, especially in Norway.

Norway, like Finland, exempts LPG, while coal and natural gas are taxed (much) more
heavily than is oil.

The carbon taxes in the Nordic countries are quite similar to the original proposal for

a common carbon tax within the EU jurisdiction (see COM(92)226 and its evaluation by

Smith and Vollebergh, 1993). This tax is aimed to lower the use of fossil fuels in
proportion to their carbon content. The European carbonlenergy tax, the first explicit

34

uniform Union-wide tax, was proposed as an additional tax on top of the (non) existing
taxes. Since the tax base would include several energy products that were not subject to tax

before, the proposal also broadens the tax base of current energy taxes. Thus, an incentive
would be provided for industry and consumers to reduce their use of carbon-based energy,
and hence for CO2 emissions to be reduced.

As this EU proposal was never implemented, a later proposal was more closely linked

to the existing drafts on Mineral Oil Excise Harmonization (see COM(95)172) and
therefore concentrated effort on a much smaller carbon tax base (see Table 2 and its
evaluation in Vollebergh, 1995). In 1997 the European Commission came up with a new
proposal to use the directive on excise harmonization across EU countries more specifically

for the purpose of carbon tax policy (see Ekins and Speck, 1999, for further details).
According to this proposal the minimum target levels for the existing excise taxes on
mineral oils should be raised in three steps, while also small minimum rates on primary
energy products, like coal and natural gas, are proposed, as well as a tax on electricity (see
Table 2 for the proposed rates for 2000).

All EU proposals allow for exemptions. In the 1992 draft directive an exemption
would depend on a case-by-case assessment of the degree of competitive pressure faced
from countries not taking equivalent measures. Member states could grant firms a reduction

in the carbon tax payable (through an exemption or an equivalent refund), if energy costs

(minus value added tax) amount to at least 8 per cent of value added. In addition, the
proposed directive in 1992 also allows for reductions or refunds if firms invest in energy
efficiency improvements or abate carbon.

Summarizing, the recently introduced (unilateral) carbon taxes in several European

35

countries

indeed broaden the existing (implicit) carbon tax base by including specific

primary energy products, like coal and natural gas. These products were usually not taxed

before. Usually the agents who pay the tax are mainly (downstream) distributors of fmal

fuel products or electricity at the point of delivery to households, small and large
businesses. Furthermore, with the exception of Norway, the tax rate is equal per unit
carbon across energy products and is interwoven with (existing) energy excise rates, if
available. Finally, with the exemption of Finland, all Nordic countries choose to exempt
*specific agents, mainly energy-intensive industries, by applying (much) lower or even zero

carbon tax rates.

4.2 Evidence on administrative costs

Empirical estimation of the administrative costs of different environmental tax policies is,
to our knowledge, absent. The same holds for compliance cost with only a few exceptions,

such as Fullerton's (1996) analysis of the Superfund's Corporate Environmental Tax. Also

direct estimates of the administrative costs of carbon taxes are lacking. Therefore this
section reviews the existing evidence on the administrative costs of taxation in general, and
the factors that appear from this literature as relevant for the level of these costs.

The lack of evidence on administrative cost is not surprising as only few explicit

environmental taxes exist in practice (see for example Fullerton 1996). Explicit
environmental taxes are those for which the legislator has expressed explicitly the aim that
this tax should serve some environmental purpose. However, the analysis of environmental

taxation and administrative cost would be severely restricted if one limits the analysis to

36

explicit environmental taxes only. As shown in the previous section, also input taxes are
important for environmental purposes. Indeed, taxes like excises and VAT matter for the

environment (taxes on petrol and motoring), as well as facilities in the income tax (tax
allowances for commuting expenses, mine exploration, pollution control equipment, etc) •23

For carbon taxation, current energy taxes, like excises on hydrocarbon oils, are the most
important as they are likely to have an impact on emissions through changes in input mix
and changes in demand for energy.

Unfortunately, empirical information on the administrative costs of other taxes is
scarce as well. Only a few studies exist.24 Many problems exist regarding how to measure

these costs, especially their absolute levels. One issue is the significant element of
transferability between compliance costs and administrative costs (Sandford et al. p. 203).

Also, difficulties arise in categorizing operating costs. For instance, the (marginal) cost of

transferring forms is highly influenced by the level of integration with existing
administration.

Table 4 summarizes the results of Sanford et al. (1989). Both administrative and
compliance costs of each tax are expressed as a percentage of the revenue raised by the tax.

Administrative cost vary from 0.12% for the Petroleum revenue tax to 1.53 % for the
income tax. The overall picture is clear: income tax and VAT are relatively expensive to
administer, while especially excise duties are inexpensive in terms of administrative costs.
This finding is also in accordance with fmdings in other studies: although the OECD (1988)

provides lower estimates on the total cost of VAT (between 0.40 and 1.09%), this study

also ranks income taxes as being relatively most expensive and excises (interpreted as
single-stage general consumption tax) as being least expensive to implement (total cost

37

around O.5%)!

INSERT Table 4

As Sandford et al. also include compliance costs, we can test whether we bias our analysis
by focusing on administrative costs only. On average, compliance costs are 3 times higher
than administrative costs. Compliance costs are relatively higher only for VAT. It is more
important for our purposes, however, that the ranking of different types of taxes according

to implementation costs is the same whether we use administrative costs or total operating

costs. Hence, the basic picture is not influenced by adding compliance cost. The similar
relative importance of compliance, and administrative costs across different taxes suggests
that administrative costs can be taken as being representative for both.

We now turn to the factors that determine the level of the administrative costs (see
also section 2.1). Administrative cost as a percentage of the total revenue raised by a tax is

not very relevant for the choice between different type of taxes. It is more important to
know their fixed and variable cost characteristics, and how they are affected by the choice

of tax base and rate. Unfortunately, such information is available only in a very limited
way. As far as the role of the number of tax payers is concerned, empirical information on
the administrative cost of VAT indeed suggests the existence of economies of scale as far as

the number of tax payers is concerned. In that case costs per registered business should be
relatively lower in countries with a low small-business exemption than in countries with a

high exemption: broadening the tax base across a larger number of tax payers reduces

overall administrative cost per tax payer. Cnossen (1994, p.1652) notes that the data

38

observed by OECD (1988), with the exception of Denmark, indeed fit this observation.

Another important determinant of administrative costs is measurability of the tax

base. One factor here are differences among tax payers. Some tax payers will be more
expensive to tax due to specific characteristics that have to be checked. Again an interesting

example is the small-business exemption in VAT. The larger the exemption, the smaller the

number of registered businesses, and the lower the absolute levels of administrative cost

(see Cnossen, 1994, p.1652). Usually exemptions will be responsible for higher
administrative cost. For instance, to give a tax rebate to a particular industry requires extra
excise officers to handle and check such claims. Of course, exemptions for specific agents

can also lower administrative costs if the agent is neither liable for tax payment nor for a

rebate. We did not fmd evidence for the assumption that more complex forms for
calculating the tax base would raise administrative cost. Also no empirical studies have not

tried to quantify the precise shape of the fixed and variable cost component of
administrative costs of different tax types in relation to the use of differences in tax rates.

No decisive empirical information exist on the (general) shape of the transaction cost
curve for different type of taxes, especially environmental taxes. Moreover, as observed by

Cnossen (1994, p.1663), the fmdings of Sandford et a!. (1989) on the comparatively high

VAT compliance costs are in clear contrast with evidence on VAT compliance costs in
Germany. Here the estimated cost are only a fraction of the costs observed for the UK,
which is mainly explained by the much longer tradition and experience in Germany, and the

integration of VAT with the administration of the business income tax. Thus, even if some

information exist, the evidence seems to be dependent on local circumstances and
institutional settings.

39

The implementation and enforcement of environmental taxes, however, has much in

common with the operation of the age-old excises on alcohol, tobacco and petroleum
products (Cnossen, 1977). Generally, these excises rely on quantitative measurement for

assessment purposes, with compliance ensured through physical controls. Similar close
controls should be exercised at points of import.26 Thus, it seems safe beforehand not to
expect always prohibitively high administrative costs for environmental taxes. This might

be different only if the regulatory tax base asks for monitoring of emissions which are
difficult to measure, and therefore require costly metering technology.

Furthermore, the change in administrative costs depends heavily on the sectors
already subject to other existing taxes or environmental regulation. For instance, according
to Hoornaert (1991, p.87), the physical control necessary for energy excises is very closely
related to carbon taxes, while administrative controls for VAT are quite different and more
time-consuming. The same might hold for other regulatory procedures which are already in

force. Usually direct controls for environmental purposes also reflect tight supervision of
technological processes and quantitative measurement. Thus, if closely linked production
processes are already subject to monitoring, administrative costs need not be very high.

Summarizing, the level of administrative cost depends much on how emissions
specifically relate to the production processes, their heterogeneity and the number of these

processes included in the tax base. Using existing excises for environmental regulation

might be a relatively cheap way of taxing bads since tax officers already have a lot of
information required to operate the tax system.

4.3 Assessment in terms of the trade-off

40

As noted before, the overall effect on welfare of introducing 'new' environmental taxes,
like carbon taxes, should be compared to the incentives provided by the tax. An important

result of our theoretical model is that input taxes offer an interesting alternative for
emission taxes if three conditions are met (see the end of section 3.4 in particular). First,

there should be a 'clear linkage between inputs and emissions. Second, only few
possibilities must exist to abate carbon emissions separately. Third, administrative cost of
emission taxes should be high. In this section we argue that these conditions are indeed met

in the case of carbon taxation which supports the strategy chosen by the different countries

applying these taxes. At the same time, however, the current design of the carbon taxes in
practice leaves considerable room for improvements.

The first condition is related to the linkage issue (measured through I — 1 as part of

the "efficiency edge" 4 in section 3.4). In the carbon case C02-emissions are indeed in a
1:1 correspondence to the carbon-content in energy products used as inputs (e.g. crude or
refined oil products, natural gas and different types of coal). Moreover, (potential) harmful

C02-emissions are mainly related to the consumption of fossil fuels in modern societies.
Thus, rather than taxing each unit of carbon emitted separately, it is rational to use taxes on

energy products which contain carbon to pursue climate change objectives. Such taxes on
energy products provide indirect incentives, using the relationship between the burning of
these products and transactions which can more easily be taxed. Thus instead of taxing the

emissions from car exhausts, additional tax may be levied on petrol purchases, on the
assumption that the environmental damage caused is proportional to the amount of petrol
used.

This approach is indeed largely reflected in the carbon taxes applied in practice. They

41

all take advantage of this fact by using carbon content of fuels as its tax base (although
often a hybrid tax base is applied with a combination of both carbon and energy content).
Thus coal-based energy production processes are put at a disadvantage compared to other
fossil and non-fossil fuel energy products. The same holds for oil relative to natural gas and

non-fossil fuels. This is entirely in alliance with the purpose of the tax: providing much
better targeted incentives compared to an indirect excise tax on energy alone. However,
applying differences in tax rates per unit of carbon, as in the Norwegian case, cannot be
justified and the rate structure applied considerably weakens its incentive effect (e.g. coal is

taxed at a much lower rate compared to natural gas which contains fewer units of carbon
per unit of energy).

The second important condition is that only few possibilities should exist to abate
carbon emissions separately (measured through a as part of the "efficiency edge" zli). If
emissions are very sensitive to emission taxation, that is if agents can abate C02-emissions

easily, input taxes might become inefficient because they do not provide appropriate
incentives for reducing carbon emissions directly. In other words, a loss in efficiency of

input taxes can be expected only if direct carbon abatement is possible, though not
stimulated by a tax levied on the agents who are responsible for these C02-emissions. With

respect to the abatement of carbon emissions ('carbon disposal') indeed relatively few
possibilities are available and almost none is actually employed.27 Furthermore, these
possibilities can usually be applied only on a rather large scale. Therefore they are outside
the reach of small individual firms or households. Thus the use of input taxes in the case of

carbon is indeed justified in this respect, in particular because the explicit carbon tax rates
are considerably low.28

42

The third condition is that administrative cost related to emission taxes should be
high, or, in other words, the cost of input taxation should be relatively small (see equations

(29) and (30) in particular). Usually administrative cost of newly designed taxes are
relatively expensive due to a fixed set-up cost element of monitoring activities. This also

applies to excise taxes, whether they are emission or input taxes, even though they are
cheap to administer compared with other type of taxes (see section 4.2). For that reason tax

reform of existing taxes is very attractive for policy makers, as the effect on (marginal)
administrative cost can be expected to be small. A rise of the marginal carbon tax rate is

simpiy reached by using the existing implicit energy taxes on carbon, i.e. the existing

energy excises. Thus, tax rate reform is sufficient, i.e. a reform of currently existing
energy input taxes into taxes based on emission coefficients (see section 4.1).

Indeed, the strategy chosen by the Nordic countries when implementing carbon taxes,
basically follows this logic. We tentatively checked which products and agents were already

subject to energy excises in these countries in the pre-carbon tax period, say 1990.29 Table

5 presents our results. We distinguish between three potential groups of tax payers:
households (Hh), industrial consumers (I), and electricity generators (E). It is immediately
clear from this table that the most important carbon-containing energy products consumed

or produced in the Nordic countries were already subject to energy excises before the
introduction of the carbon tax. The basic picture was that existing excises were levied on
fuels consumed by households, with the exception of natural gas in Sweden and Norway

(which is a small category anyway). The inputs of electricity were usually not subject to

tax, in contrast to the delivery to consumers (both households and industries). Although

many energy products are subject to tax, including even the products used as inputs in

43

industry, it turns out that the industrial sector is often exempted or pays lower tax rates,
especially energy intensive industries (refineries; steel and aluminium production).

INSERT Table 5

Thus, the effects on administrative cost of introducing carbon taxes on fuel content in these

countries is dominated by the use of the existing energy excise administration. As long as

this administration is also used for the carbon tax, one can safely assume a small rise in

administrative costs. The only factor that might give an upward effect is the more
complicated tax base calculations due to the integration of two instead of one indicator (both

energy content and carbon content). The same holds for carbon tax exemptions, especially

in the case of rebates. As noted before, rebates often complicate the tax and cause higher
administrative costs. If, however, exemptions in the carbon tax also take advantage of these

institutional set-up, additional administrative costs still need not be high (sunk cost
element).

In all Nordic countries, however, the carbon excise is also imposed on new
products, especially the production of electricity (use of inputs) and natural gas. Also coal

seems to be taxed now on a more comprehensive basis. But the effects on administrative
costs of these changes also seem to be limited. Like the existing excise systems for other

energy products, tax administration can take advantage of the way in which final fuel
products, like diesel or electricity, is usually delivered to consumers (both industry and
households). The administration of energy excise taxes saves on the number of tax payers

by using points of delivery (eg. fuel stations and energy distributors) instead of taxing all

44
consumers separately. This is applicable in the case of natural gas (delivery through pipe
lines), as well as in the case of coal (points of distribution). Thus, the broadening of the tax
base implies only a small increase in the number of tax payers.

4.4 Scope for improvement

Although the current carbon tax strategy in the Nordic countries satifies the conditions for
using input taxes instead of emission taxes, considerable scope for improvements seems to

exist. The coverage of the carbon excises in the Nordic countries (as well as the
Netherlands) is far from exhaustive, especially in tenns of the agents subject to an effective

tax. Exemptions are widely used, mainly motivated by concerns about international
competiveness. Often energy inputs of domestic industries are taxed at lower rates or not
taxed at all. Furthermore, the existing energy excises related to oil products are of the final

fuel type, which implicitly exempts production of the fuels themselves. Also extraction of
any fossil fuel is not subject to this tax (although other type of taxes and subsidies apply).

Our theoretical results suggest that sectoral differentiations in the tax rate are
justified by administrative costs, if linkage and marginal abatement cost (MAC) differ
among sectors. Exemptions can also be justified by differences in fixed administrative
costs. A difference between linkage and MAC, as well as fixed administrative cost among

sectors, seems to apply in the carbon case. However, current differentiation is exactly the

opposite to what our model suggests as optimal. Dijkgraaf and Vollebergh (1997) have
shown that this observation generalizes across OECD countries. In general, households face

much higher taxes on average compared to industry. Furthermore, most OECD countries

45

tax final oil products (diesel, gasoline) much more heavily compared to primary energy

products on average (heavy fuel oil, natural gas and coal). In this respect the countries that

introduced a carbon tax, already applied a much broader (implicit) carbon tax base
compared to the other countries.

Thus the industries that are usually exempted now, mainly the energy-intensive
industries (both producing energy products as energy-intensive products), are also the tax

payers who can be taxed with lowest transaction costs per unit emission. In other words,
the most important polluters (small number of tax payers consuming the larger part of fossil

fuels) still do not pay any or only a very small amount of tax. The same holds for the

choice to exempt certain energy products consumed by specific sectors, like coal by
electricity generation. Finally, not taxing particular energy products that cause considerable

carbon emissions, like coal, seems to be particularly unattractive.30 Of course, issues of

carbon leakage are of considerable importance here. If a country follows a unilateral
strategy without any compensation for its carbon-exposed industries, import substitution

could easily reduce the effectiveness of its carbon abatement policy. However, several
mechanisms are available to compensate for these effects with small or even no negative
effect on administrative costs, such as tax credits (Vollebergh et.al., 1997).

Another issue closely linked to the selectivity of coverage is that all explicit carbon

taxes are based simply on the amount of carbon contained in the actual products. This
implies that carbon emitted in the production processes producing those fuels is not taxed at

all. As Pearson and Smith (1991, p.29) noted long ago, such a scheme gives an undesirable

incentive towards the use of highly-refined fuel products, in which as much as possible of
the carbon emissions have taken place before the excise is applied. Thus this tax will be less

46

efficient at encouraging carbon-reducing fuel substitutions. According to Vollebergh (1995)

it might be an efficient strategy in this case to use a materials balance approach to impute

the amount of upstream carbon emissions that are related to energy products of the final
fuel type.

A third possibility for improvement is to supplement current input taxes with
incentives for abatement (introducing a mixed system of input and emission taxes).

Although abatement of CO2 emissions is very limited for small energy users, large
industries and energy producers may have some opportunities for abatement that are less

costly than separate abatement possibilities like carbon sequestration. Large-scale firmspecific investments are involved in these abatement projects. Emission taxes for energy

producers may provide appropriate abatement incentives. Moreover, the administration
costs for emission taxes in the energy production sector can be expected to be considerably
lower than for small industry and households. Technologies are more homogenous, and the

number of agents is small. For large energy-intensive industries, however, the
competitiveness argument may prevent the implementation of emission taxes, since these

taxes increase costs and require again compensation schemes. Alternatively, abatement
subsidies decrease costs, and seem more feasible.

The most important step toward more efficient carbon policies is explicit
coordination of carbon policies on EU, OECD or, better, world scale. Carbon leakage then

no longer offsets unilateral carbon policies. Thus, exemptions of large energy-intensive

exporting industries to restore international competitiveness would no longer be a
reasonable strategy. Only then it is possible to initiate a full-fledged tax reform toward
imposing carbon taxes on agents that have most options for abatement, contribute most to

47

CO2 emissions, and for which the administrative costs involved are relatively smallest.

48
References

Barthold, T.A. (1994), "Issues in the Design of Environmental Excise Taxes't, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 8, 1, 133-151.

Bovenberg, A.L. and L.H. Goulder (1998), "Environmental Taxation", forthcoming in A.
Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, North Holland,
second edition.

Cohen, M.A. (1998) 'Monitoring and Enforcement of Environmental

, mimeo,

Vanderbilt University, Nashville.

Cnossen, S. (1977), Excise Systems, Baltimore (Johns Hopkins University Press).

Cnossen, S. (1994), "Administrative Costs and Compliance Costs of the VAT", Tax Notes
International, June 20, 1649-1668.

Cnossen, S. and H.R.J. Vollebergh (1992), "Toward a Global Excise on Carbon", National

Tax Journal, 45, 1, 23-36.

De Mooij, R.A. (1999) Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend, Ph.D. thesis
Rotterdam University, Voorburg 1999.

49
Dijkgraaf, E. and H.R.J. Vollebergh (1997), 'Energy Taxation in OECD countries', paper
presented at the IIPF conference, Tel Aviv.

Ekins, P. and S. Speck (1999), "Competitiveness and Exemptions from Environmental
Taxes in Europe", Environmental and Resource Economics 13, 369-396.

Eskeland, G.S. and S. Devarajan (1996), 'Taxing bads by taxing goods: towards efficient
pollution control with presumptive charges', in: S. Cnossen and L. Bovenberg (eds)

Environmental taxation in a second-best world. Boston (Kluwer Academic
Publishers), 61-1 12.

European Commission, COM(87) 327, COM(89) 526, COM(91) 43, COM(92) 36,
COM(92) 226, COM(95) Brussels.

Feldstein, M. (1976), "On the theory of tax reform", Journal of Public Economics, 6, 77101.

Fullerton, D. (1996), "Why have Separate Environmental Taxes?", Tax Policy and the
Economy 10, Cambridge (MIT Press).

Fullerton, D. and A. Wolverton (1997), 'The case for a two-part instrument: presumptive
tax and environmental subsidy', NBER working paper 5993.

50
Fullerton, D., I. Hong and G. Metcalf (1999), "A Tax on Output of the Polluting Industry

is not a Tax on Pollution: the Importance of Hitting the Target", in C. Carraro and

G. Metcalf (eds.) Distributional and Behavioral Effects of Environmental Policy,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, this volume.

Goulder, L.H. 1995 'Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend: a Reader's
Guide', International Tax and Public Finance 2, 157-183.

Hoel, M. (1998), "Emission Taxes versus Other Environmental Policies", Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 100, 1, 79-104.

Hoornaert, L. (1992), "The use of taxation as a policy Instrument Aimed at Limiting the
Community's CO2 emissions: Practical Dimensions of Implementation", European
Economy, Special Edition no.1, 63-124.

Kaplow, L. (1990), 'Optimal Taxation with Costly Enforcement and Evasion', Journal of
Public Economics 43, 221-236.

Krutilla, K. (1999), "Environmental Policy and Transaction Costs", in: J.C.J.M. van den
Bergh (ed.), Handbook of Environmental Economics, Edward Elgar, forthcoming.

Messere, K. (1993), Tax Policy in OECD Countries, IBFD Publications (Amsterdam).

51

Pearson, M., en S. Smith (1992), The European carbon tax: an assessment of the European
Commission's proposals, London (Institute for Fiscal Studies).

OECD (1988), Taxing Consumption, Paris.

OECD/IEA (1993), Taxing Energy: Why and How, Paris.

OECD (1993), "Environmental Taxes in OECD Countries: A Survey", OECD Working

Papers, Environment Directorate and Directorate for Financial, Fiscal and
Enterprise Affairs, vol. I, no. 4, Paris.

OECD (1998), Subsidies and the Environment, Paris.

Polinsky and Shavell (1982) 'Pigouvian Taxation with Administrative Costs', Journal of
Public Economics 19, 385-394.

Poterba, J.M. (1992), "Tax Policy to Combat Global Warming: On Designing a Carbon

Tax", in: R. Dombusch and J.M. Poterba (eds.), Global Warming, Cambridge
Mass. (MIT Press), 71-98.

Sandford, C., M. Godwin and P. Hardwick (1989), Administrative and Compliance Costs
of Taxation, Fiscal Publications.

52

Schmutzler, A. and L.H. Goulder (1997), "The Choice between Emission Taxes and
Output Taxes under Imperfect Monitoring", Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 32, 51-64.

Shortle, J.S, R.D. Horan, and D.G. Abler (1998), "Research Issues in Nonpoint Pollution
Control", Environmental and Resource Economics 11, 571-585.

Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (1998), 'Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration', in:

A.Auerbach and M. Feldstem (eds) The Handbook of Public Economics,
Amsterdam (North-Holland), forthcoming.

Smith, S. (1992), "Taxation and the Environment: A Survey" Fiscal Policy, 13, 4, 21-57.

Smith, S. and H.R.J. Vollebergh (1993), "The European Carbon Excise Proposal: A Green
Tax Takes Shape, EC Tax Review, 1993/4, 207-221.

Smulders, S. and H.R.J. Vollebergh (1998), "Environmental Taxation and Administrative

Costs: should we optimally exempt some firms from emission taxes?" paper
presented at the World Congress of Environmental and Resource Economists,
Venice, June 1998.

Smulders, S. and H.R.J. Vollebergh (1999), "The choice between upstream and
downstream taxation in the presence of administrative costs", mimeo.

53

Vollebergh, H.R.J. (1995), "Transaction Costs and European Carbon Tax Design", in: M.
Faure, J. Vervaele en A. Weale, Environmental Standards in the European Union in
an Interdisciplinary Framework, Antwerpen (MAKLU e.a.), 135-154.

Vollebergh, H.R.J., P. Koutstaal en J. de Vries (1997), "Hybrid carbon incentive
mechanisms and political acceptability", Environmental and Resource Economics 9,
43-63.

Xepapadeas, A. (1999) 'Non-point Source Pollution Control', in: J. van den Bergh (ed.)
Handbook of Environmental and Resource Economics, Edward Elgar.

Yitzhaki, S. (1979), "A Note on Optimal Taxation and Administrative Costs", American
Economic Review, 1979, 3, 475-480.

54

Table 1 Characteristics of main fossil fuels
Fuel

Unit

Coal

Metr. Ton

Crude Oil

Barrel

Natural Gas

1000 m3

Energy

Carbon

Tons of

Normalized

Content

Content

oil-equivalent

Carbon Content

GJ

Ton

TOE

Ton/TOE

25-30

0.61

0.6

0.96-1.00

6.1

0.12

1

0.76-0.84

9.6-10.7

0.17

8.0

0.56-0.64

1) Based on average above (8,3738 1) and under (7,5357 14) Gronings' gas

Source: OECD/IEA (1991)

55

Table 2 Excise taxation of energy products in countries applying carbon taxes, 1997 '
Petrol

Country

Diesel

Gas oil

Heavy Fuel

Coal

Natural

Electricity

Gas

Oil

ECU/l000 I

ECU/l000 I

ECU/l000 1

ECU/l000 I

ECU/ton

ECU/rn3

ECU/kWh

Denmark

533

321

236

266

160

0.03091

0.06719

Finland

616

307

50

38

29

0.02443

0.00533

Netherlands

579

302

47

16

0

0.00962

0

Norway

658

485

56

79

56

0.10897

0.00397

Sweden

597

337

210

217

144

0.12031

0.01316

EU minimum

337

245

18

13

0

0

0

EU prop 2000

450

343

37

23

13

0.01400

0.00200

CO2 taxes as well as existing energy excises per unit of fuel are included

Source: Ekins and Speck (1999), Table 1, p.371

56
Table 3 Effective tax rates of explicit C02-taxes for some industries in the Nordic countries (in % of nominal

tax rates)
Energy products

Sweden

Denmark

Norway

Finland

Manufacturing

Heavy processes

Pulp/paper

All industry

industry

industry

Gas oil (heating)

0.50

0.24

0.50

1.0

Heavy fuel oil

0.50

0.23

0.50

1.0

LPG

0.50

0.25

0

0

Coal

0.50

0.25

1.0

1.0

natural gas

0.50

0.24

1.0

1.0

Source: own calculations based on Ekins and Speck (1999), p.380

57
Table 4 Relative administrative and compliance costs of different type of taxes

Tax or group

Administrative

Compliance

Total Operating

costs

Costs

Costs

% Total Revenue

%

Total Revenue

%

Total Revenue

Income tax

1.53

3.40

4.93

VAT

1.03

3.69

4.72

Corporation tax

0.52

2.22

2.74

Petroleum revenue tax

0.12

0.44

0.56

Excise duties (hydrocarbon oils;

0.25

0.20

0.45

0.85

1.48

2.33

tobacco; alcoholic drinks)

Minor taxes (stamp duty; car,
betting and gambling)

Source: Sandford et a!. (1989), p.192

58
Table 5 Energy Excises Applying to Households, industry and the Electricity Sector in the Nordic countries in

1990
Sweden

Energy product

Denmark

Finland

Norway

Hh

I

E

Hh

I

E

Hh

I

E

Hh

I

E

- Diesel

+

+

-

+

+

-

+

+

-

+

-

- Heavy fuel

-

+

0

-

+

0

-

+

0

-

+
+

-Coal

+

+

0

+

+

0

0

0

na

na

- Natural gas

0

0

0

+

na

na

0

0

0

- Electricity

+

+

-

+

0

-

+

+

-

Notes:

Hh: Households; I: Industry; E: Electricity Generation;

+ = tax; 0 = no tax; - = not used; na = not available.

Source:

OECD Energy Prices and Taxes; OECD (1993); IFA (1993)

+

+

+
+

na

+

0

-

+

59
NOTES:

1.

The relation between taxation in general and transaction costs is more widely

analysed, see Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1998) for an overview.
2.

Section 4.2, however, shows that administrative and compliance costs turn out to

move together in practice, that is, taxes for which compliance costs are relatively important
are also associated with relatively high administrative costs).
3.

The term "gross welfare cost" is due to Goulder (1995).

4.

This definition applies to corrective taxes. The gross welfare cost in case of revenue

raising can be similarly defmed as the change in welfare apart from that arising from
relaxing the government budget constraint.
5.

There is an interesting analogue between the current paper and the long standing issue

in environmental economics of selecting instruments to improve ambient quality directly or

indirectly through the reduction of emissions. It is well-known that linkage between
emissions and ambient quality is often indirect, but the cost of ambient quality regulation
can be prohibitive. Thus an interesting trade-off exist between the utility loss in terms of

the directness of linkage on the one hand, and the cost of regulation on the other hand. We
owe this point to Dallas Burtraw.
6.

We realize that this term might be misleading, since transaction costs also affect

(ultimately) private welfare. However, the term captures the fact that we focus on
administrative costs that first affect the tax authority (and not directly private agents).

Indeed of the three terms in (1), only the first captures direct changes in private welfare.
The third term, the environmental gain, is a "public" component of the welfare change if
the environment is assumed to be a public good. Alternatively, we could have used the

60
terms "frictionless gross welfare cost" and "frictionless efficiency".

7.

In fact, Smith (1992) has shown that the basic idea can be traced back to the seminal

paper of Diamond (1972).
We also abstract from output taxes and abatement subsidies. See Smulders and

8.

Vollebergh (1999) for the interaction between these instruments and administrative costs.

9.

Furthermore, e ">0,

e" >0, and l">O. We ensure concavity by assuming

[l"+(—ea )e ']e "—(—ea ')(e )2> 0
10. with at least one equality
11. To simplify notation, all summation sign refer to summation over all final goods
sectors, unless stated otherwise.

12. Note that, by assuming linear sectoral separability, we ignore economies of scope as
discussed in section 2.

13. See the analysis in Bovenberg and Goulder (1998, section 3.1).

14. Note that equations (2), (3), (4), (5) and (8) allow us to determine how a, x:, q., Pj

and p -- and hence also 1(x1), e(a1,x1), E1, X,, T and U -- depend on the tax rates.
15. This condition can be called the "entry condition" analogous to industrial organization
models where firms enter if the operating profits (cf. welfare), measured at the optimal
price (cf. tax), exceed the entry cost (cf. tax introduction/set-up cost).

16. To be precise, (is the tax that maximizes welfare given the set of taxes employed;

(=0 if (15) is violated.
17. Solving the social planner problem for the case without transaction costs, we fmd the

i

following optimality conditions: (i) u, '= +a1 +x1 + e1D', (ii) 1
1

—i

'-e1 V /

— eat

V/

(iii)

Comparing these conditions to (2), (3), (4), (5) and (8) we find that

61

z =D', t, = 0 implements the first-best outcome. As a special case, if e '=0 and e1 '—e1/x1
Vi, any combination of taxes that satisfies

(x1/e)t1 =D 'Vi, also implements the first-best

social optimum (input taxes and emission taxes are equivalent, cf. section 3.4).

18. For this case d U/cit reduces to (i—D ') dE,/d r which is positive for t <D'. Hence the
left-hand side of the second inequality in (15) is positive while the right-hand side is zero
and (15) is satisfied.

19. Similarly, two-parts instruments may do the job. If only one pollutant causes an
externality and if all other outputs and inputs can be taxed at zero transaction cost, the firstbest outcome can be reached (see Fullerton and Wolverton 1997). In the present model this
would require a (sector-specific) taxes on output and input use and a (sector-specific)
subsidy on abatement. Note, however, that optimality breaks down once more pollutants

play a role.

20. To see this, substitute (17) into (18).

21. Note that (x1/e1)2(, + f)= - dX1Idt and (x1/e1)(e +
22. It can be derived from (3) and (4) that dx/d

= - dE1/dt,, = - dX/d z.

e '(da1Idt) + e' (dx1/dt).

23. Barthold mentions 51 federal tax code provisions for the US (Barthold, 1994) and the
OECD in more recent inventories also mentions a much larger number of relevant taxes.

24. Sandford et a!. (1989) analyse administrative and compliance costs of different taxes
in the UK in 1986-1987. OECD (1988) discusses operating cost for consumption taxes
relative to other taxes.

25. See the discussion in Cnossen (1994).
26. Note that the tax base of specific excises requires physical control due to the physical
dimensions in which they are usually expressed ($ per unit, litre, etc). This is

62

fundamentally different from taxes expressed on an ad valorem basis (% of price or (added)
value).

27. Of course, many opportunities exist for savings on energy use (improvements of
energy efficiency) which also implicitly reduces carbon emissions (Eskelund and

Deravajan, 1996). However, the condition applied here is the improvement of carbon
efficiency at the margin (as measured through the efficiency edge of emission taxes over

input taxes, see section 3.4). We also exclude 'compensation' techniques, like carbon
sequestration (by planting trees), as they are not directly related to the production
techniques employed for producing output.

28. This might change if carbon tax policy would become more strict as technological
improvements might considerably reduce the cost of existing carbon abatement potentials.

29. We only checked excises as the introduction of a carbon tax is closely related to
existing energy excises. Furthermore, in terms of the fixed cost element, it is not important
whether these products are VAT-exempt or not. As discussed in section 4.2, the
administrative procedures for VAT differ considerably with excise administration.
30.

OECD (1998) shows that coal is even still subsidised in quite a number of OECD

countries.

Utils

B

—

Linkage to
emissions

T

Y

Utils

ti**

1:,

ti*

Utils

t /**

Y

