                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME
                                  IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                            Raghbendra Jha
                                             John Whalley

                                          Working Paper 7305
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7305


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Raghbendra Jha and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Environmental Regime in Developing Countries
Raghbendra Jha and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 7305
August 1999
                                         ABSTRACT

        This paper discusses the environmental externalities that are commonly found in the developing
world (the environmental regime) along with the policy responses, if any, commonly used to deal with these.
Included are the effects of industrial emissions, air and water quality impacts of untreated waste (industrial
and human waste), congestion effects of traffic, soil erosion, and open access resource problems (including
forests). We note the tendency in much literature of the last few years to equate environmental problems
in developing countries with pollutants (or emissions). The paper argues that to discuss environmental
problems in developing countries (or to compare with developed countries) without reference to
degradation as well as pollutants is incomplete; the effects of the former are large and pervasive, and their
severity and interaction with economic process often differs sharply from that of pollutants. The paper
concludes with a discussion of how environmental policy in developing countries differs from that found in
developed countries in light of our focus on degradation effects.


Raghbendra Jha                                                     John Whalley
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research            Department of Economics
General Vaidya Marg,                                       Social Science Centre
Goregaon (E),                                              University of Western Ontario
Bombay 400 065                                                     London, Ontario N6A 5C2
India                                                              CANADA
rjha@igidr.ac.in                                                   and NBER
                                                                   whalley@sscl.uwo.ca
I.      INTRODUCTION

        This paper responds to the request we received from the conference organizers to produce a

piece on the environmental regime in developing countries. By regime, we mean those environmental

externalities that are commonly found in the developing world, along with the policy responses, if any,

to these. Included are the direct effects of industrial emissions, air and water quality impacts of

untreated waste (industrial and human waste), congestion effects of traffic, soil erosion, and open access

resource problems (including forests).

        We note the many difficulties involved with adequately characterizing this regime, not the least

of which is the heterogeneity across both environmental problems and policy responses in the

developing world. Enforcement and compliance (which are typically lax in developing countries) also

play a central role in defining this regime. In addition, we note the differences between developed and

developing country experience more generally beyond the environmental area.

        In the paper we make three main points. The first is that there is a tendency in much literature

of the last few years to equate environmental problems in developing countries with pollutants (or

emissions). Such an approach has been partly influenced by data availability, including that collected

by the Global Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS) supported by UNEP. This has yielded data

on a range of environmental indicators including BOD, airborne SO2 concentrations, heavy metal levels2,

untreated human waste, and other air and water quality indicators. This focus on pollutants has meant

that in much literature there is less emphasis on what others have called degradation. This refers to the

effects of uninternalized externalities seen in soil erosion, congestion, open access resource and other

problems, where physical emissions are less the problem. The paper argues that to discuss

environmental problems in developing countries (or to compare them with those in developed countries)
                                                     2

without reference to these problems is incomplete; their effects are large and pervasive, and their

severity and interaction with economic process often differs sharply from that of pollutants.

        The second point is in many ways an elaboration of the first. We have attempted to review

studies of the social costs associated with incomplete internalization of the externalities we list. The

studies that are available are limited in both country and item coverage, and, in addition, do not always

use consistent methodologies, but the picture they paint is that such costs seem large (perhaps in excess

of 10% of GDP on an annual basis in some countries), and that these costs are dominated by

degradation rather than pollutant effects (perhaps ¾ of the total effect). One implication we draw is that

with large cost estimates of inaction, environmental policy in developing countries should perhaps have

a higher ranking than currently, especially if these cost estimates substantially exceed those of inaction

with regard to more conventional policy reform such as tax or trade policy. The other is that if the

balance of costs is skewed more to degradation than to the effects of pollutants, degradation should

perhaps receive more attention in the literature.

        Our third point concerns the relationship between growth, policy reform and environmental

quality, and comparisons of the environmental situation either across economies or through time in light

of our characterization of the developing country environmental regime. To the extent that recent

literature focuses on differences in outcomes across countries or over time in terms of levels of various

environmental indicators, the issue is whether degradation effects can give a different picture. We argue

that degradation impacts could well behave differently from pollutants; soil erosion problems, for

instance, seem to progressively recede as income per capita rises, since the population in agriculture falls

and plot sizes rise; while outward oriented trade policies draw labor into urban areas from rural areas,

adding to congestion. We discuss literature on the environmental Kuznets curve (Shafik and
                                                     3

Bandopadhyay (1992) for the 1992 World Development Report, Grossman and Kreuger (1995), and

Andreoni and Levinsohn (1998)) and recent literature on trade and environment (Copeland and Taylor

(1994, 1995)) and (Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (1998)). While authors contributing to these

literatures are clear in labeling their analyses to be primarily of pollutant levels, users of this research

naturally tend to think of the results as giving guidance on the wider environmental situation in the

countries discussed, and without explicit reference to degradation effects the picture once again can be

incomplete.

        In its final section, the paper concludes by arguing that welfare gains from moving to full

internalization would seem to be the more appropriate comparative measure of severity of environmental

problems across countries (or changes through time). The studies referred to in the text seem to suggest

that internalization gains relative to GDP are significant for developing countries (and probably larger

than for developed countries) raising the issue of why a higher degree of internalization has not occurred.

We discuss briefly whether this outcome reflects income elasticities of demand for environmental quality

above one; or whether it reflects technology and capital intensity of environmental management and

policy enforcement, so that abatement costs in developing countries are the barrier. We also touch on

the role of political structure in these countries; and whether a key problem is also in defining and

enforcing property rights. In the process we discuss the links between poverty and degradation taken

up by Maler (1997).

        In concluding, the paper discusses the implications of our characterization of the developing

country environmental regime for environmental policy in these countries. Can developed country policy

regimes be simply transferred, or are there special features that need to be taken into account?
                                               4

Degradation, property rights, and compliance issues seem to be more prominent than for developed

countries.
                                                       5

II.     THE ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

        We interpret the term “environmental regime” applied to the developing countries as meaning

the set of externality related problems often characterized as environmental, as well as the policy

response they have induced. Individually these cover soil erosion, open access resources (forests,

fisheries), congestion (traffic), household emissions (fuel burning), industrial emissions, ground and

surface water resources (shared aquifers and water table problems), untreated human and non-human

waste, and other problems. Property rights and a lack of their clear definition, and compliance with

environmental controls are two factors closely connected with these problems. Policy responses include

regulation (command and control), local actions (village level on soil erosion), resource management

policies (forests) and infrastructure development (urban congestion).

        For the purpose of our later discussion we classify these externalities into two broad headings;

pollutants, covering industrial and household emissions of various forms, and untreated waste; and

degradation, covering soil erosion, congestion, and open access resources. . For both of the problem

areas we identify the classical externality literature applies: a Pigouvian tax will internalize the externality,

the Coasian issues of the assignment of property rights and whether partial internalization can take place

through bi (or pluri) lateral deals once property rights are established also arise.

        We could group these in other ways such as agriculture and rural activity externality problems,

urban externality problems, and environmental problems associated with varying forms of industrial

waste. The reasons for grouping these environmental problems in the way we do relate primarily to

measurement issues. They do not reflect any major analytical distinction in terms of the economics, even

though, for instance, open access externality problems for renewable resources have a complex

analytical literature characterizing both how replacement of the stock occurs, and what constitutes
                                                   6

optimal policy across sustainable harvests. Pollutants capture emissions and contaminants of various

forms, which can be monitored by such efforts as GEMS. Degradation captures environmental effects

for which emissions and contaminants are not the central issue, and direct monitoring is more

problematic.

        We note in passing that the developing countries in which these regimes occur are far from a

homogenous group of countries. They vary by per capita income, GDP growth rates, size, the volume

and pattern of their international trade, their degrees of urbanization, and many other characteristics.

They also vary in the form their environmental problems take; some countries are heavily endowed with

environmental assets such as tropical forests3, while others are arid and desert; some are mountainous,

others are low lying and flood prone. Generalizing across all developing countries and categorizing the

environmental regimes they each face is thus difficult. A few generalizations seem to hold, though: lower

income countries have proportionately more significant agricultural and rural sectors, for instance.

Elements of the Regime

        Notwithstanding these problems, in Table 1 we have set out what we see as the main elements

in our characterization of the environmental regime in developing countries using the broad categories

of pollutants and degradation discussed above.

        Pollutants in the form of toxic contaminants cover effluents of various types which come largely

from mines, chemical production, pulp and paper plants, and leather and tanning
                                                     7

                                                 Table 1

         A Pollutant/Degradation Classification Scheme for Environmental Externalities
                                   in Developing Countries

1. Pollutants

Toxic contaminants -      Organo-chlorines, dioxins, pesticides, grease and oil, acid and caustic metals; mainly

                          discharges from mines, chemical producers, pulp and paper plants, and leather tanning

                          factories

Untreated fluid waste -   Untreated sewage discharges into rivers, streams, open ditches - water borne disease

Domestic solid waste -    Poorly managed solid waste spreads infectious disease, blocks urban drainage

                          channels, with risk of flooding and water borne disease

Smoke and burning -       Health related effects (respiratory damage, heart and lung disease, cancer) from

                          burning dung, wood, and crop residues; vehicle exhaust; coal burning; smoke

2. Degradation

Soil erosion -            Sedimentary transfer of topsoil to neighboring plots, river estuaries, hydro dams –

                          silting, accompanied by leaching of soil

Soil quality -            Pesticide residues impact on production of neighboring plots

Open access resources     over exploitation of resources due to ill defined property rights - firewood/forests;

-                         fisheries; shared aquifers and water tables

Congestion/traffic -      time loss and elevated accident risk from poorly regulated traffic; lowered air quality
                          in urban areas
                                                   8

factories. They include organic chlorines, dioxins, pesticides, grease and oil, acid and caustic metals.

These generate health and other problems. The 1998 UN Human Development Report (HDR)

estimates that Asia’s rivers, on average, contain lead levels twenty times in excess of those in

European/North American countries, and claims, by way of example, that in China most toxic solid

waste is disposed of in municipal waste streams without treatment.

        A second category of pollutant based externality problems are those associated with water

quality and untreated fluid waste. It is common in many countries for there to be untreated sewage

discharges into rivers, streams and open ditches. The 1998 HDR suggests that as much as 50% of all

discharges into waterways in developing countries are untreated. These in turn generate significant

health problems, including water borne diseases, which in some countries are rife. The HDR estimates

that diarrhoea and dysentery account for an estimated 20% of the total burden of disease in developing

countries; that polluted water generates nearly two billion cases of diarrhoea annually in the developing

world, and diarrhoea related diseases cause deaths of some 5 million people annually, including 3 million

children. They also estimate that contaminated water leads to 900 million cases of intestinal worms and

200 million cases of schistosomiasis, and that Asian rivers carry 50 times as many bacteria from human

excrement as is the case in European/North American countries.4 High levels of arsenic linked to

phosphoric fertilizers in ground water killing some of the people who drink such water is a further

problem in a number of countries.

        A further component of the pollutant category is domestic solid waste. In most developing

countries there are only limited solid waste disposal systems and the result is the spread of infectious

diseases. The 1998 HDR estimates that between 20 and 50 % of domestic solid waste in these

countries remains uncollected, even with up to one half of local government spending in some countries
                                                     9

going on waste collection. In some areas, given the lack of sanitation, waste becomes mixed with

excrement further contributing to the spread of infectious disease. Uncollected domestic waste is the

most common cause of blocked urban drainage channels in Asian cities, which in turn increases the risk

of flooding and water borne disease. Poorer households in these countries tend to live near waste

disposal sites.

        Health related problems (which include respiratory damage, heart and lung disease and cancer)

due to smoke from burning, and vehicle exhaust in both urban and rural areas reflect another pollutant-

based element of the environmental regime. In lower income countries, these problems come from

burning dung, wood and crop residues. The 1998 HDR estimates that 90% of deaths globally due to

air pollution are in the developing world, and of those 80% are due to indoor pollution.

        Of the elements of degradation that we identify as part of the environmental regime in

developing countries, soil erosion is a major component; although to identify the externality related

component one has to differentiate between on site and off site effects. Erosion arises from a variety

of causes. One is population growth which results in progressive division of plot sizes, with spillover

of topsoil into neighbouring plots, river estuaries, hydro dams, and, in the case of more heavily desert

countries, wind borne soil loss. The 1998 HDR estimates that in Bakina Faso and Mali one person in

six has been forced to leave their land as it has turned into desert; and that desertification has a world-

wide annual cost of $42 billion in lost income, $9 billion of which arise in Africa. Soil erosion reduces

agricultural productivity and in some cases agricultural lands availability per capita. Soil erosion has also

had the effect of reducing fodder available for cattle.

        A recent survey paper on studies of the cost of soil erosion in developing countries (Barbier

(1996)) places the annual losses by country in a range from 1 to 15% of GDP. Knut et.al. (1996) in
                                                    10

a study of Nicaragua estimate annual productivity losses due to soil erosion by crop in coffee of 1.26%,

beans 2.52%, maize 2.41%, and sorghum 1.35%. Magrath and Arens (1989) in a study of soil erosion

losses in Java in 1985, estimate annual losses of around 4% of the value of crops harvested. Cruz,

Francisco, and Conway (1988)5 examining two watersheds in the Philippines and focussing only on

additional sedimentary costs for hydro power installations (reduced water storage capacity for hydro

power, reductions in the service life of the dam, and reduced hydro power) estimate annual costs of

$27/hectare of agricultural land in the watershed, a significant portion of the value of crop yield. Soil

quality problems arise from leeching of pesticides to neighbouring plots, contaminating neighbors' soil.

        In addition to soil erosion and soil quality, other degradation type externalities arise with open

access resources; resources for which the property rights are ill-defined or poorly enforced, and over

exploitation of resources occurs. These include deforestation associated with land clearing, slash and

burn cultivation, squatting, and, in some countries, the collection of firewood. These problems are

especially severe in Africa, and Central and Latin America; Schatan (1998), for instance, identifies land

degradation as the most serious environmental problem facing Latin and Central America. For Ghana,

one of the less severe cases, Lopez (1997a) estimated that over cultivation of land at the expense of

forests runs at 25% of land use. Over exploitation of fisheries is a further major problem. Shared access

to water through common aquifers and ground water is a yet further manifestation of the problem; this

results in reduced water tables, causing especially severe problems in the North China plain.

        Finally, within this regime under the heading of degradation come urban congestion problems.

Rapid growth in urban populations and vehicle densities, especially in high growth economies, leads to

congestion. This lowers air quality, increases the spread of infectious disease, generates significant time

loss from traffic, and with it high accident rates and noise. A 1990 study by Japan’s International
                                                  11

Cooperation Agency6 produced the estimate that road congestion in Thailand (one of the worst cases)

reduces potential output in the Bangkok region by 1/3.

        In closing this discussion we also note that the environmental regime in developing countries is

characterized by policy measures which frequently exhibit lax enforcement. As in the developed world,

the primary form that developing country environmental policy towards industrial emissions takes is the

use of command and control instruments of various forms. These involve the setting of standards,

monitoring (with penalties for violators), but a common feature is the presence of only limited

compliance due to weak enforcement. For household waste water, soil erosion and other non-industrial

environmental problems there is little or no abatement of damage in many countries.
                                                  12

The Costs of Environmental Damage in Developing Countries

        If this is the regime, what are its consequences? In Table 2 we report some estimates of the

costs of environmental damage for a number of countries, each associated with the elements of the

regime we identify. Cost estimates of this form are relatively few and are scattered over the literature.

The methods and data used to construct them are not always fully available, and have a variance in their

findings. Most of these estimates do not directly refer to the welfare costs of the environmental damage,

but instead use some other measure (such as value of work time loss due to health impacts). We rely

here heavily on a synthesis of studies of environmental damage for a sample of Asian economies that

have recently been drawn together by the Asian Development Bank, and are reported in the 1998

HDR. These together with results of a related study by the World Resources Institute, are cited in

Table 2.

           In the case of China, the ADB studies suggest that annual productivity losses due to soil

erosion, deforestation and land degradation could be as high as 7% of GDP for the early 1990's. If the

health and productivity losses from pollution in cities are added (in the region of 1.7 to 2.5% of GDP),

combined annual cost estimates from environmental damage are in the region of 10% of GDP. Even

this estimate excludes a number of key components of environmental damage, such as those due to

congestion from traffic related problems. A further study of China by Smil (1992) based on 1988 data

puts losses due to environmental degradation (farmland loss, nutrient loss, flooding, timber loss) at

around 10% of GDP, as against losses from pollutants of perhaps 2 % of GDP (water borne pollutants

which reduce crop yields, reduced fish catches, reduced industrial output, airborne pollution which

results in higher morbidity, reduced plant growth, damage to materials, and soil pollution which reduces

crop yields).
                                                   13

        Estimates of the cost of damage from a series of environmental sources in India in 1992 are put

at about 6% of GDP in the ADB studies. The elements included cover urban air pollution, health

costs from water quality, soil erosion, and deforestation, while the study excludes traffic related costs,

pollution costs from toxic wastes, and biodiversity losses.

        The other studies included in Table 2 are less complete in their coverage of environmental

damage. Studies for Indonesia of the health costs of particulate and lead levels (gasoline related) set

at levels above those laid down as standards by the World Health Organization are put at around 2%

of GDP in 1989. In Pakistan the health impacts of air and water pollution along with productivity losses

from deforestation and soil erosion were estimated at around 3½% of GDP in the early 1990's. The

ADB studies of the Philippines concentrate on the Manila area alone and look at the effects of lowered

air and water quality, and produce cost estimates for this component of damage of around 1% of GDP.

In Thailand, health effects of particulates and lead levels (gasoline related) in excess of WHO standards

are put at 2% of GDP.

        Table 3 reports estimated time loss costs from traffic congestion for a sample of Asian cities.

These are also cited in the 1998 HDR, and are in addition to those costs listed in Table 2. For Bangkok

time related costs from traffic are estimated at 2% of local product in 1994; these estimates fall to 0.4%

for Seoul in the same year. Health related costs of traffic are already included in studies referred to in

Table 2.
                                                     14

                                                    Table 2

               Some Estimates of Environmental Costs in Selected Asian Countries

       China

                ·      Productivity losses due to soil erosion, deforestation and land degradation, water

                       shortages and destruction of wetlands in 1990 put at US$ 13.9-26.6 billion annually or 3.8-

                       7.3% of GDP

                ·      Health and productivity losses from pollution in cities in 1990 put at US$ 6.3-9.3 billion,

                       or 1.7-2.5% of GDP

       India

                ·      Total environmental costs of US$ 13.8 billion in 1992, or 6% of GDP; urban air pollution

                       costs $1.3 billion; health costs from water quality at $5.7 billion; soil erosion costs at $2.4

                       billion; deforestation costs put at $214 million. Traffic related costs, pollution costs from

                       toxic wastes, biodiversity losses excluded.

       Indonesia

                ·      Health costs of particulate and lead levels above WHO standards in Jakarta put at US$

                       2.2 billion in 1989, or 2.0% of GDP

       Pakistan

                ·      Health impacts of air and water pollution and productivity losses from deforestation and

                       soil erosion put at US$ 1.7 billion in the early 1990's; or 3.3% of GDP

       Philippines

                ·      Health and productivity losses from air and water pollution in the Manila area put at US$

                       0.3-0.4 billion in the early 1990's, or 0.8-1.0% of GDP

       Thailand

                ·      Health effects of particulate and lead levels in excess of WHO standards put at US$ 1.6

                       billion, or 2% of GDP

Source: Agarwal (1996), ADB (1997), and UN (1998)
                                             15

                                            Table 3


            Estimates of time losses due to traffic congestion in Asian cities, 1994

City                            Annual cost of time delays           Cost as % of local

                                       (US$ millions)                (city-wide) product

Bangkok                                     272                              2.1

Kuala Lumpur                                 68                              1.8

Singapore                                   305                              1.6

Jakarta                                      68                              0.9

Manila                                       51                              0.7

Hong Kong                                   293                              0.6

Seoul                                       154                              0.4



Source: WRI (1996) and UN (1998)
                                                   16

        What is striking from these two sets of studies is that in the case of the two more comprehensive

country studies (China and India), estimates for combined environmental damage are large; in the region

of 10% of GDP in the China case, neglecting damage from additional sources such as time loss in

traffic. Given that model based analyses of the gains from more conventional policy reform (such as tax

or trade reform) in those countries often produce estimates which are lower (perhaps 1-3% of GDP),

this suggests that environmental policy should perhaps receive a higher weighting in the over policy

stance in these countries than currently.

        In addition, the composition of environmental damage costs in these countries is striking. The

China studies in the ADB compendium suggest that perhaps 70-80% of environmental damage occurs

through degradation, largely in rural areas; a range echoed in the study by Smil we cite above. While

the numbers for India are perhaps less dramatic, the high estimates of costs of soil erosion outside Asia7,

to us at least, support our contention that degradation of the environment rather than damage caused

by pollutants may well be the more important environmental issue in developing countries.




Transborder Environmental Externalities and the Developing Country Environmental

Regime

        Developing countries both contribute to and are affected by a range of transborder and global

externality problems. In Table 4 we list some of the more major transborder and global environmental

externalities involved, both those affecting and contributed to by developing countries. These also form

part of the typical developing country environmental regime, and although we do not emphasize them

here we mention them nonetheless.
                                                  17

                                                   Table 4


                       Transborder/Global Environmental Externalities Affecting
                                       Developing Countries

1. Global warming -               Temperature rise and micro climate change, combined with increasing

                                  frequency of extreme weather events

2. Ozone depletion -              Thinning of ozone layer increases ultraviolet light penetration of the

                                  atmosphere. Effect more severe in temperate climates

3. Biodiversity/Deforestation -   Loss of gene pool through forest and wildlife erosion - mangrove losses

                                  linked to shrimp farming - loss of forests affects local populations who

                                  use non-timber forest products, reduces carbon absorption by forests,

                                  increases water run off in flooding

4. Acid rain -                    Airborne acid depositions; high in areas such as South - East China,

                                  North - East India, Korea, Thailand. Wheat yields halved in areas in

                                  India close to sulfur dioxide emissions
                                                  18

        Global warming is perhaps the more major transborder environmental issue for the developing

countries, with temperature rise and micro climate changes the projected outcome, to be combined with

increased frequency of extreme weather events. The possible impacts on developing countries are

thought to be potentially more significant for low terrain countries such as Bangladesh, as are the

adjustment problems faced by smaller countries as micro climates change (such as in Western Africa)

and labour flows across borders.

        Further transborder elements forming part of the environmental regime in these countries include

the thinning of the ozone layer which increases ultraviolet light penetration of the atmosphere. These

effects are more severe in developed country temperate climates than in the developing countries, but

the ability of the developing countries to abate damage of this form is more

limited than that in the developed world; especially as much of the population spends a larger fraction

of their time out of doors.

        We also include problems associated with biodiversity and deforestation as a part of the

transborder/global part of the regime. For biodiversity, the issue is loss from the gene pool through

flora/fauna damage. The environmental effects of economic activities which affect resources with global

existence value (including species and biodiversity) is one aspect. Shrimp farming, for instance, has

grown in the last two decades from initially low levels in Thailand and other countries, and with it has

come significant loss of mangroves and a resulting loss of biodiversity. Many pharmaceutical products

sold worldwide each year are generated from forest related sources in developing countries. Global

impacts of forest loss occur through many channels including carbon sink reduction and impacts on

existence value abroad. But there are also the effects of forest loss on local populations who use non-

timber forest products; and increased water runoff in the event of flooding.
                                                  19

        Acid rain problems reflect airborne acid depositions affecting buildings and agricultural yields;

these problems are especially significant in such areas as South and East China, North and East India,

Korea and Thailand. The 1998 HDR reports that areas in India close to sulfur dioxide emissions

(admittedly mostly originating within India) are estimated to have halved wheat yields due to these

emissions. While these global and transborder externalities are also part of the developing country

environmental regime, but both their impact on individual countries and the contribution of countries

through them to global damage remain poorly quantified.
                                                    20

III.    GROWTH, POLICY REFORM AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME IN
        DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

        The discussion in the previous section emphasizes the wide range of externalities which

comprise the environmental regime in developing countries, along with the seeming quantitative

dominance of environmental problems associated with degradation more so than with pollutants. But

how does this regime change as countries grow; does environmental quality improve or worsen, in what

dimension and for what reasons? And what policy measures contribute to the environmental situation,

either positively or negatively?

The Environmental Kuznets Curve

        One of the more prominent of the recent discussions on these issues focuses on the so-called

environmental Kuznets curve (EKC). The EKC refers to the relationship between environmental

indicators of certain types and per capita incomes of countries; its origins lie in Kuznets' work in the

1950's on income inequality measures across developing countries, which documented a clear trend

initially towards increased inequality as per capita income grows, with a subsequent fall. This work

suggested an inverted U shape for a cross country plot of an inequality measure such as a Gini

coefficient against income per capita. The EKC hypothesis is that environmental indicator levels first

rise (pollutant levels per capita rise) as per capita income rises; then the relationship reverses after some

threshold level of income.

        The implication drawn by some in the literature from EKC plots is that growth need not be

inconsistent with the objective of improving environmental quality in the medium to longer run:

environmental concerns can be delinked from growth objectives. Indeed, some authors have gone

further and argued that the best way to improve environmental quality is to follow policies that make

countries rich in the shortest possible time, since in the long run there is no conflict between growth and
                                                  21

environmental protection. Andreoni and Levinson (1998) and Jaegar (1999) have recently provided

microfoundations for the EKC, arguing that the characteristics of clean-up technology are key to the

EKC.

        The first paper in this area by Shafik and Bandopadhyay (1992) (a background study for the

1992 World Development Report (World Bank (1992)) with results given prominent profile in the

Report itself) examined a range of environmental indicators. These included lack of clean water, lack

of urban sanitation, ambient levels of suspended particulate matter, ambient sulfur oxides, change in

forest area during the period 1961-86, the annual rate of deforestation between 1961 and 1986,

dissolved oxygen in rivers, fecal coliforms in rivers, municipal waste per capita and carbon emissions

per capita. Their sample consisted of observations on up to 149 countries for the period 1960-90,

although their coverage was incomplete. Some of the dependent variables were observed for cities

within countries, in other cases for countries as a whole. Only in the case of air pollutants was an EKC

type relation found. Lack of clean water and lack of urban sanitation were found to decline uniformly

both with increasing income and over time. Deforestation seemed to be unrelated to income. River

quality tended to monotonically worsen with income.

        Selden and Song (1994) following Safik and Bandopadhyay focussed exclusively on air

pollutants in their examination of possible EKC relationships. They studied emissions of SO2, NOx,

SPM and CO. Emissions were measured as kilograms per capita on a national basis with pooled

cross-section and time-series data drawn from World Resources Institute. The data were averages for

1973-75, 1979-81 and 1982-84. There were 30 countries in their sample: 22 high income countries,

6 middle income and 2 low income. Their results indicated that emissions of CO were independent of
                                                  22

income, whereas emissions of other pollutants followed an EKC pattern. However, the turning points

occurred at much higher levels of income than in the Safik and Bandopadhyay study.

        Grossman and Krueger (1995) subsequently investigated EKC relationships using the GEMS

cross country data on air quality over the period 1977-1984 and isolated a series of environmental

indicators: SO2 concentration in selected cities, smoke, dissolved oxygen in water, biological oxygen

demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrates, fecal coliform, total coliform, lead,

cadmium, arsenic, mercury and nickel. The data measured ambient air quality at two or three locations

in each of a group of cities in a number of countries over the period 1977-88. The number of

observations varied over time (52 cities in 32 countries in 1982, but only 27 cities in 14 countries in

1988). The authors claimed that the data were representative of countries at varying levels of economic

development and with different geographical conditions, and found an EKC type relation for SO2,

smoke, dissolved oxygen, BOD, COD, nitrates, fecal contamination of rivers and arsenic. The evidence

was less compelling for total coliform and heavy metals.

        Elsewhere in the literature Panayotou (1993) estimated EKC type relationships for SO2, NOX,

SPM and deforestation using cross section data for 1985 and, as in Seldon and Song, pollutants

measured in emissions per capita on a national basis. He found EKC type relations for SO2, NOX and

SPM. Turning points were at levels of income lower than those in Seldon and Song. Cooper and

Griffiths (1994), in contrast, estimated three regional (Africa, Latin America and Asia) EKCs for

deforestation only, using pooled cross-section, time-series data for each region for the period 1961-91,

and for 64 countries. They found no EKC relationship.

        These findings are such that it is now often argued that attempts to estimate EKC type

relationships should be confined to air pollutants alone, and, in particular, to SO2 emissions.
                                                   23

As a result, drawing conclusions from any EKC plot as to how overall environment damage behaves

as income change is thought to be fraught with problems.

        But even for SO2, the EKC does not also appear to be a particularly robust description in

current literature of the behavior of environmental pollutants vis a vis income per capita. Kaufman et.al.

(1998) point out a number of econometric problems with EKC estimates, including violations of

homoskedasticity, the non-use of random and fixed effects methods in panel data, improper definition

of dependent and independent variables and other problems. Kaufman et.al. try to circumvent these

difficulties in their attempt to identify a EKC type relation in the case of SO2; defining SO2

concentrations as annual average concentrations in ground level atmosphere at a particular location

within a city. Using a panel of 23 countries (13 developed, 7 developing and 3 centrally planned) over

the period 1974 to 1989, their analysis shows an EKC type relation between emissions per capita and

spatial intensity of economic activity, as well as between emissions per capita and GDP per capita.

However, they also find evidence that still further increases in incomes per capita lead to a further

increase in emissions per capita; an N type rather than inverted U type relation between emissions per

capita and GDP per capita.

        Unruh and Moomaw (1998) evaluate whether the transition from a high emission to a low

emission state occurs mechanically at a particular income level as suggested by earlier papers. They

identify some industrialized countries that seem to have gone through EKC type transitions discovering

that these transitions span a broad range of income levels8. Furthermore, the transitions occur abruptly

and co-temporally, and do not appear to be the consequence of endogenous income growth. Rapid

and co-temporal historical events, technological progress and the need to react to external shocks seem

to drive the EKC structure. Ekins (1997) argues that the pattern of emissions of selected air pollutants
                                                    24

does not indicate the environmental impact of such emissions, and examines an aggregate indicator of

environmental impact developed by the OECD. Examining the relationship between this indicator and

income per capita, Ekins finds no evidence in favor of an EKC.

        Thus, even taken within its own confines, the relation between economic growth and

environmental damage seems more complex than that portrayed by the EKC (Barbier (1997)). There

appears to be nothing automatic about this relation, nor is any inference on causality necessarily justified.

Once degradation effects are added in, drawing conclusions as to how overall environmental quality

changes with income is even more treacherous. For instance, soil erosion problems, measured relative

to aggregate income, would seem to recede as growth occurs, and in (relative terms) the agricultural

sector shrinks. But with growth come urbanization and congestion problems, which relative to income

perhaps recede after a transitional period when growth and new infrastructure come on stream.

The Environmental Effects of Policy Reform (Trade and Environment)

        A further strand of recent literature attempts to assess how environmental quality changes with

policy changes, including trade liberalization; in particular how various kinds of pollutant concentrations

can be affected. Copeland and Taylor (1994), for instance, evaluate the role of trade where

environmental quality is a local public good (damage from pollutants remain in the country). They

consider a two country single period equilibrium, where goods differ in pollution intensity in production.

Countries differ in their endowment of a primary factor (human capital); environmental quality in both

countries is a normal good in preferences, and with assumed endogenous setting of pollution policy the

higher income country has higher environmental standards. They find that free trade shifts pollution

intensive production towards human capital scarce countries and raises world pollution levels.
                                                    25

        Copeland and Taylor (1995) consider a different case where environmental quality is a pure

public good to which all countries are exposed. Trade effects are different in this case, since relocation

of pollution intensive industries to countries with less stringent environmental protection can increase the

exposure of residents in the home country, and works against more conventional gains from trade.

Since there are transborder externalities in this case, nationally based pollution regulation does not lead

to Pareto Optimality, and free trade need not raise welfare.

        More recently, Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (1998) first generate and then test a series of

propositions as to how economies behave in terms of their trade and environment linkages. They

assume a small open economy formulation, the economy has a number of agents, produces two final

goods and uses two primary factors. One product is labor intensive and involves no pollution, whereas

the other is capital intensive and causes pollution. They assume producers have access to an abatement

technology, which, for simplicity, only uses the polluting good as an input. It is also assumed that the

government uses emission taxes to reduce pollution, and given the pollution tax rate they generate a firm

level profit function.

        The level of the tax actually used is assumed to be an increasing function of what an optimally

set tax would be. This treatment allows government behavior to vary across countries, and also allows

for environmental policy to respond and differ by country. On the demand side, consumers maximize

utility taking pollution as given; they assume preferences over goods are homothetic, while there is

constant marginal disutility of pollution.

        The model allows them to decompose a total change in pollution levels into scale, composition,

and technique effects. This, in turn, allows them to generate a number of theoretical propositions to test.

Thus, if economies differ only with respect to their degree of trade openness, if both countries export
                                                   26

the polluting good, then pollution will be higher in the country which is less open. Where the world price

is fixed, then for a given level of income and for certain settings of key model parameters, they show that

the composition effect associated with trade liberalization in such countries is to increase pollution.

These and other propositions as to how the links between trade and environment operate emerge from

their analysis as they focus on emissions associated with trade related polluting activity.

        However, as our earlier discussion indicates, emissions are likely to constitute only a portion of

the overall welfare cost of environmental externalities in liberalizing developing countries, and other

environmental externalities may well have different interactions with trade. Thus, if with increased trade,

labor moves from rural to urban areas, and if this generates increased congestion, these adverse

consequences linked to trade can easily dominate the overall environmental impact compared to

changes in emissions. Impacts on soil erosion from agricultural trade liberalization abroad can be

adverse, while at home beneficial. Liberalization in the manufactured sector can produce opposite

implications for soil erosion. A wider view of the environmental regime in developing countries can thus

also produce different conclusions as to what the key linkages between policy changes and the

environment actually are.
                                                   27

IV.     MEASURING THE DEGREE OF DEVELOPING COUNTRY ENVIRONMENTAL
        FAILURE

        Given the preceding discussion, if pollutant levels across economies do not provide a complete

picture for the evaluation of comparative environmental performance across countries or through time,

either in analytical or empirical work, what is a more appropriate way to proceed? Unfortunately, the

problem is not only the incomplete coverage of environmental externalities in developing countries; one

also needs estimates of damage functions, which allow the losses involved to be computed in welfare

terms. Thus, even if economies have high levels of emissions per capita, if the ability to abate differs

across economies (such as health care capabilities to deal with adverse effects of emissions) then

differences in emission levels across countries do not necessarily map into comparable differential

welfare losses due to environmental failures. In the appendix to the paper, we show for the special case

of a stock externality that, even if an EKC relationship is followed in emissions per capita, this need not

map into a comparable relationship in terms of welfare.

        For these reasons, therefore, some alternative approach is needed to evaluate the significance

of environmental failures across economies or through time, and hence to assess the impact of the

environmental regime in developing countries. The appropriate concept to us would seem to be a

distance measure reflecting the severity of departures from Pareto optimality associated with

externalities; how far away are economies from Pareto optimality in a welfare sense, and what would

be the potential welfare gains from moving from the current allocation of resources with uninternalized

or partially internalized externalities to complete internalization. The implied measure would seem to be

a money metric measure (say a Hicksian measure) of the gain from internalization relative to a current

non internalized equilibrium. Income effects associated with different assignments of property rights

would affect the precise fully internalized equilibrium, although we put these issues on one side for now.
                                                     28

Such a measure of gain is implicit in the literature discussed in section II, which produces estimates of

the costs of various kinds of environmental failures in terms of GDP per capita; but much of this

literature is not explicit about the precise welfare formulation used.

        Such measures need not behave in any way which is necessarily collinear with levels of

emissions, or intensity of environmental failure. Figure 1 shows schematically how a comparison across

two economies with differing levels of emissions may yield larger gains to the economy with smaller

emissions. Here, we represent marginal benefit and marginal cost of abatement functions for two

economies. Economy A has more steeply sloped functions, and in Pareto optimality has smaller

abatement than B. But the gains from abatement (internalization) are larger in A than in B because of

the more shallowly sloped functions in B. Comparing pollutant levels across economies need give no

guide as to the relative size of gains from internalization.

        The seemingly large estimates we report earlier of the gains from internalizing environmental

externalities in developing countries also suggest the perhaps obvious question of why is it that if

internalization gains are so large, more internalization has not occurred. It would be wrong to say that

no internalization has occurred in these countries. At village level, terracing and other schemes are

designed to remedy some of the ills of soil erosion. National environmental regulation often approaches

levels of stringency seen in regulation in developed countries, but is accompanied by problems of

enforcement and compliance. In many developing countries, environmental NGO groups are also

extremely active, generating a rising profile for environmental issues in local policy debate even though

large potential gains from internalization still seem to remain.
                                   29

                              Figure 1

         Abatement Levels and Welfare Gains from Internalization
                           in Two Economies
$          Economy A               $           Economy B

                        MC

                                                               MC
        Gain
                                            Gain
                                                               MB

                        MB

    0    Abatement Level       L        0    Abatement Level        L
                                                   30

        Various explanations abound for the presence of these seemingly large potential gains. One is

that the technology of internalization is both capital intensive and high cost for low income countries.

Monitoring devices, administration of environmental fees and fines all require inputs on a scale not easily

attained in low income countries. Another is that if environmental quality is costly to provide, then

models with traditional preferences and technology would naturally imply that abatement levels are lower

in low income countries. These effects, in turn, would be exacerbated by income elasticities of demand

for environmental quality exceeding one, as is often claimed.

        Another direction explored in recent literature (see Lopez (1997b) and Maler (1997)) is that

it is outside shocks to social systems that are a significant compounding factor, either disrupting or

delaying internalization and producing lowered environmental quality. Particularly important in this

discussion is the observation that environmental management systems in developing countries commonly

rely on informal social norms, which can partially or wholly break down under rapid population growth,

technological innovation, or changes in market outcomes. Previously reasonably well-managed

resources can become open access poorly managed resources, with worsened environmental quality

the result. Dasgupta and Maler (1991) have argued that, viewed in these terms, poverty and

degradation can even be reinforcing. Thus, if deforestation moves available firewood from forests

progressively further from villages, families may have more children to offset the increased time required

to collect firewood9. Population growth is higher, and with it the demand for firewood, producing further

degradation.
                                                   31

V.      COMPARING DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRY POLICY REGIMES

        We often tend to think of developing countries as following the developmental experience of

developed countries with a form of compressed lag. OECD countries over some 200 years have grown

and developed, transforming themselves first from agrarian societies, to industrial economies based on

heavy industry (steel, chemicals), to modern high technology service based economies. Developing

countries are following this experience at varying speeds and in different ways, but the transition time

is clearly shorter. Korea, for instance, may have transformed itself from a country with lower income

per capita than India in the mid 1950’s to a lower income OECD country today; a 40 year transition.

Furthermore, unlike developed countries at the height of their industrial growth, developing countries

today are under considerable pressure to reduce environmental stress. This pressure (sometimes backed

by the threat of punitive action) comes from a number of sources, e.g. developed country governments,

international funding agencies, academia, local and international NGOs and the developing countries'

own bodies of jurisprudence. Such pressures were unheard of during the days of rapid industrial growth

of the currently developing countries.

        It is only relatively recently, however, that developed countries have gained the environmental

awareness they now have, and developed systems of environmental management that control emissions,

treat waste, and otherwise abate environmental damage. At the height of OECD country industrial

revolutions, effectively no environmental controls were in place.

        What then should developing countries do? Following developed country experience would

seem to indicate adopting few environmental controls, and that with income growth environmental

quality will improve. Indeed, a great fear is that attempts to heighten environmental regulation will only

serve to slow growth, and hence slow eventual achievement of higher environmental quality through
                                                  32

growth. On the other hand, with problems of compliance one can argue that perhaps developing

countries have no choice but to follow the older developed country industrial revolution experience of

largely benign neglect.

        There are, however, some key differences in the developing country experience in this area

compared to the industrial revolution of old. First, the time periods involved are compacted, and hence

the flow environmental damage per year during industrialization is larger. Second, the shocks which hit

the economies are also much more severe than was true of the old industrial revolutionizers. These latter

economies simply did not experience population growth rates of 3%/year plus, massive growth in urban

vehicle densities, and other elements contributing to todays environmental ills in the developing world.

Not only is the process more compact, the severity of damage time adjusted probably exceeds that

experienced in the OECD one hundred years ago. Third, even though weakly administered, there are

abatement technologies which can and are being employed, and even though there is political

opposition, environmental management is taking root.

        Thus the large cost estimates we report earlier, an the scope of developing country

environmental problems suggest to us a much more activist environmental policy regime will continue

to emerge in developing countries than was true of industrial countries some hundred years ago as they

grew and industrialized. And unlike the past, this will have an equal if not dominant focus on

degradation over pollution.
                                                    33

VI.     CONCLUDING REMARKS

        This paper discusses the environmental regime in developing countries, stressing both the

complexity of the regime and the wide ranging nature of environmental externalities which go beyond

more conventional literature discussion of pollutant levels. It suggests that a full characterization of this

regime needs to focus on such externality problems as soil erosion, open access resources and

congestion problems in urban areas. The paper stresses that from available studies the gains from

internalization of these externalities seem to be large; potentially exceeding numerical (model based)

estimates of gains from conventional policy reforms (such as trade or tax reform) by substantial orders

of magnitude. Also, the majority of such gains seem to arise from internalizing externalities associated

with degradation (soil erosion, open access resources, congestion) more so than pollutants. We also

stress how existing literature discussing how the environmental situation changes with growth (the

environmental Kuznets curve) covers only part of the environmental situation; a point which also applies

to other literatures such as that on policy reforms (trade liberalization) and environmental quality.

        Having developed this picture of the environmental regime in the developing countries the paper

concludes by suggesting that a measure is needed of overall environmental performance in terms of

departures from Pareto optimality so as to give a money metric welfare measure of the internalization

gains of moving to complete internalization. It also discusses some of the reasons for the lack of

internalization, citing recent literature which argues that social conventions defining implicit management

regimes come under stress as rapid urbanization, rapid population growth, and other shocks to social

systems occur. The overall theme of the paper, repeated throughout, is than in discussing the

environmental situation in developing countries, a more comprehensive sense of what comprises this

regime is needed.
34
                                               35


VII.   REFERENCES

ADB (Asian Development Bank) (1997) Emerging Asia-Changes and Challenges, Manila.

Agarwal, A. (1996) “Pay- offs to Progress”, Down to Earth (Centre for Science and Environment,
      New Delhi) 5(10): 31-39.

Andreoni, J. and A. Levinson (1998) "The Simple Analytics of the Environmental Kuznets Curve",
      NBER Working Paper 6739.

Antweiler, W., B.R. Copeland, and M.S. Taylor (1998) “Is Free Trade Good for the Environment?”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.6707, August 1998.

Barbier, E. (1997) "Introduction to the Environmental Kuznets Curve Special Issue"
        Environment and Development Economics, vol.2, pp. 369-381.

Barbier, F. (1996) “The Economics of Soil Erosion: Theory, Methodology and Examples” Economy
        and Environmental Programme of South East Asia, Special Paper, May 1996.

Cooper, M. and C. Griffiths (1994) "The Interaction of Population and Growth and
      Environmental Quality" American Economic Review, vol. 84, pp. 890-897.

Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor (1994) "North-South Trade and the Environment"
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, pp. 755-787.

Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor (1995) “Trade and Transboundary Pollution” American Economic
       Review, vol.85, pp.716-737.

Dasgupta, P. and K.G. Maler (1991) "The Environment and Emerging Development
      Issues" In S. Fischer, D. de Tray and S. Shah (eds.) Proceedings of the World
      Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, Washington, D.C.: The
      World Bank.

Ekins, P. (1997) "The Kuznets Curve for the Environment and Economic Growth:
        Examining the Evidence" Environmental Planning, vol. 29, pp. 805-830.

Filmer, D. and L. Pritchett (1996) "Environmental Degradation and the Demand for
        Children" Discussion Paper, The World Bank, May.

Grossman, G. and A. Krueger (1995) "Economic Growth and the Environment" Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, vol. 110, pp. 353-377.
                                                36

Hettige, H., Mani, M. and D. Wheeler (1997) "Industrial Pollution in Economic Development"
        Development Research Group, The World Bank, December 1997.

Jaegar, W.K. (1999) "Economic Growth and Environmental Resources" mimeo, Department
        of Economics, Williams College, Ma. USA.

Kaufman, R.K., Davidsdottir, B., Garnham, S. and P. Paul (1998) "The Determinants of
      Atmospheric SO2 Concentrations: Reconsidering the Environmental Kuznets
      Curve" Ecological Economics, vol. 25, pp. 209-220.

Knut, A.H. et.al. (1996) “The Cost of Soil Erosion in Nicaragua” Ecological Economics, vol. 16,
       pp.129-145.

Ko, I.D., Lapan, H.E. and T. Sandler (1992) "Controlling Stock Externalities: Flexible
       Versus Inflexible Pigovian Corrections" European Economic Review, vol.36,
       pp. 1263-1276.

López, R. (1997a) “Evaluating Economywide Policies in the Presence of Agricultural Environmental
       Externalities: The Case of Ghana” in The Greening of Economic Policy Reform Volume
       II: Case Studies, The World Bank Environmental Department and Economic Development
       Institute.W. Cruz, M. Munasinghe and J.J. Warford (eds.), pp. 27-54.

López, R. (1997b) "Where Development Can or Cannot Go: The Role of Poverty-Environment
       Linkages" in Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, 1997,
       World Bank, 1998, pp. 285-306.

Magrath, W. and P. Arens (1989) "The Costs of Soil Erosion on Java: A Natural
      Resource Accounting Approach", Environment Working Paper 18, World
      Bank, Environment Department, Washington, D.C.

Maler, K. (1997) "Environment, Poverty and Economic Growth" in Annual World Bank
       Conference on Development Economics, 1997, World Bank 1998,pp.251-270.

Panyatou, T. (1993) "Empirical Tests and Policy Analysis of Environmental Degradation
       at Different Stages of Economic Development", Working Paper WP238, Technology
       and Employment Program, ILO, Geneva.

Schatan, C. (1998) "Some Crucial Environmental Latin American Issues: Precedents for
       a WEO Discussion" mimeo, ECLAC, Mexico.

Seldon, T. and D. Song (1994) "Environmental Quality and Development: Is there a Kuznets Curve for
        Air Pollution Emissions?" Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol.27,
        pp.147-162.
                                                 37

Shafik, N. and S. Bandopadhyay (1992) Economic Growth and Environmental Quality: Time
        Series and Cross-country Evidence" Background Paper for the World Development Report
        1992, World Bank: Washington, D.C. Oxford University Press.


Smil, V. (1992) "Environmental Changes as a Source of Conflict and Economic Losses in
       China" Paper prepared for a Workshop on Environmental Change, Economic Decline,
       and Civil Strife, Institute for Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, 1991.


Torras, M. and J. Boyce (1998) "Income Inequality and Pollution: a Reassessment of the
        Environmental Kuznets Curve", Ecological Economics, vol. 25, pp. 147-160.

UN (1998) UN Human Development Report, 1998.

Unruh, G.C. and W.R. Moomaw (1998) "An Alternative Analysis of Apparent EKC-type
       Transitions", Ecological Economics, vol. 25, pp. 221-229.

Warford, J.J., M. Munasinghe and W. Cruz (1997) The Greening of Economic Policy Reform, The
      World Bank Environmental Department and Economic Development Institute.

World Bank (1992) World Development Report, 1992, Washington, D.C.: Oxford University
      Press.

WRI (World Resources Institute) (1996) World Resources 1996-97, New York: Oxford University
        Press.
</ref_section>
                                                   38


                                               Appendix

                    Internalization Gains and the Environmental Kuznets Curve

        The EKC literature discussed in the text of this paper seemingly points to the conclusion that

there is no clear evidence in favor of the EKC. Even though the EKC itself may empirically be dubious,

its welfare interpretation also has to be highly qualified. Here, we develop a model where optimality is

defined as internalization, and since such internalization is, in principle, independent of the level of

emissions, the EKC even if it were to exist lacks any welfare content. We use an amended version of

the growth with stock externalities model, showing that alternative technological assumptions can give

us different (optimal) relations between emissions and income, and each such relation is consistent with

perfect internalization. The emphasis in the model is on shadow pricing the external effect appropriately

(Ko et.al. (1992)).

        In the model:

        (i)       Labor is normalized to equal 1

        (ii)      Output, y, depends upon capital, k, and emissions, e :

         y = f(k,e). An important point here is the nature of the relation between k and e. We

        assume that fke > 0, i.e. capital and emissions are substitutes. We further assume that there

        exists a level of emissions e such that the marginal product of emissions for a given level of

        capital is zero.

        (iii)     Capital accumulates according to the equation

         .

        k=      f ( k , e) − c − δk          (1)

        where c is consumption and δ is the rate of depreciation of capital.
                                                             39

         (iv)               Pollution accumulates according to the relation:

           .

          S = −bS + e                                 (2)

         where b is fixed.

                            The social planner's problem is to choose non negative consumption and emission

         paths that solve the infinite horizon maximization problem:

          ∞

          ∫e
                − ρt
                       U (C , S ) dt                   (3)
          0



         subject to (1) and (2). Here U(.) is the instantaneous utility of the representative consumer

         and ρ is the discount rate.

                            The Hamiltonian for this problem is:

H (k , S , c, e) = U ( c, S ) + θ 1 (t )[ f ( k , e) − c − δk ] + θ 2 (t )( e − bS )   (4)

where θ1 and θ2 are costate variables.

         First order conditions imply

Uc = θ1 (5), assuming we always have an interior solution; and

θ1 (∂f / ∂e) + θ 2 ≤ 0 (6)

with equality if e*(t) > 0.

The canonical equations are :

 .                      .
θ1 = ( ρ + δ − ( ∂f / ∂k ))θ1              (7)

 .                          .
θ 2 = {( ρ + b)θ 2 } − ∂U / ∂S               (8)

and transversality conditions apply, i.e.,:

limt->∞ e-ρt θ1(t) = limt->∞ e-ρt θ2(t) = limt->∞ e-ρt k(t) = limt->∞ e-ρtS(t) = 0 (9)
                                                     40

which require that the present value of capital and pollution becomes negligible at infinity.

              The above welfare exercise refers to the optimal solution obtained in a command economy.

From the first order conditions we can solve for optimal consumption and optimal emissions as: c* =

c(k, S, θ1,θ2) and e* = e(k, S,θ1,θ2). If we assume that the production and the utility functions are

strictly concave in this case then for given values of parameters, c* and e* would be unique. The

EKC in this case refers to the relationship between c* and e*; the issue is how this may be expected

to vary with c. If we use the above result on θ2 then it follows that, from a welfare point of view, the

relationship between consumption and emissions would be monotonically falling. Richer countries

would have higher θ2 and, therefore, lower emissions, ceteris paribus, than poorer countries.

              In a competitive market economy the representative consumer takes as given time paths

{w(t), r(t), π(t)} for tε [0,∞), of wages, interest rates, and profits. The instantaneous utility of the

consumer is defined by U(c,S) as before. The consumer sells the fixed labour input (normalized to

unity) to a representative firm at the market-determined wage rate, and rents out capital (k(t)) at the

market rate of interest to the firm. The representative firm maximizes profits under competitive

conditions. It generates emissions e(t) per unit time and pays a tax λ(t) on these emissions. Total tax

proceeds collected by the government are redistributed to the consumer. The consumer maximizes

utility and has perfect foresight about market wage rates and other variables.

              The consumer maximizes:

∞

∫e
     − ρt
            U (c (t ), S (t )) dt subject to                         (CP)
0


 .

k = π (t) + rk (t ) + λ(t)e(t ) − c(t) − δk (t )
and treats S as a parameter. ρ is the consumer's discount rate and δ is the rate of depreciation of
                                                          41

capital.

           The firm takes as given (and has perfect foresight about) time paths of emission taxes {λ(t), t

ε [0,∞)} along with the times paths of wage and interest. The firm can reduce its tax liabilities by

reducing output. Output is produced according to a standard neoclassical production function so

that the firm chooses k(t) and e(t) to solve the problem:

           Max π(t) = f(k(t),e(t)) - r(t)k(t) - λ(t)e(t)                      (FP)

           Given that the consumer perfectly predicts the time paths of {w(t), r(t), π(t)} and the firm

perfectly predicts the time paths of {w(t), r(t), π(t)}, then the consumer will determine consumption

demand (cd) and capital supply (ks) whereas the firm will determine consumption supply (cs) and

capital demand (kd) and the emissions e(t). The paths {w(t), r(t), π(t), λ(t)} are a perfect foresight

competitive equilibrium with emission taxes if the solution {cs(t), kd(t), e(t)} of the FP is such that if

profits are defined by

π(t) = f(k(t),e(t)) - r(t)k(t) - λ(t)e(t) for each t and if {cd(t), ks(t)} solves the CP then for all tε [0,∞)

we have:

(i)        cd(t) = cs(t) goods market or flow equilibrium;

(ii)       ks(t) = kd(t) capital market or stock equilibrium;

(iii)      ec(t) is the competitive emission;

            .
(iv)       S = e c (t ) − bS ( t ), S ( 0) = S 0 (evolution of pollution stock).

           An examination of the planner's problem in (1) immediately reveals that if the

emission tax is defined as λ(t) = -θ2(t)/θ1(t), the competitive equilibrium solution for CP and the

firm's FP are identical to the solution of the social optimization problem. To see this, assume that the

FP has an interior solution, then we must have:
                                                               42

∂f/∂k = r                                  (10)

∂f/∂e = λ                                  (11)

These determine the demand for capital and competitive supply of emissions. Given this, then the

consumer maximizes the following Hamiltonian:

H = U(c,S) + γ(t)(π+ rk +λe - c - δk) (12)

The first order conditions are:

∂U/∂c = γ                                  (13)

.
γ = ( ρ + δ − r )γ                         (14)

.
k = π + rk + λe − c − δk with k(0)=k0                          (15)

The transversality conditions are:

lim t → ∞ e − ρt γ (t ) = lim t → ∞ e − ρt γ (t )k (t ) = 0.   (16)

          If we compare this solution to that for the planner's problem, it is clear that for

γ=θ1 and λ = -θ2/θ1 the solutions to the two problems are identical. Hence, by solving the social

optimization problem and using an optimal and flexible emission duty the planner can induce profit-

maximizing firms to follow the socially desirable emission policy.

          An important implication of the solution to the market problem is that if we have incomplete

Internalization ( λ ≠ −θ 2 /θ1 ) then this carries a welfare cost. The EKC, even if it is observed, then

does not give any indication of the welfare cost of non internalization across countries.


FOOTNOTES


          1
           An earlier version of this paper was presented to a NBER/FEEM conference on “Distributional and

Behavioral Effects of Environmental Policy” held in Milan, June 11/12. We are grateful to May Arunanondchai for
                                                         43


research support, and to Ed Barbier, our discussant, Gib Metcalf, Carlo Cararro, Peter Newell, Ajit Ranade, Manoj

Panda, Diana Tussie and Ben Zissimos for comments and discussions. This paper draws on material from a project

on a possible World Environmental Organization and the interests of the developing countries supported by the

MacArthur Foundation, in which the two authors are jointly involved.


         2
             Lead, arsenic, mercury, lead and cadmium.


         3
          Schatan (1998), for instance, notes that Latin America and the Caribbean account for 50 % of the world's

tropical forests, and five of the ten countries richest in biodiversity worldwide are in the region (Brazil, Colombia,

Ecuador, Mexico and Peru).

         4
             This is consistent with Hettige, Mani and Wheeler's (1997) finding that the environmental Kuznets Curve

does not hold for water borne pollutants.


         5
             This is cited by Barbier (1996).

         6
             This was cited in The Economist, September 5, 1998, although we should note that that the estimate is

substantially in excess of those in other studies we mention later.


         7
          See Barbier (1996) and Schatan (1998).

         8
          In a recent paper, Torras and Boyce (1998) take the existence of the EKC at face value and ask whether it

is merely the level of income or also its distribution that affects emissions per capita. They argue that a more even

distribution of income, higher literacy rates and other indicators of power lead to lower emissions per capita.


         9
             This hypothesis has been tested empirically by Filmer and Pritchett (1996) using household data for

Pakistan for 1991-92. They conclude that households living in areas in which the distance from firewood is greater

have more children.
