NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF YOUNG WORKERS
ON THE AGGREGATE LABOR MARKET
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 7306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7306

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

I have received helpful comments from Daron Acemoglu, Andrew Caplin, Hank Farber, Chris Foote, Bo
Honore, Alan Krueger, Christina Paxson, Harvey Rosen, and seminar participants at George Washington
University, NYU, and Princeton. Thanks to Susan Gore for providing me with cross-state unemployment and
participation rates for different age and sex groups, to David Neumark for providing me with his cross-country
time series of unemployment rates, to Joydeep Roy for research assistance, and to the National Science
Foundation grant SBR-9709881 for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market
Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 7306
August 1999
JEL No. E24, J41, J64
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the response of the unemployment rate and labor force participation rate to
exogenous variation in the youth share of the working age population, using cross-state variation in lagged
birth rates as an instrumental variable. A one percent increase in the youth share reduces the unemployment
rate of young workers by more than one percent, and of older workers by more than two percent, holding
conditions in other states constant. It raises the labor force participation rate by about a third of a percent
for young workers, and by much less for older workers, again ceteris paribus. These results are consistent
with increasing returns to scale (“thick market externalities”) in the labor market. Young workers are
frequently mismatched in their employment, and firms create jobs to take advantage of this mismatch. Data
on gross job creation and destruction in manufacturing support this theory. I also reconcile these results
with existing evidence on the labor market impact of young workers.
Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
Princeton University
001 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
shimer@princeton.edu

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

1

Robert Shimer

Introduction

The baby boom has profoundly altered the demographic structure of the U.S. population during the past ﬁfty years. A number of authors have argued that this
anticipated supply shock can explain part or all of the secular changes in the unemployment rate during this period. First Perry (1970) predicted that the entrance of
the baby boom cohort into the labor force would push up the unemployment rate
during the 1970s. Later, Flaim (1979) and Gordon (1982) conﬁrmed the increase,
and predicted declines during the 1980s, which were in turn conﬁrmed by Flaim
(1990) and Shimer (1998).
The eﬀects of the baby boom on unemployment can be grouped in two categories. First, since the aggregate unemployment rate is a weighted average of the
unemployment rates of diﬀerent age workers, demographic changes may alter the
weights and thus the aggregate unemployment rate without aﬀecting the age-speciﬁc
unemployment rates. Shimer (1998) ﬁnds that this ‘direct’ eﬀect of the baby boom
can account for about an eighty four basis point (0.84 percentage point) increase in
the aggregate unemployment rate from 1954 to 1978, and an eighty one basis point
decline from 1978 to 1998.
Second, changes in demographics may have ‘indirect’ eﬀects on age-speciﬁc unemployment rates. For example, the conventional neoclassical growth model predicts
that an increase in the labor force growth rate will reduce the capital-labor ratio,
raising interest rates and lowering wages. Augmenting such a model with labor
market frictions, low wages may lead to high unemployment, for example if unemployed workers reduce their search eﬀort. In addition, if diﬀerent age workers are
not perfect substitutes, an increase in the youth labor supply may have a diﬀerential
impact on young and old workers.1 Shimer (1998) estimates that the indirect eﬀects
of the baby boom were about as large as the direct eﬀect, so that the baby boom
caused a 180 basis point increase in the aggregate unemployment rate until 1980,
and a 145 basis point decrease in the subsequent years.
Unfortunately, while the direct eﬀect of this supply shock can be precisely es1

This possibility has received considerable attention from labor economists. See the literature
review in Korenman and Neumark (1997).

-1-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

timated, most previous calculations of the indirect eﬀects of the baby boom use
conjectures based on time series evidence. For example, Shimer (1998) attributes
an increase in the youth unemployment rate relative to the prime age unemployment rate to the baby boom. Although the timing of this increase coincides with
the entrance of the baby boom into the labor market, at least two criticisms can
be levied at this attribution. First, there may have been coincident macroeconomic
ﬂuctuations that raised the youth unemployment rate relative to the prime age unemployment rate in the 1970s and 1980s. Second, if young and old workers are
complements in production, the baby boom may have simply reduced the unemployment rate of prime age workers. If that is the case, the indirect eﬀects of the
baby boom at least partially oﬀset the direct eﬀects. It is impossible to reject these
possibilities using time series evidence from a single baby boom.
Recent work by Korenman and Neumark (1997) partially addresses these issues
by using time series data on unemployment rates for 15 countries. They look at the
relative unemployment rate of young and old workers in an eﬀort to muﬄe the noise
introduced by country-speciﬁc macroeconomic shocks, and ﬁnd that an increase in
the youth share of the working age population raises the youth unemployment rate
relative to the prime age unemployment rate, with an elasticity of approximately
0.5. The use of data from multiple countries allows them to include time dummies in
their regression, thereby addressing the ﬁrst criticism. However, the use of relative
unemployment rates exposes it to the second: they cannot tell whether an increase
in the youth share of the labor force lowers the prime age unemployment rate or
raises the youth unemployment rate.
This paper’s innovation is to focus on data from within the U.S.. I use annual observations of unemployment rates from all ﬁfty states and the District of Columbia,
from 1978 to 1996. Because of the relatively large sample size and the relative irrelevance of state-speciﬁc macroeconomic shocks, I can tightly estimate the impact of
changes in the youth share of the population on youth and prime age unemployment
rates. Contrary to the existing literature, I ﬁnd that an increase in the youth share
of the working age population reduces the youth unemployment rate, with an elasticity of about -1; and that the eﬀect on the prime age unemployment rate is even

-2-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

larger in magnitude. A one percent increase in the youth share of the population
reduces the prime age unemployment rate by more than two percent. Not only are
the signs of these estimates surprising, but the magnitudes are enormous, with an
(out of sample) implication that the entry of the baby boom cohort into the labor
market should have halved the prime age unemployment rate!
One possible explanation for these results is that young workers migrate to states
with low unemployment rates. I control for the endogeneity of the youth share
using instrumental variables techniques. When I instrument the youth share with
appropriately lagged birth rates, I ﬁnd that the estimates do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly
from those found by ordinary least squares (OLS). Indeed, a speciﬁcation test fails to
reject the exogeneity of the youth share of the population. A number of robustness
checks conﬁrm the basic results.
Finally, I ﬁnd that an increase in the youth share of the population raises the
labor force participation rate rate for young workers, with an elasticity of about a
third. It has a smaller eﬀect on the participation rate of older workers, with an
elasticity of around 0.05. This implies that the employment-population ratio rises
for each group of workers.
The second task of this paper is to understand why an exogenous increase in the
youth share of the working age population leads to such a dramatic reduction in
unemployment rates and increase in participation. The change in the youth share
of the working age population represents an anticipated supply shock. Standard
theories predict that in response to an increase in the supply of an input, its price
and utilization rate will decline. Yet the data indicate that labor utilization rates
increase in response to an increase in the youth labor supply.
I propose that in the presence of search frictions and increasing returns to scale,
labor markets with many young workers will be more ﬂuid. There is no inherent difference between young and old workers; however, it takes time to ﬁnd good matches,
and so younger labor markets will tend to have more workers who are mismatched in
their current employment. Firms will ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to participate in such
labor markets, boosting job creation and reducing the unemployment rate of both
young and old workers. In contrast, a labor market with mostly older workers is

-3-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

more rigid. By increasing the ﬂuidity of the labor market, an increase in the youth
share of the population also induces more workers to participate in the market,
consistent with the evidence.
A testable implication of this theory, is that labor markets with more young
workers should have more turnover. Since reliable worker ﬂow data does not exist
on a state level, I instead use state level job ﬂow data for the manufacturing sector
(Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1996). I ﬁnd that a one percent increase in the
youth share of the population raises the job creation rate by 0.8 percent and the job
destruction rate by 0.7 percent, which supports the theory.
The third task is to reconcile the ﬁndings of this paper with the existing ‘cohort
crowding’ literature on the relationship between the youth share of the population
and the youth unemployment rate. I conﬁrm that one cannot ﬁnd the relationship
in the 15-country time series assembled by Korenman and Neumark (1997). But
this is not surprising, because cross-state data ignores other channels that lead to
an increase in the unemployment rate. As previously noted, an increase in the
growth rate of the labor force reduces the capital-labor ratio, raises unemployment
and reduces wages. If capital ﬂows freely across states, however, this eﬀect will not
appear in cross-state data; a large increase in the population growth rate in one state
will cause a modest reduction in the capital-labor ratio in all states, which I will
pick up as a year ﬁxed eﬀect and interpret as a macroeconomic shock. In contrast,
to the extent that capital ﬂows imperfectly across national borders, this eﬀect will
appear in the cross-country panel regression using Korenman and Neumark’s (1997)
data. General equilibrium interactions may also rationalize why the entry of the
baby boom into the labor force did not lead to a ﬁfty percent decline in the U.S.
unemployment rate.
Section 2 describes the data used in the main empirical analysis, whose results
are presented in Section 3. Section 4 argues that the endogeneity of fertility decisions
is unlikely to explain these results. Instead, I develop a simple model in Section 5
that illustrates how an increase in the youth share of the population can reduce
the unemployment rate by increasing the ﬂuidity of the labor market. Section 6
oﬀers a simple test of this theory using job creation and destruction data from

-4-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

manufacturing. Section 7 reconciles these results with existing evidence on the
relationship between the youth share of the population and labor market conditions.
Section 8 concludes by exploring the broader implications of the ﬁndings.

2

Data

The main empirical analysis draws on cross-state diﬀerences in birth rates within
the U.S., and the consequent impact on the youth share of the population and
on unemployment and participation rates. The basic source of unemployment and
participation rate data is the Current Population Survey (CPS), which is designed
to yield an accurate description of the national labor market. The Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) has estimated state unemployment and participation rates since
1970 by augmenting the CPS with information from the unemployment insurance
system and ‘time series modeling’.2 This yields an oﬃcial series for the state rates,
which is publically available from the BLS web site <http://stats.bls.gov/>. In
addition the BLS computes (but does not make generally available) data on state
unemployment and participation rates for diﬀerent age cohorts from 1978 to 1996,
my primary sample period.
The Census Bureau produces annual estimates of the number of workers in each
state in many diﬀerent age cohorts, supplementing the decennial census. Although
the BLS also produces analogous numbers, BLS and Census data are surprisingly
diﬀerent. To avoid any measurement error that might be correlated with measurement error in the BLS unemployment rate estimates, I use Census data for the age
structure of the population.
The third source of data is birth rate data for each state from 1954 to 1980 (16
to 24 years before my sample period). This data comes from various years of the
Statistical Abstract of the United States, and is measured in births per thousand
people. Whenever possible, I use birth rates corrected for undercounting, rather
than the oﬃcial birth census.
2

Time series models are used for 41 small states. Unemployment rates are calculated directly
from the CPS in the ten largest states (California, Florida, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, New
Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas). I return to the importance of the estimation
procedure in the robustness checks.

-5-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

3

Robert Shimer

Empirical Analysis

3.1

Empirical Model

The unemployment rate varies substantially over time. At a national level, it averaged 7.5% during the ﬁrst half of the sample period, and fell to 6.1% during the
second half. The age structure of the population shows similar temporal variation,
with the share of youths, 16 to 24 year olds, in the working age population, 16 to 64
year olds, declining from 26.3% at the beginning of the sample to 18.9% at the end.
Given the importance of macroeconomic shocks during this time period, it would
be naı̈ve to interpret this correlation causally.
Similarly, unemployment and demographics show considerable cross-sectional
variation. The youth share of the working age population averaged 27.1% in Mississippi and 22.3% in Connecticut during the sample period, while the state unemployment rates averaged 7.9% and 6.0% respectively. It is not obvious whether there is
a causal relatonship, and if so, in which direction the causation goes.
To avoid these issues, I do diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence estimation. The empirical
model looks at how the unemployment rate and labor force participation rate in
state i and year t depend on state and year ﬁxed eﬀects and on the youth share
of the working age population, shareit , deﬁned as the number of 16–24 year olds
divided by the number of 16–64 year olds:
log rateit = αi + βt + γ log shareit + εit

(1)

where the dependent variable rateit is either the unemployment or participation rate
in state i and year t, and ε represents other sources of variation in the dependent
variable, such as state-speciﬁc economic shocks, which are orthogonal to the youth
share of the population.3
3

Other papers studying the behavior of state employment and unemployment rates do not
include any other exogenous variables in the regression (Blanchard and Katz, 1992). There are a
few papers that study the determinants of regional ﬂuctuations, and ﬁnd that variables like statespeciﬁc military spending and ﬂuctuations in the price of oil interacted with cross-state diﬀerences
in the mix of oil-sensitive industries have signiﬁcant explanatory power (Davis, Loungani, and
Mahidhara, 1997). If, as seems reasonable, these variables are uncorrelated with the de-meaned
youth share of the population, they will not bias the estimates of the variable of interest, the

-6-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

The null hypothesis is that the elasticity γ is zero. Because I allow for both state
and year ﬁxed eﬀects, I can only estimate γ to the extent that log shareit cannot
be predicted by state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Since about 94.9% of the variation
in log shareit is predicted by the two ﬁxed eﬀects, only the remaining 5.1% of the
variation can be used to estimate γ. However, given the fairly long sample period
of nineteen years and large cross section of 51 ‘states’ (including the District of
Columbia), this is enough to obtain tight estimates.

3.2

OLS Results

Panel A of Table 1 shows the results from estimating equation (1) using aggregate
unemployment and participation rate data from 1970 to 1996. The estimated elasticity of the unemployment rate with respect to the youth share of the population is
approximately -1, signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than zero at any standard conﬁdence level.
This is best interpreted as a partial equilibrium correlation. A one percent increase
in the youth share of the working age population in one state is correlated with
a one percent reduction in the unemployment rate in that state. The elasticity of
the participation rate has the opposite sign and is much smaller, although it is still
statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than zero. A one percent increase in the youth
share of the working age population is correlated with a 0.05 percent increase in the
participation rate in that state.
For both regressions, both the state and year ﬁxed eﬀects are highly signiﬁcant,
justifying the panel data analysis. One can also compare the results of the ﬁxed
eﬀects OLS regression with a random eﬀects feasible generalized least squares estimate. The latter is more eﬃcient if the random eﬀects are uncorrelated with any
omitted variables, but will otherwise be inconsistent; while the former is consistent
in either case. A Hausman speciﬁcation test cannot reject the null hypothesis that
the random eﬀects model is consistent in the unemployment rate equation; however,
the coeﬃcient estimates are not signiﬁcantly changed compared with the ﬁxed effects estimates. On the other hand, in the participation rate equation, the Hausman
test strongly rejects random year eﬀects. To avoid these inconsistent estimates, I use
elasticity γ. Finally, I have veriﬁed that the racial composition of a state has no eﬀect on the
youth share coeﬃcient, and so can safely be omitted.

-7-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

ﬁxed eﬀects estimates throughout the remainder of the paper, possibly sacriﬁcing
some eﬃciency. Since almost all of the estimates are statistically signiﬁcant, this
should not aﬀect my conclusions.
The estimates in Panel A suﬀer from autocorrelated residuals, because an unexpected increase in the unemployment rate only gradually disappears as the laid-oﬀ
workers ﬁnd new jobs. A regression of the OLS residual ε̂it on itself lagged one
period, ε̂it−1 , yields a coeﬃcient of 0.73. A similar regression of the residuals in the
participation equation yields a coeﬃcient of 0.72. There is no evidence of higher
ordered autocorrelation, so Panel B performs an AR(1) correction. The point estimates of the elasticities are statistically unchanged. Although the standard errors
are somewhat larger, the results remain signiﬁcant. All the results in the remainder
of the paper include an AR(1) correction.
There is also a mechanical bias in the estimates in Table 1. Since young workers
have a higher unemployment rate, an increase in the youth share of the population
will raise the aggregate unemployment rate. On the other hand, young workers
generally have low participation rates, so an increase in the youth share of the
population will lower the aggregate participation rate. Similarly, male and female
labor market participation rates systematically diﬀer; and the relationship between
them changes with age. This too may bias the estimates in Table 1.
To address these concerns, I estimate equation (1) separately for seven diﬀerent
age groups and both sexes. Column I in Table 2 shows the results. For the data
availability reasons described in Section 2, I use the sample period 1978–96. In
each case, the independent variable of interest is the youth share of the working age
population. The dependent variable is the unemployment or participation rate of a
particular age and sex group in the state at that point in time. The ﬁrst row also
shows the results from a regression of the aggregate unemployment or participation
rate on the youth share using this shorter sample period.
The results are qualitatively similar for almost all age and sex groups. An increase in the youth share of the population is correlated with a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in the unemployment rate of all workers contingent on their age and
sex (Panel A). Quantitatively, an increase in the youth share of the population has
twice as large an eﬀect on the unemployment rate of older workers as on younger
-8-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

workers. The elasticity of the teenage unemployment rate is -1.3, and the elasticity
of the unemployment rate for workers age 45–64 is -2.5. As a result, the relative unemployment rate of young workers rises in response to an increase in the youth share
of the population, consistent with the ‘cohort crowding’ hypothesis (Korenman and
Neumark, 1997). However, the absolute decline in the youth unemployment rate
is not consistent with the standard hypothesis. The response of male and female
unemployment to changes in the youth share is the same.
An increase in the youth share of the population is correlated with a much larger
increase in the participation rate of young workers than of older workers (Panel B).
Since the results in Panel A suggest that labor market conditions improve more for
older workers than for younger workers, one might expect the opposite relationship.
However, the participation rate results make sense if young workers have a more
elastic labor supply. Again, the response of male and female unemployment is
about the same for each age group.
Finally, a reduction in the unemployment rate and an increase in the participation rate imply an increase in the employment-population ratio. One can show
that the employment-population ratio is higher for each age and sex group when the
youth share of the population is higher. Thus these are generally periods of tight
labor markets.

3.3

IV Results

One possible explanation for the results in Column I of Table 2, is that young
workers who are eager to participate in the labor market ﬂock to states with low
unemployment rates. Note that the story is not as simple as saying that state i
always has low unemployment rates, so young workers move to state i. A persistently
low unemployment rate would be captured by state i’s ﬁxed eﬀect. The concern is
more subtle: a temporary reduction in the unemployment rate in i might temporarily
attract more young workers to i.
I control for this possibility using instrumental variables (IV). I look for exogenous variation in the youth share of the working age population, shareit , caused by
the birth rate in that state 16 to 24 years before. More precisely, birthit in year

-9-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

t = 1978 is equal to the sum of the number of births per person in state i from
1954 to 1962. A simple regression of log shareit on log birthit and a constant yields
an elasticity of 0.647, with a standard error of 0.007. This single variable explains
86.0% of the variation in the youth share. Including state and year ﬁxed eﬀects
lowers the elasticity estimate to 0.595 with a standard error of 0.016, and the R2
rises to 0.977. Since the elasticity is less than one, an increase in the birth rate leads
to a smaller increase in the youth share 16–24 years later, a tendency towards mean
reversion. However, the instrument is a remarkably good predictor of future youth
shares.
Column II of Table 2 then estimates the basic regression using IV instead of OLS.
None of the results are signiﬁcantly changed, and the magnitudes are generally
larger, not smaller. A one percent exogenous increase in the youth share of the
population, caused by an increase in the birth rate 16 to 24 years before, reduces
the unemployment rate of teenagers by one percent and of older workers by two
or three percent. It raises the participation rate of teenage workers by about half
a percent, and slightly raises the participation rate of older workers. Because the
standard errors are somewhat larger using IV, a few of the elasticity estimates are
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
Since lagged birth rates and state and year ﬁxed eﬀects predict 97.7% of the
variation in the youth share of the population, the youth share of the population
cannot ﬂuctuate too much in response to short term economic conditions. Thus it
should not be too surprising that IV and OLS estimates are similar. Indeed, the
predictability of future youth population shares suggests that instrumental variables
may be inappropriate. If the youth share of the population is exogenous, OLS is a
consistent and eﬃcient estimator, while IV is ineﬃcient. I examine whether this is
the case using a two-stage procedure proposed by Davidson and MacKinnon (1993).
In the ﬁrst stage, predict the youth share of the population from a regression on all
the exogenous variables, here the lagged birth rates and state and year dummies.
Then in the second stage, regress the unemployment or participation rate on the
youth share of the population, the predicted value of the youth share, and state and
year dummies. If the predicted value of the youth share enters signiﬁcantly into this
regression, then we can reject the null hypothesis that the youth share is exogenous.
-10-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

The ﬁnal column in Table 2 shows the p-values from this exogeneity test, which
is just the p-value for a t-test of whether the coeﬃcient on the predicted youth
share is diﬀerent from zero. One can reject exogeneity at the ten percent conﬁdence
level in only eleven of 44 cases, and at the ﬁve percent level in only four cases.
Moreover, in about half the cases where one can reject exogeneity of the youth
share at conventional signiﬁcance levels, IV has the ‘wrong’ eﬀect on the elasticity
estimates. Exogenous variation in the youth share has a more negative eﬀect on the
unemployment rate, and a more positive eﬀect on the participation rate, than does
endogenous variation. I conclude that OLS is a consistent and eﬃcient estimator,
and use it throughout the remainder of the paper.4

3.4

Robustness

This section describes several robustness checks on the results in Table 2. All support
the preceding results.5
Regional Fluctuations
Shocks are likely to be correlated according to economic, cultural, and geographic
proximity. This may bias down the standard errors reported in Table 2. Ideally, one
could estimate the complete cross-sectional variance-covariance matrix of shocks,
but this is impossible because I have fewer time observations than states. Instead,
I try several alternative controls for regional economic ﬂuctuations.
4

This may appear to contradict the conclusion of Blanchard and Katz (1992), that regional
labor markets adjust to shocks via migration. There are two possible reconciliations. First, their
ﬁndings concern relatively long term adjustment, while with my methodology, long term adjustment is dumped into state ﬁxed eﬀects. Second, the population variables that I use are estimated
by the Census Bureau in years between decennial censuses. To the extent that the Bureau relies
on lagged birth rates to construct the population variables, I will be unable to observe temporary population ﬂuctuations. As a result, the measured youth share of the population is already
somewhat exogenous to current labor market conditions.
5
I have performed, but do not report, a number of other robustness checks. These include
population weighted regressions, quantile regressions to control for outliers, and a variety of subsample estimates: the 41 small states; within census regions; during recessions or expansions; and
in each half of the sample period. None of the results contradict the main ﬁndings, although in
some cases (e.g. within the East and Midwest census regions) the standard errors explode and the
point estimates are imprecise. This reﬂects the fact that much of the usable variation in population
shares is at the regional level, as pointed out in Columns I and II of Table 3.

-11-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

First, I include a full set of census division/year dummies in the basic regression.
The Census Bureau divides the country into nine geographic divisions, ranging in
size from three states (New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania) to nine (South
Atlantic division). Let d(i) denote the census division of state i. I include a separate
year ﬁxed eﬀect for each census region, βd(i),t , constant for any observation in census
division d and year t and zero otherwise. This will pick up regional ﬂuctuations.6
Column I of Table 3 shows the results from estimating this equation.7 Only
one of the point estimates changes signiﬁcantly (at the ﬁve percent level) from the
point estimates in Table 2. This is what we would expect, since regional ﬂuctuations
should be uncorrelated with the youth population share.
More important is what happens to the standard errors. Including all these
extra dummy variables comes at some cost in terms of degrees of freedom. If,
in fact, shocks are independent across states within census divisions, this should
raise the estimated standard errors by a little over 9%. On the other hand, to
the extent the results are driven exclusively by ﬂuctuations within census divisions,
the standard errors should blow up, which would indicate that the standard errors
reported in Table 2 are too small. We ﬁnd that in the unemployment rate equation,
the standard errors increase by about 15% on average, while in the participation
rate equation they increase by 34%, evidence for a weak correlation of shocks within
census divisions. However, this correlation is not so large that it alters the statistical
signiﬁcance of any of the results.
A complementary way to control for regional economic ﬂuctuations is to aggregate all the data to the regional level and rerun the regression. That is, I regress
the log unemployment rate in region d and year t, on region and year dummies and
the log youth share of the working age population in region d and year t. This
aggregation comes at an even larger cost in terms of degrees of freedom, since we
are throwing away over 82% of the observations. However, this should completely
eliminate any concern about correlation of shocks.
The results are presented in Column II of Table 3. An exogenous increase in
6

Allowing for state-speciﬁc time trends yields similar results.
I omit the results for sex-speciﬁc unemployment and participation rates to avoid overwhelming
the reader with numbers. The results are again similar.
7

-12-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

the youth share of the population in a census division causes a decrease in the
unemployment rate, possibly larger for older workers than for teenagers. It causes
an increase in the youth participation rate, and we cannot discern a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on prime age participation. This conﬁrms the robustness of the main results.
Estimates Using Only Large States
Recall that the BLS uses ‘time series methods’ to calculate the unemployment and
participation rate in many states. Is it possible that this estimation procedure is
somehow driving the results? One way to answer that question, is by running the
regression using only data from the ten large states where the rates are computed
directly from the CPS. Column III of Table 3 reports those results. They are
consistent with the full sample estimates, eliminating this cause for concern.
Sectoral Composition of Employment Growth
An increase in the youth share of the population causes an increase in participation
and a sharp decline in the unemployment rate, and so it must lead to an increase
in total employment. I test this using state level data on total employment from
1970–97, also available from the BLS website. Regressing log total employment on
the log youth share and year and state dummies yields an elasticity of 0.36 (Table 4,
Panel A); controlling for endogeneity of the youth share raises the estimate slightly.
Moreover, upon breaking employment down by sector, one sees that the response is
widespread, with the strongest eﬀect on construction, and a slightly weaker impact
on manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and services. This conclusion holds
whether we estimate the elasticity of the level of employment (Panel A) or the
sectoral employment-working age population ratio (Panel B).
The large response of construction employment might suggest that the strong
labor market conditions are due to a construction boom, as residential and commercial real estate are built to accommodate a large youth cohort. However, if that
were the case, the price of labor should be bid up, causing substitution away from
employment in other sectors. This is inconsistent with the evidence in Table 4.
Instead, the economy-wide increase in employment suggests a growth in labor de-

-13-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

mand, which then leads to a construction boom. The large response of construction
employment is simply due to the fact that that sector is highly cyclical.

3.5

Summary

Cross-state evidence suggests that an exogenous one percent increase in the youth
share of the population in a state will reduce the unemployment rate of workers in
that state by over one percent, with the strongest eﬀect on prime age unemployment
and a somewhat weaker eﬀect on young workers. It will also raise the participation
rate of young workers by at least one-third of a percent, with a smaller and less
signiﬁcant eﬀect on prime age workers.
These elasticities not only have an unexpected sign, but they are very large.
Consider the regression of the log youth share of the population, shareit , on state
and year dummies. The residual has a standard error of 0.033, so a one standard
deviation increase in the youth share of the population, relative to that state’s
history and to the youth share in other states at that point in time, will reduce the
unemployment rate in that state by about six percent and raise the participation
rate of young workers by about one percent.
The implied impact of the baby boom on the aggregate unemployment rate is
simply enormous. The youth population share bottomed out at 18.0% in 1953,
rose to 26.7% by 1976, and has since fallen back to 19.0%. Roughly speaking, this
change should have ﬁrst halved and then doubled the prime age unemployment rate!
However, one must be cautious with this calculation, since the estimated elasticities
concern changes in the youth population share in one state relative to others, while
the baby boom was an international phenomenon that may have induced general
equilibrium eﬀects.

4

The Endogenous Fertility Hypothesis

The empirical ﬁndings contradict the existing literature on cohort crowding. Why
might an increase in the youth share of the population caused by an increase in the
birth rate twenty years earlier lead to a reduction in the unemployment rate and an

-14-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

increase in the participation rate? One possibility is that a third factor aﬀects the
birth rate now and will later alter unemployment and participation rates.
Birth rates are endogenously determined by the collective decisions of parents.
Suppose parents expect a strong labor market in the future. This might lead to an
increase in fertility today, as parents anticipate being able to support more children,
or as they have more children in an eﬀort for the family to take advantage of the
economy. I label this the endogenous fertility hypothesis.
While endogenity of fertility is undoubtedly important in many situations, it
seems unlikely to be driving the empirical ﬁndings. These are ‘diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence’ estimates. Parents in state i from year t − 24 to year t − 16 must anticipate
low unemployment in state i in year t, relative to the norm in state i and relative
to other states in year t. Such precise beliefs seem implausible.
To get at this more concretely, I try other demographic variables on the right
hand side of the regression. I start with share5−15
, the number of 5–15 year olds
it
in state i and year t as a fraction of the working age population 16–64. The ﬁrst
line in each block of Table 5 shows that an increase in the share of ‘school children’
in a state raises the unemployment rate and reduces the participation rate for each
, the
working age group, opposite to the previous results. Next I try share25−34
it
share of 25–34 year olds in the working age population. This yields qualitatively
similar results, although they are quantitatively and statistically less signiﬁcant.
The timing of births implied by these results is so precise and the foresight required
is so incredible, that I reject the endogenous fertility hypothesis.
The question remains as to why the share of school children and 25–34 year
olds enters signiﬁcantly into these regressions. One possibility is the mechanical
negative correlation between these share variables and the share of 16–24 year olds.
To see whether this is the case, I include the share of 16–24 year olds in the two
regressions, and report the results in the remaining lines of each block. The eﬀect of
the share of 25–34 year olds largely goes away. However, the eﬀect of school children
appears to be robust, and slightly dampens the eﬀect of 16–24 year olds. Again,
this result is quite surprising. One would expect the parents of school children to be
more attached to the labor market, but an increase in the number of school children
raises the unemployment rate and reduces the participation rate in a state for all
-15-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

age groups. Although a detailed exploration of this ﬁnding goes beyond the scope
of this paper, I will brieﬂy return to it at the end of the theory developed in the
next section.

5

The Fluid Labor Market Hypothesis

If the birth rate is exogenous, then the relationship between the youth population
share and the unemployment and participation rates must be interpreted causally.
The most obvious causal connection is that an exogenous increase in the youth
share of the population leads to more job creation, reducing the unemployment
rate and raising the participation rate. However, simple theories of equilibrium
unemployment do not admit such behavior (Pissarides, 1990). An increase in the
youth share of the population directly raises the unemployment rate, because young
workers are unemployed more frequently. Even if job creation responds more than
proportionately, as would be the case if there is some form of increasing returns
to scale in the labor market (Diamond, 1982), this cannot lead to a decline in the
aggregate unemployment rate, or it would choke oﬀ the new job creation.
Instead, there must both be increasing returns to scale and a reason for ﬁrms
to create jobs even when unemployment falls.8 This section uses a very simple
model to illustrate a plausible mechanism. Younger workers are more likely to
be mismatched with their current employer. Having many mismatched workers
encourages job creation, since ﬁrms that locate in such markets ﬁnd it relatively
easy to attract employees.
8

Some readers will strongly oppose the increasing returns to scale assumption. Indeed, the
standard theory of equilibrium unemployment (Pissarides, 1990) assumes constant returns to scale,
typically justifying this by the empirical work of Blanchard and Diamond (1989). However, this
ﬁnding is controversial. Hall (1989) questions it in his discussion of their paper. And in a later
paper, Blanchard and Diamond (1992) recognize that “the process through which workers and jobs
ﬁnd each other, surely has increasing returns over some range.” The empirical evidence in this
paper supports this view.

-16-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

5.1

Robert Shimer

Model

There are two types of agents, workers and ﬁrms. Let L(t) denote the measure of
workers in the economy at time t and θ(t)L(t) denote the measure of ﬁrms. Both
types of agents are risk neutral, inﬁnitely lived, and discount the future at rate
r > 0. Each agent may be in one of three states: unmatched, mismatched, or well
matched. While unmatched, an agent earns nothing. A mismatched agent (worker
or ﬁrm) gets x1 > 0. A well matched agent gets x2 > x1 .9 In addition, new workers
Rt

are born, unmatched, at rate n(t) > 0, so L(t) = L0 e 0 n(s)ds . New ﬁrms enter the
market by paying a one-time ﬁxed cost c. The assumption that the supply of jobs
is perfectly elastic is reasonable in this setting, since the empirical evidence looks at
cross-state variation in birth rates. A change in the birth rate in one state will lead
to a ﬂow of capital from other states, but will not change the cost of capital.
Let α1 (t) denote the fraction of workers who are mismatched and α2 (t) denote
the fraction who are well matched in steady state, so 1 − α1 (t) − α2 (t) is the fraction
who are unmatched. Simple accounting shows that at time t, a fraction of ﬁrms
(θ(t) − α1 (t) − α2 (t))/θ(t) are unmatched, while fractions α1 (t)/θ(t) and α2 (t)/θ(t)
of the ﬁrms are in bad and good matches, respectively.
These fractions are limited by search frictions. Workers and ﬁrms periodically
meet and have an opportunity to match. A ﬁrm meets a worker at a rate η(θ),
decreasing in the contemporaneous ﬁrm-worker ratio θ(t). A worker meets a ﬁrm
at an increasing rate µ(θ) ≡ θη(θ). In each case, the potential partner is drawn
randomly from the appropriate population, regardless of the partner’s current match
quality. The two agents then realize the quality of their match; it is good with
probability p, independent across workers and ﬁrms and over time.
Finally, potential partners match if it improves both agents’ state. That is, a
good match is accepted unless either agent is already in a good match. A mismatch
is accepted only if both agents are unmatched. Thus it is easier to match when the
fraction of unmatched or mismatched agents is high. As in Diamond (1982), this
‘thick-market externality’ is the source of increasing returns to scale.
Whenever a matched agent accepts a new partner, her old partner becomes
9

Note that these payoﬀs are not transferable. This assumption simpliﬁes the analysis by eliminating wage determination issues.

-17-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

unmatched.10 There is no recall of past partners. One can think of a worker leaving
a mismatch for a good match as a quit; a ﬁrm leaving a mismatch for a good match
as a layoﬀ; unmatched workers as unemployed; and unmatched ﬁrms as vacant.
Equilibrium demands two things. First, the two state variables α1 (t) and α2 (t),
the fraction of mismatched and well matched workers, are determined by worker
and ﬁrm ﬂows and initial conditions αi (0) = αi0 , i ∈ {1, 2}. And second, the value
of creating a new unmatched ﬁrm must always equal the startup cost c.
This model builds on work by Burdett and Mortensen (1998), who introduce
on-the-job-search into an otherwise standard search framework. There are two signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the models. First, their model is more ambitious, in
that it endogenizes the division of match surplus, and demonstrates that wage dispersion is an equilibrium phenomenon. I treat the division of surplus as exogenous,
and take wage dispersion (x1 < x2 ) as a primitive. Second, I only allow ﬁrms to hire
one worker, and thus develop a theory of temporary employment. In the BurdettMortensen model, the marginal product of labor is constant, so ﬁrms never ﬁre
workers. One can show that without temporary employment, this framework cannot explain a decline in the aggregate unemployment rate in response to an increase
in the birth rate.

5.2

State Variables

A good match is an absorbing state in this economy. The measure of good matches
increases when unmatched or mismatched ﬁrms meet unmatched or mismatched
workers and the pair matches well, and never declines.

 θ(t) − α2 (t)
dα2 (t)L(t)
= µ(θ(t))L(t) 1 − α2 (t)
p
dt
θ(t)
The right hand side of this equation describes the ﬂow of new good matches at time
t. There is a ﬂow µ(θ(t))L(t) meetings by workers, a fraction 1 − α2 (t) of which are
not well matched; and a fraction (θ(t) − α2 (t))/θ(t) of those meetings are with ﬁrms
10

These matching patterns are eﬃcient if x2 > 2x1 . Otherwise, output might be higher if
mismatched agents did not match with other mismatched agents. However, since utility is nontransferable, a spurned partner can still not prevent the termination of her match.

-18-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

that are not well matched; and a fraction p of those meetings result in a good match.
Since dL(t)/dt = n(t)L(t), the labor force cancels from the above equation, yielding
a diﬀerential equation for α2 in terms of model parameters and the ﬁrm-worker ratio
θ.



α̇2 (t) = η(θ(t)) 1 − α2 (t) θ(t) − α2 (t) p − n(t)α2 (t)

(2)

The expression for the measure of mismatches is more complicated. The share
of mismatches decreases due to new births, quits, and layoﬀs. It increases when
previously unmatched workers and ﬁrms meet. The diﬀerence is the growth rate of
the share of mismatches.



α̇1 (t) = η(θ(t)) 1 − α1 (t) − α2 (t) θ(t) − α1 (t) − α2 (t) (1 − p)




θ(t) − α2 (t)
− n(t) + µ(θ(t))
p + η(θ(t)) 1 − α2 (t) p α1 (t) (3)
θ(t)
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side reﬂects the fact that new mismatches occur only
if both partners are unmatched. The ﬁrst term on the second line is the adjustment
for new births. The second term is the probability that the worker quits for a good
match. The third term is the probability that the ﬁrm lays oﬀ the worker for a good
match. Equations (2) and (3) can be solved numerically for α1 and α2 in terms of
the ﬁrm-worker ratio θ and initial conditions.
Now consider the eﬀect of a permanent increase in the birth rate n(t), holding
the ﬁrm-worker ratio constant. From equation (2), this will push down the steady
state share good matches, as young workers have not yet had a chance to ﬁnd them.
It will raise the share of mismatches, since there are more workers passing through
that intermediate stage. And it will push up the unemployment rate, as many
workers will not yet have even found a ﬁrst job, or will be suﬀering from layoﬀs.

5.3

Entry

For a ﬁrm, the reduction in the share of good matches is advantageous. When ﬁrms
meet well matched workers, their overtures are always rejected. Instead, ﬁrms prefer

-19-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

to operate in environments with more mismatched or ummatched workers. To show
this formally, calculate the value of a ﬁrm in diﬀerent states, letting W0 (t), W1 (t),
and W2 (t) denote the expected present value of proﬁts for an unmatched ﬁrm, a
mismatched ﬁrm, and a well-matched ﬁrm, respectively.
A well-matched ﬁrm earns x2 forever, yielding a payoﬀ W2 (t) ≡ x2 /r. A mismatched ﬁrm earns x1 , but may suﬀer a quit or be able to create a good job.
rW1 (t) − Ẇ1 (t) = x1 + µ(θ(t))


θ(t) − α2 (t) 
p W0 (t) − W1 (t)
θ(t)
 


+ η(θ(t)) 1 − α2 (t) p W2 (t) − W1 (t) (4)

The ﬂow value of a ﬁrm in a mismatch is equal to the sum of the current payoﬀ x1 ,
plus the probability that its employee realizes a good match with a ﬁrm not already
in a good match, times the capital loss associated with becoming unmatched, plus
the probability that the ﬁrm realizes a good match with a worker not already wellmatched, times that capital gain. Similarly, the value of an unmatched ﬁrm satisﬁes:

 

rW0 (t) − Ẇ0 (t) = η(θ(t)) 1 − α2 (t) p W2 (t) − W0 (t)




+ η(θ(t)) 1 − α1 (t) − α2 (t) (1 − p) W1 (t) − W0 (t) (5)
The ﬁrst term is the probability of realizing a good match with a worker not already
in a good match, times the resulting capital gain. The second term is the probability
of realizing a bad match with an unmatched worker, times that capital gain.
For a given time-path of θ, α1 , and α2 , equations (4) and (5) can be solved for W0
and W1 . For this to be an equilibrium, it must be the case that W0 (t) = c for all t,
the free entry condition. Thus an equilibrium is a tuple of functions {α1 , α2 , W1 , θ}
that satisﬁes equations (2)–(5) with W0 (t) ≡ c and W2 (t) ≡ x2 /r.
In practice, I solve this system numerically using a simple algorithm. Conjecture
a path for the ﬁrm-worker ratio, perhaps from a steady-state solution. Use this to
calculate a candidate path for the state variables from equations (2) and (3). Then
under the assumption that W0 (t) ≡ c and W2 (t) ≡ x2 /r, solve equation (4) for
W1 (t) and invert equation (5) to solve for θ(t). If the solution coincides with the

-20-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

initial guess, this is the equilibrium. Otherwise, perturb the initial guess towards
the ﬁrm-worker ratio that comes out of the algorithm, and restart. In practice, this
algorithm rapidly converges to a unique equilibrium for any initial conditions.

5.4

Simulation

Clearly this model is too simple to be taken quantitatively seriously. However,
a simulation shows how an increase in the population growth rate can lead to a
suﬃcient increase in job creation, so as to reduce unemployment.
√
√
Let µ(θ) = 10 θ and η(θ) = 10/ θ. Take x1 = 1 and x2 = 2, with p = 0.04,
so few potential matches are good. Also let the interest rate r = 0.05 and set the
population growth rate n = 0.02, reasonable numbers for annual data. Finally, set
the entry cost c = 30. Run the model for many periods, so the system converges to
a steady state, independent of the initial conditions. In this steady state, θ = 1.00,
while 5.2% of workers are unmatched; 14.8% are mismatched; and 80.1% have found
good matches.
Now consider an anticipated permanent increase in the population growth rate
to n = 0.03 in year T , starting from the n = 0.02 steady state. If the ﬁrm-worker
ratio did not change, the resulting increase in the youth population would eventually
raise the unemployment rate by 1.1 percentage points and the share of mismatches
by 2.7 percentage points. However, this creates proﬁt opportunities for ﬁrms. In
response, θ increases to 1.05, which reduces the steady state unemployment rate to
4.5% and leaves the share of mismatches at 17.7%. All workers beneﬁt from this
increase in θ, as it makes it easier to ﬁnd jobs when unmatched, to ﬁnd good jobs
when mismatched, and it reduces the chance that an employer will lay them oﬀ to
hire another worker.
This is a dynamic model, so I can look not only at the new steady state, but at the
dynamic adjustment path (Figure 1). Since ﬁrms enter the market in anticipation of
the high population growth rate, about 9% of the decline in unemployment occurs
before the increase in population growth in year T . The remaining adjustment takes
some time, although about 95% of the decline in unemployment happens by year
T + 10.

-21-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

I can also check whether the decline in unemployment rates is larger for young
or old workers. Since by assumption all newborn workers are unemployed regardless
of the birth rate or ﬁrm-worker ratio, it must in some sense be bigger for old workers. Indeed, in this example the change in the birth rate reduces the steady state
unemployment rate of workers with ten years of labor market experience by 49%;
and the unemployment rate of workers with thirty years of experience by 69%; and
is generally a monotonic function of experience. This demonstrates that the model
is consistent with the empirical evidence that a change in the youth share of the
population has a bigger eﬀect on the prime age unemployment rate than the youth
unemployment rate (Table 2, Panel A).

5.5

Discussion

The simplicity of this model highlights its main elements. In a labor market with
many older workers in good matches, ﬁrms are reluctant to create jobs, because
they meet mismatched young workers too infrequently. The conclusion might seem
sensitive to the assumption that well-matched workers continue to meet ﬁrms. If
ﬁrms could focus their search on unmatched or mismatched workers, the mechanism
in this paper would disappear. Moreover, in this model, well matched workers have
nothing to gain by meeting ﬁrms, so it might be feasible for ﬁrms to avoid meeting
such workers.
Such an interpretation would take the model too literally. A straightforward
extension allows for many job qualities. Fairly well matched workers continue to
search because there is always a chance of ﬁnding a better job. Even if they can
reduce the time and eﬀort devoted to search as they climb the quality ladder, they
will still clog the labor market to some degree.
Another critique of the model is that it fails to address the relationship between
the youth share of the population and the participation rate. However, a simple
extension to the model endogenizes workers’ participation decision. Assume that
more workers participate in the labor market when the expected value of participating is higher. Then participation rates would also increase following an increase in
the birth rate, as the value of workers’ participation goes up when the ﬁrm-worker

-22-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

ratio θ increases.
This model also sheds some light on why the unemployment rate is higher when
the share of school children is higher. I oﬀer two conjectures. First, new parents
expend additional search eﬀort to make sure that they ﬁnd good jobs. By the time a
large cohort of children is in school, the high average match quality will create a more
rigid labor market, reducing job creation and raising unemployment. Alternatively,
parents of school children are geographically less mobile, again creating a rigid labor
market.

6

Testing the Fluid Labor Market Hypothesis

A ﬁrst-order testable implication of the ﬂuid labor market hypothesis is that there
should be more voluntary quits in younger labor markets. Firms create more jobs
to take advantage of mismatched workers, more of whom then quit their old jobs
to take new ones in equilibrium. Indeed, the eﬀect of the youth share of the labor
market on quits may be much larger than the eﬀect on the unemployment rate. In
the numerical simulation in the previous section, the increase in the birth rate from
2% to 3% raised the quit rate from 1.2% to 1.9%.11
An empirical test of this hypothesis would examine whether states with younger
labor markets have more job-to-job movement. Unfortunately, reliable worker ﬂow
data is unavailable on a state level. An alternative is to focus on the ﬂow of jobs.
When a worker quits her job, one ﬁrm decreases its employment level, while another
increases its employment. This should show up in the data as simultaneous job
creation and destruction.
I test the theory with gross job creation and job destruction data in the manufacturing sector, using time series constructed from the Longitudinal Research
Database by Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996). This includes annual observations for 49 states from 1973–88.12 Job creation in state i and year t measures
11

The eﬀect on layoﬀs is ambiguous. With more ﬁrms in the market, a mismatched ﬁrm is less
likely to contact a new potential employee; on the other hand, that potential employee is more
likely to be unmatched or mismatched. In the numerical example, the layoﬀ rate increased from
1.2% to 1.5%. In any case, a layoﬀ (in the sense of the model) would not show up in the data set
I use, because the same ﬁrm simultaneously creates and destroys a job.

-23-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

the employment increase among expanding or newly created plants, expressed as
a percentage of manufacturing employment in that state and year; job destruction
measures the employment decrease (a positive number) among contracting or closing
plants in state i and year t, again expressed as a percentage.
To test whether a younger state has more gross creation and destruction, I regress
the log of job creation and job destruction on the log youth share and a full set of
year and state dummies. The null hypothesis is that the elasticity of the creation and
destruction variables should be equal to zero, while the theory predicts a positive
value for both elasticities, and a larger value for the elasticity of creation than for
destruction, reﬂecting an increase in net job creation. Table 6 shows the results from
estimating the equation using OLS and IV. The point estimates are positive, and
the estimated elasticity of job creation is indeed larger than that of job destruction;
however, the estimated elasticity of job destruction is not statistically diﬀerent from
zero, nor are the estimated elasticities diﬀerent from each other.
The theory also predicts that an increase in the youth share should have a larger
eﬀect on the creation and destruction rate than on total employment growth. A
comparison of the point estimates here with the estimates for the manufacturing
sector in Table 4 oﬀers modest support for that prediction, although the diﬀerence
between the estimates is again not statistically signiﬁcant. I conclude that job creation and job destruction data do not contradict the ﬂuid labor market hypothesis,
and oﬀer some modest support.

7

Reconciliation with Previous Studies

Previous studies have found that an increase in the youth share of the population
raises the youth unemployment rate. For example, Korenman and Neumark (1997)
conclude from a cross-country data set that a one percent increase in the youth
share of the population raises the youth unemployment rate by about a third of a
percentage point, although their estimate is not very signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than zero.
The major methodological diﬀerence between that study and this one, is that they
12

No data are available for Hawaii and Rhode Island.

-24-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

include the prime age unemployment rate on the right hand side of the regression:
youth
prime
log urit
= αi + βt + γ log shareit + δ log urit
+ εit

(6)

The dependent variable is the youth (16–24 years old) unemployment rate. The
prime age (25–54) unemployment rate is included on the right hand side,13 and the
youth share is instrumented with lagged birth rates.
Unfortunately, it is not easy to interpret the estimate of the elasticity γ if changes
in the youth share of the population cause changes in the prime age unemployment
rate, as the evidence in this paper suggests. Indeed, there is a good reason to
think that this methodology biases their estimate of γ upwards. Because there is
a positive correlation between prime age and youth unemployment rates over the
business cycle, one would expect to ﬁnd a positive coeﬃcient on δ, multiplying
the prime age unemployment rate. Then if an increase in the youth share of the
population reduces both the prime age and the youth unemployment rate, part or
all of the eﬀect on the youth unemployment rate will be captured by δ. The variable
of interest γ may even become positive.
As conﬁrmation of this reasoning, Table 7 shows estimates of equation (6) on
the standard 51 state, 19 year data set, using both OLS and instrumental variables.
If the prime age unemployment rate is excluded from the regression, one obtains
estimates similar to those for 16–19 and 20–24 year olds in Table 2. But including
this endogenous variable biases the estimated coeﬃcient on the youth share towards
zero, as predicted. Instrumenting the youth share with lagged birth rates yields a
slightly positive coeﬃcient estimate.
I have focused on Korenman and Neumark (1997) because their methodology
is the most directly comparable with mine. However, many other authors have
assumed that the youth share of the population does not aﬀect the prime age unemployment rate. For example, Flaim (1979) interprets a positive correlation between
the youth share of the population and the gap between the teenage and prime age
13

I use these deﬁnitions of youth and prime age for consistency with Korenman and Neumark
(1997). The results are not sensitive to this choice. Also, Korenman and Neumark include the
prime age employment-population ratio on the right hand side. The results are not sensitive to
including that variable.

-25-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

unemployment rates in U.S. time series data as evidence that an increase in the
youth share of the population raises the teenage unemployment rate. More recently,
Shimer (1998) labels unemployment ‘demographic’ if it cannot be predicted from a
linear regression on the prime age unemployment rate. Thus he presumes that the
prime age unemployment rate is unaﬀected by demographic changes.
While this hypothesis certainly does not hold across states in the U.S., it does
seem to hold in Korenman and Neumark’s (1997) cross-country data set, which has
information on unemployment and participation rates, youth population shares, and
lagged birth rates in 15 OECD countries14 for all or part 1970–94. To establish this,
I estimate equation (1) on that data set. Panel A of Table 8 shows that although
the point estimates from the basic OLS ﬁxed eﬀects regression of the unemployment
rate on the youth share are negative, they are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
Instrumenting the youth share with lagged birth rates reverses the sign of this
elasticity. I conclude that there is no systematic relationship between the youth
population share and the unemployment rate in that data set; and one can reject
the elasticities estimated in U.S. data.
Panel B shows that the OLS-estimated impact of the youth share on the participation rate is ambiguous, switching signs for diﬀerent age groups. However, the IV
estimates are positive and similar to the estimates on U.S. data — and surprisingly,
one can strongly reject exogeneity of the youth population share.
Why do cross-state data give such diﬀerent results than cross-country in the
unemployment rate regression? An interesting possibility is that there are eﬀects
missing from cross-state variation in the youth share of the population, which might
be present in cross-country data sets. For example, in a closed economy neoclassical
growth model, an increase in the population growth rate reduces the capital-labor
ratio and thus the wage rate. With search frictions, this manifests itself as an
increase in unemployment. However, with an open economy, capital would ﬂow
across regions so as to equalize the capital-labor ratio. Even if one state has a
higher population growth rate than another, it would not have a lower capital-labor
14

The countries are: Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the UK, and the US. See their paper for details
on the data set.

-26-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

ratio or a higher unemployment rate. On the other hand, if all states have a higher
population growth rate and international capital ﬂows are imperfect, the capitallabor ratio would fall in the country, and the unemployment rate would increase.
Using cross-state data, this would get pushed into a year ﬁxed eﬀect, but a crosscountry time series would capture this eﬀect of population growth.

8

Conclusion

This paper argues that an increase in the youth share of the population causes
a sharp decline in the unemployment rate, particularly for older workers. It also
leads to an increase in the participation rate, especially for younger workers. This
is inconsistent with standard theories of unemployment, which either predict no
relationship or the opposite relationship between these variables. However, it is
consistent with a theory of the labor market in which mismatch of young workers is
important, and ﬁrms prefer to locate in markets with a lot of mismatch, because it
is easier to ﬁnd good employees in thicker labor markets.
One can interpret the empirical results in this paper as a test for thick market
externalities. The standard theory of equilibrium unemployment, as summarized
in Pissarides (1990), assumes that the number of matches created in a period is
a constant returns to scale function of the number of unemployed workers and the
number of vacant ﬁrms. This yields many strong predictions. For example, the equilibrium of simple search and matching models is unique, and the economy rapidly
converges towards a steady state. The standard model also predicts that an exogenous increase in the number of job searchers will have no eﬀect on job creation and
job destruction rates, although it will directly increase the aggregate unemployment
rate (Shimer, 1998).
In contrast, Diamond (1982) allows the matching function to have increasing
returns to scale. Multiple equilibria are then possible, and even with a unique
equilibrium, the labor market may substantially amplify external shocks. For this
reason, Hall (1989) declared that “economywide thick-market eﬀects are one of the
most promising ways to explain the business cycle.” Models with thick-market
eﬀects also predict that an increase in the number of job searchers will raise job
-27-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

creation and reduce job destruction rates. The aggregate unemployment rate may
even fall, as happens in the model developed in Section 5.
One can therefore test for thick market externalities by looking for exogenous
variation in the number of job searchers. Lagged changes in birth rates are an ideal
source of variation: First, there is substantial variation in birth rates over time and
across regions. Second, birth rates are easily measureable, and good data is widely
available. Third, lagged birth rates are unlikely to be aﬀected by current labor
market conditions, so there is hope of establishing a causal relationship. And ﬁnally,
the nature of the shock is unambiguous, e.g. the entry of the new cohort should be
anticipated. Exploiting this source of variation, this paper uncovers evidence that
contradicts the standard model with constant returns to scale, but is completely
consistent with the existence of thick market externalities.

References
Blanchard, Oliver, and Peter Diamond (1989): “The Beveridge Curve,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 1–60.
(1992): “The Flow Approach to Labor Markets,” American Economic
Association Papers and Proceedings, 82(2), 354–359.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Katz (1992): “Regional Evolutions,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 1–61.
Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen (1998): “Equilibrium Wage Diﬀerentials and Employer Size,” International Economic Review, 39, 257–274.
Davidson, Russell, and James MacKinnon (1993): Estimation and Inference
in Econometrics. Oxford University Press, New York.
Davis, Steve, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996): Job Creation
and Destruction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Davis, Steve, Pradash Loungani, and Ramamohan Mahidhara (1997):
“Regional Labor Fluctuations: Oil Shocks, Military Spending and Other Driving Forces,” Northwestern/Chicago Joint Center For Poverty Research Working
Paper 4.

-28-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

Diamond, Peter (1982): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 881–894.
Flaim, Paul (1979): “The Eﬀect of Demographic Change on the Nation’s Unemployment Rate,” Monthly Labor Review, 102, 13–23.
(1990): “Population Changes, the Baby Boom and the Unemployment
Rate,” Monthly Labor Review, 113, 3–10.
Gordon, Robert (1982): “Inﬂation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural
Rate of Unemployment,” in Workers, Jobs and Inflation, ed. by Martin Baily,
pp. 89–152. Brookings Institute, Washington, D.C.
Hall, Robert (1989): “The Beveridge Curve: Comment,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, (1), 61–64.
Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark (1997): “Cohort Crowding and
Youth Labor Markets: A Cross-National Analysis,” NBER Working Paper 6031.
Perry, George (1970): “Changing Labor Markets and Inﬂation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (3), 411–441.
Pissarides, Christopher (1990): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Basil
Blackwell, Oxford.
Shimer, Robert (1998): “Why is the U.S. Unemployment Rate So Much Lower?,”
in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by Ben Bernanke, and Julio Rotemberg,
vol. 13. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

-29-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
Youth Share
A. Basic Regression
Unemployment Rate -1.028 (0.158)
Participation Rate
.052 (0.018)
B. AR Correction
Unemployment Rate -.961 (0.261)
Participation Rate
.083 (0.029)

Robert Shimer

N
1377
1377
1290
1290

Table 1: OLS estimates of equation (1) using data from 51 states from 1970–96. All
regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors in parentheses.

-30-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
A. Unemployment Rate
All Workers

Column 1: OLS
Youth Share
N

Robert Shimer

Column 2: IV
Youth Share
N

p

-1.246 (0.251) 918 -1.796 (0.305) 892 0.032

16–19

All
Men
Women

-1.268 (0.259) 916 -1.023 (0.308) 890 0.063
-1.567 (0.400) 816 -1.098 (0.515) 790 0.077
-1.418 (0.374) 816 -0.601 (0.482) 790 0.002

20–24

All
Men
Women

-1.633 (0.298) 918 -2.062 (0.350) 892 0.104
-1.799 (0.352) 918 -2.154 (0.413) 892 0.300
-1.588 (0.306) 918 -1.872 (0.364) 892 0.345

25–34

All
Men
Women

-1.526 (0.290) 918 -1.928 (0.347) 892 0.162
-1.735 (0.362) 918 -2.152 (0.432) 892 0.265
-1.490 (0.280) 918 -1.689 (0.335) 892 0.417

35–44

All
Men
Women

-1.832 (0.347) 918 -2.270 (0.419) 892 0.190
-1.895 (0.398) 918 -2.495 (0.479) 892 0.078
-2.012 (0.374) 918 -2.082 (0.451) 892 0.967

45–54

All
Men
Women

-2.455 (0.365) 918 -2.753 (0.440) 892 0.327
-3.037 (0.476) 918 -3.399 (0.578) 890 0.351
-2.010 (0.379) 918 -2.268 (0.454) 892 0.428

55–64

All
Men
Women

-2.472 (0.455) 918 -2.882 (0.552) 892 0.167
-3.074 (0.548) 918 -3.621 (0.666) 892 0.168
-2.407 (0.589) 918 -2.533 (0.716) 890 0.685

65+

All
Men
Women

-2.440 (0.687) 893 -1.842 (0.844) 870 0.234
-2.984 (0.813) 843 -3.220 (0.965) 843 0.752
-2.152 (1.130) 751 -0.810 (1.426) 745 0.186
(continued)

Table 2A

-31-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

Column 1: OLS
Youth Share
N

Column 2: IV
Youth Share
N

0.093 (0.029)

918

0.102 (0.035)

892 0.946

16–19

All
Men
Women

0.365 (0.084)
0.414 (0.112)
0.427 (0.127)

916
816
816

0.451 (0.101)
0.558 (0.143)
0.643 (0.163)

890 0.169
790 0.135
790 0.032

20–24

All
Men
Women

0.185 (0.036)
0.172 (0.037)
0.211 (0.042)

918
918
918

0.233 (0.043)
0.193 (0.045)
0.282 (0.067)

892 0.067
892 0.383
892 0.039

25–34

All
Men
Women

0.060 (0.024)
0.026 (0.015)
0.105 (0.045)

918
918
918

0.071 (0.028)
0.027 (0.018)
0.151 (0.055)

892 0.763
892 0.947
892 0.220

35–44

All
Men
Women

0.055 (0.024)
0.040 (0.015)
0.078 (0.046)

918
918
918

0.065 (0.029)
0.029 (0.019)
0.125 (0.056)

892 0.811
892 0.243
892 0.221

45–54

All
Men
Women

0.048 (0.028)
0.056 (0.025)
0.062 (0.056)

918
918
918

0.055 (0.033)
0.046 (0.031)
0.097 (0.067)

892 0.721
892 0.816
892 0.495

55–64

All
Men
Women

0.164 (0.058)
0.169 (0.062)
0.150 (0.087)

918
918
918

0.163 (0.070)
0.178 (0.075)
0.131 (0.105)

892 0.885
892 0.861
892 0.662

65+

All
Men
Women

-0.209 (0.163) 918 -0.411 (0.195) 892 0.023
-0.143 (0.174) 918 -0.251 (0.205) 892 0.091
-0.303 (0.231) 918 -0.596 (0.278) 892 0.084

Dependent Variable
B. Participation Rate
All Workers

p

Table 2B
Table 2: OLS and IV estimates of equation (1) using 19 years and 51 states, for
seven diﬀerent age groups and both sexes. All regressions include state and year ﬁxed
eﬀects and an AR(1) correction. Sample sizes N vary due to missing observations in
1994–96. Standard errors in parentheses. p is the p-value in a Davidson-MacKinnon
(1993) exogeneity test.

-32-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Column I.
Dependent Census Division/Year
Variable
Fixed Eﬀects
A. Unemployment Rate
16–19
-1.065 (0.309)
20–24
-1.239 (0.322)
25–34
-1.130 (0.286)
35–44
-1.887 (0.382)
45–54
-2.163 (0.427)
55–64
-1.624 (0.532)
65+
-1.979 (0.937)
B. Participation Rate
16–19
0.398 (0.114)
20–24
0.208 (0.048)
25–34
0.121 (0.030)
35–44
0.091 (0.032)
45–54
0.046 (0.037)
55–64
0.117 (0.081)
65+
-0.190 (0.223)

Column II.
Aggregate
Census Division

Robert Shimer

Column III.
Large States

-1.863
-2.004
-2.519
-2.358
-2.653
-3.386
-2.967

(0.680)
(0.789)
(0.827)
(0.959)
(1.023)
(1.190)
(1.113)

-1.704
-1.367
-1.436
-2.780
-3.063
-2.939
-4.762

(0.826)
(0.975)
(1.082)
(1.162)
(1.203)
(1.234)
(1.198)

0.423
0.242
-0.048
0.013
0.101
0.347
0.311

(0.204)
(0.084)
(0.048)
(0.054)
(0.056)
(0.122)
(0.322)

0.443
0.228
-0.098
0.012
0.120
0.468
0.170

(0.257)
(0.105)
(0.057)
(0.061)
(0.078)
(0.182)
(0.406)

Table 3: OLS estimates of the elasticities of the unemployment and participation
rates with respect to the youth share. Column I includes state and census division/year ﬁxed eﬀects. Column II is aggregated to the census division level and
includes census division and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Column III is run only on the ten
large states for which the unemployment rate is calculated directly from the CPS,
and includes state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. All regressions have an AR(1) correction.
Standard errors in parentheses.

-33-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
A. Employment Levels
Total Employment

Column I. OLS
Youth Share

Robert Shimer

Column II. IV
Youth Share
p

0.360 (0.052)

0.445 (0.071)

0.502

Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Services
Transportation & Public Utilities
Government
Finance, Insurance & Real Estate
Mining
B. Employment Rates
Total Employment

1.389
0.531
0.388
0.319
0.252
0.007
0.240
0.126

1.343
0.947
0.468
0.457
0.183
0.202
0.059
-0.157

(0.265)
(0.104)
(0.072)
(0.071)
(0.087)
(0.061)
(0.102)
(0.390)

0.237
0.001
0.163
0.707
0.015
0.117
0.001
0.456

0.147 (0.039)

0.284 (0.053)

0.123

Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Services
Transportation & Public Utilities
Government
Finance, Insurance & Real Estate
Mining

1.139
0.344
0.199
0.091
0.058
-0.160
0.046
-0.207

1.192
0.810
0.326
0.298
0.049
0.078
-0.076
-0.402

0.501
0.000
0.413
0.021
0.416
0.000
0.023
0.642

(0.189)
(0.070)
(0.050)
(0.051)
(0.062)
(0.039)
(0.073)
(0.262)

(0.175)
(0.071)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.055)
(0.035)
(0.065)
(0.249)

(0.223)
(0.105)
(0.056)
(0.067)
(0.076)
(0.054)
(0.092)
(0.363)

Table 4: OLS and IV estimates of the elasticities of employment with respect to the
youth share for the entire economy and in subsets of states. All regressions include
state and year ﬁxed eﬀects and an AR(1) correction. Standard errors in parentheses.
The source of employment data is oﬃcial BLS time series for employment in 1-digit
sectors. p is the p-value in a Davidson-MacKinnon (1993) exogeneity test.

-34-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
A. Unemployment Rate

16–20

20–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65+

Robert Shimer

share5−15

share16−24

share25−34

1.443 (0.214)
—
1.184 (0.236)
—
1.072 (0.255)
1.629 (0.273)
—
1.190 (0.296)
—
1.256 (0.319)
1.378 (0.271)
—
0.931 (0.295)
—
0.949 (0.316)
2.127 (0.185)
—
1.317 (0.347)
—
1.362 (0.372)
2.179 (0.326)
—
1.516 (0.346)
—
1.656 (0.372)
1.602 (0.420)
—
0.789 (0.447)
—
1.092 (0.479)
2.660 (0.561)
—
2.198 (0.610)
—
2.589 (0.663)

—
—
-0.669 (0.270)
-1.813 (0.320)
-0.959 (0.363)
—
—
-1.060 (0.323)
-1.874 (0.386)
-0.889 (0.449)
—
—
-1.080 (0.318)
-1.781 (0.385)
-1.032 (0.451)
—
—
-1.210 (0.375)
-2.160 (0.459)
-1.095 (0.528)
—
—
-1.729 (0.389)
-2.673 (0.466)
-1.368 (0.532)
—
—
-2.090 (0.503)
-2.196 (0.565)
-1.350 (0.671)
—
—
-1.371 (0.735)
-2.472 (0.828)
-0.462 (0.958)

—
0.188 (0.230)
—
-0.751 (0.268)
-0.322 (0.271)
—
0.704 (0.273)
—
-0.326 (0.332)
0.189 (0.344)
—
0.699 (0.274)
—
-0.340 (0.340)
0.053 (0.352)
—
0.804 (0.327)
—
-0.439 (0.403)
0.129 (0.410)
—
1.096 (0.325)
—
-0.290 (0.386)
0.393 (0.395)
—
1.461 (0.387)
—
0.386 (0.467)
0.830 (0.500)
—
1.038 (0.547)
—
-0.046 (0.647)
1.010 (0.685)
(continued)

Table 5A

-35-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
B. Participation Rate

16–20

20–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65+

share5−15

share16−24

-0.348 (0.076)
—
—
—
-0.245 (0.084) 0.238 (0.094)
—
0.213 (0.106)
-0.357 (0.087) -0.076 (0.126)
-0.127 (0.034)
—
—
—
-0.063 (0.037) 0.154 (0.041)
—
0.122 (0.046)
-0.109 (0.039) 0.037 (0.054)
-0.027 (0.022)
—
—
—
-0.002 (0.025) 0.059 (0.027)
—
0.052 (0.031)
-0.007 (0.026) 0.047 (0.038)
-0.057 (0.022)
—
—
—
-0.043 (0.025) 0.033 (0.027)
—
0.057 (0.031)
-0.049 (0.027) 0.018 (0.038)
-0.057 (0.025)
—
—
—
-0.046 (0.028) 0.026 (0.031)
—
0.025 (0.035)
-0.067 (0.030) -0.027 (0.042)
-0.135 (0.053)
—
—
—
-0.085 (0.059) 0.122 (0.065)
—
0.228 (0.074)
-0.063 (0.063) 0.178 (0.089)
-0.157 (0.150)
—
—
—
-0.309 (0.165) -0.363 (0.180)
—
0.212 (0.206)
-0.130 (0.176) 0.108 (0.248)

Robert Shimer
share25−34

—
-0.322 (0.072)
—
-0.208 (0.091)
-0.350 (0.095)
—
-0.149 (0.031)
—
-0.087 (0.038)
-0.131 (0.041)
—
-0.041 (0.021)
—
-0.011 (0.027)
-0.014 (0.029)
—
-0.029 (0.021)
—
0.003 (0.027)
-0.017 (0.029)
—
-0.045 (0.023)
—
-0.031 (0.030)
-0.058 (0.032)
—
-0.035 (0.050)
—
0.088 (0.063)
0.062 (0.068)
—
0.460 (0.139)
—
0.575 (0.177)
0.521 (0.190)

Table 5B
Table 5: OLS regressions including additional measures of the youth share. All
regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects and an AR(1) correction. Standard
errors in parentheses.
-36-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Robert Shimer

Column I. OLS
Column II. IV
Dependent Variable
Youth Share
Youth Share
p
Job Creation
0.775 (0.371) 1.506 (0.993) 0.492
Job Destruction
0.676 (0.416) 0.917 (1.009) 0.877
Table 6: OLS and IV estimates of the elasticity of job creation and destruction with
respect to the youth share. Both regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects
and an AR(1) correction. Standard errors in parentheses. p is the p-value in a
Davidson-MacKinnon (1993) exogeneity test.

-37-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Column I. OLS
Youth Share Prime Unemploy.
-1.310 (0.269)
—
-0.251 (0.171)
0.561 (0.027)

Robert Shimer

Column II. IV
Youth Share Prime Unemploy.
-1.354 (0.316)
—
0.096 (0.211)
0.573 (0.028)

p
0.868
0.000

Table 7: Dependent Variable: Youth unemployment rate. OLS and IV estimates
of the elasticity of the unemployment rate with respect to the youth share and the
prime age unemployment rate. All regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects
and an AR(1) correction. Standard errors in parentheses. p is the p-value in a
Davidson-MacKinnon (1993) exogeneity test.

-38-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Dependent Variable
A. Unemployment Rate
15–24
25–54
55–64
B. Participation Rate
15–24
25–54
55–64

Column I. OLS
Youth Share
N

Robert Shimer

Column II. IV
Youth Share N

p

-0.173 (0.479) 319 0.443 (0.767) 317 0.351
-0.300 (0.546) 319 0.337 (0.930) 317 0.459
-0.173 (0.591) 314 0.013 (0.791) 312 0.392
0.130 (0.079) 319 0.463 (0.181) 317 0.025
-0.137 (0.028) 319 0.079 (0.071) 317 0.000
-0.108 (0.076) 314 0.146 (0.155) 317 0.066

Table 8: OLS and IV estimates of equation (1) using 25 years and 15 OECD countries
for three diﬀerent age groups. All regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects, an
AR(1) correction, and dummy variables to account for changes in some of the data
series. Standard errors in parentheses. p is the p-value in a Davidson-MacKinnon
(1993) exogeneity test.

-39-

The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market

Birth Rate

Firm-Worker Ratio
1.05
1.04
1.03
1.02
1.01

0.03
0.025
0.02
20 40 60 80 100

20 40 60 80 100
Mismatch Rate

Unemployment Rate
0.052
0.050

Robert Shimer

0.175
0.17
0.165
0.16
0.155
0.15

20 40 60 80 100

0.048
0.046

20 40 60 80 100

0.044
Figure 1: The dynamic response of the ﬁrm-worker ratio, unemployment rate, and
mismatched rate to an anticipated permanent increase in the population growth
rate from 0.02 to 0.03 in period 50.

-40-

