NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES AND THE ALLOCATION
OF HOURS AND EFFORT
Mark Bus
Yongsung Chang
Working Paper 7309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7309

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

We thank Jang-Ok Cho, Pete Klenow, and participants at several workshops for helpful comments. The views

expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by Mark Bils and Yongsung Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Wages and the Allocation of Hours and Effort
Mark Bus and Yongsung Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 7309
August 1999

JELNo. E3
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of wage stickiness when employment has an effort as well as hours

dimension. Despite wages being predetermined, the labor market clears through the effort margin.

We compare this model quantitatively to models with flexible and sticky wages, but no effort
margin. Allowing for responses in effort dramatically improves the ability of a sticky-wage model
to mimic U.S. business cycles. The model produces fluctuations in hours that are intermediate to the

standard flexible-wage and sticky-wage models; but output and consumption behave much like in

the flexible-wage economy. Consequently, welfare costs of wage stickiness are potentially much,
much smaller if one entertains an effort dimension.

Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
bus @troi.cc.rochester.edu

Yongsung Chang
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
McNeil 457, 3178 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA 19104

1. Introduction
There is an immense literature on the impact of nominal wage rigidities. This

literature is partly motivated by the large numbers of workers whose wage rates are
updated to reflect economic news, including inflation, only at intervals of a year or longer.

According to many writers, these wage rigidities fundamentally alter the short-run

response of the economy to shocks, particularly nominal shocks. For instance, an
unexpectedly low price level is understood to drive up the real wage, causing firms to cut
back on labor until this reduction is sufficient to drive the marginal product of labor up to

the level of the "too high" real wage.
One criticism leveled at sticky-wage models is that they suggest that expansions in
output will exhibit declines in labor productivity. Yet many cyclical fluctuations exhibit

procyclical labor productivity. A common explanation for procyclical productivity is that
cyclical movements in labor input are mismeasured. For instance, from N. Gregory

Mankiw's text Macroeconomics (1994, page 382).
"If firms do hoard labor, then labor input is overestimated in recessions, because

the hoarded workers are probably not working as hard as usual"

We argue, however, that choices for effort, in the face of sticky wages, will not work this
way. If intensity of effort reflects a choice of workers or firms then it no longer makes
sense to speak of workers as being pushed off their labor supply curves—a central element

of the sticky-wage story. Figure 1 illustrates. Suppose that a nominal shock, given a
sticky nominal wage, drives the real wage above its flexible-wage counterpart. The
conventional interpretation of the impact of sticky wages has the market move from point

E to E with labor supply exceeding labor demand. But it is clearly more profitable for a
firm to ask more of its workers. As firms ask more of workers this shifts the demand for

hours of labor upward. It also shifts the labor supply curve upward reflecting the greater
cost to workers of each hour at the higher effort. This continues until work intensity
justifies the "too high" real wage at a point like E". Given the upward shift in labor

demand, hours are reduced by less than at E'

2

The next section formalizes this story of sticky-wages with endogenous effort
within a general equilibrium. Under flexible wages individuals make choices on how hard

to labor at work, as well as how many hours to work. Greater exertion at work results in
a higher wage, but less energy to devote to consumption and leisure activities.' Under
sticky wages this choice is restricted. Workers must produce enough to merit the
specified wage in order to maintain employment.

Section 3 quantifies the model for empirical purposes. A key issue is the

willingness of workers to trade off exertion and hours in production. We calibrate this
willingness based primarily on World War II evidence on how piece-rate workers
responded in work efficiency to large swings in their weekly hours of work.

Section 4 examines model responses for hours, output, productivity, and a variety
of other variables to a nominal and a set of real shocks. We compare responses for our
model to those for a model with complete wage flexibility and a model with sticky wages

and no endogenous effort response. For all shocks considered, the following is true for
our model. Real wages respond as in the typical sticky wage setting; the response in hours
worked is very much intermediate to the responses in the standard flexible-wage and
sticky-wage models; finally, output and consumption respond very much as in the flexiblewage economy.
We find that allowing for a response in effort dramatically improves the ability of a

sticky-wage model to mimic U.S. business cycles. In particular, fluctuations in hours are
much more persistent and the correlation between fluctuations in hours and labor

productivity is much closer to that observed in the data. Comparisons with the flexiblewage model are less clear. The flexible-wage model better matches observed persistence
in productivity. But the model with sticky wages and an effort response is much more
successful in generating movements in productivity that lead movements in hours worked.

Our treatment of effort choice under flexible wages parallels that of Becker (1985). Becker considers
differences in intensity of work as an explanation for differences in individuals' wages, particularly
between men and women. Relatedly, 01(1990) depicts the firm-size effect on wage rates as arising partly
from a higher effort choice in larger firms. Hartley (1992) shows how a minimum wage might lead to
greater effort, mitigating the legislation's impact on employment.
3

For U.S. data, fluctuations in real wages, labor productivity, and TFP all dramatically lead
those in hours.

We also examine the welfare cost of sticky wages in the face of monetary shocks.
We calibrate that this cost is smaller by nearly a factor of 100 for our model compared to a

standard sticky-wage model without effort choice. It is an open question as to why
explicit wage contracts do not provide more contingencies for inflation and employment

outcomes. Our model provides a partial rational in that, with an effort margin, the benefits
of greater wage flexibility are very small.

2. Model

Consumers:

There are a large number of identical infinitely lived consumers in the economy.

At time!, the representative consumer maximizes expected discounted utility defined over

a stream of effective consumption, x.

U(t)=E,/'u(x), ,8 <1,
E1 is the expectations operator; the discount factor is fi. Following Becker (1965),

consumption activity requires an input of time as well as goods. More exactly, effective
consumption reflects commodities c, real balances ni1/P, and effective labor spent on

consumption activities i. We assume the utility function reflects the following relations.

u(x,) = log;

xt=zt it
1

1—--

rn

z =[%Ct V +(1)()

10
v]u-1

4

Shifts in preferences are allowed through variations in 9. An increase in 9 represents an
increase in importance of purchased inputs relative to time in producing effective

consumption.
Goods and real money balances combine through a CES function with substitution
elasticity u. This yields a demand for real balances with elasticity of 1 with respect to
consumption and —u with respect to the nominal interest rate. We can conveniently draw
upon a large empirical literature in calibrating a value for u.
The distinguishing feature of our model is that the effective amount of labor

supplied to the market and to home consumption depends not only on how hours are split

between market and home, but also on levels of exertion or effort, Suppose the consumer

spends an amount of time n, in the market and 1- n at home for consuming. Let q5t and ,
represent the effort levels he exerts at work and in the activity of consuming. Then we

treat effective labor in the market i and effective time in consumption l as

= n1çb/'
2

=(1—n)2,

where both yand 2 are? 0 and < 1.
We impose a constraint on the available energy that a consumer can exert in
market and non-market activity. The "energy constraint" is

(1)

q5,n+(1—n)Ø, =1.

This presents consumers with a tradeoff. If the consumer works more intensely in the
market, he is left with less energy for non-market activities. (Becker, 1985, introduces
such a constraint.) More generally, we can envision a number of ways in which consumers

can potentially show themselves to be more desirable employees. For instance workers
could reduce absenteeism at the cost of less flexibility to stay at home on days they deem
5

that as attractive. Or workers could cut back on consumption activities that make them
less productive and attractive as employees, such as carousing to late hours during the

workweek.
The consumer spends his money income for purchases of consumption goods c,
investment i1, and money holdings rn1. Income includes labor income, rental income and a

cash transfer from the government. Given the nominal wage rate W, rental rate R, price
of goods Pt., and money transfer from government T1, the budget constraints are

m

W

R

(2)

c+—-+i !n +—i-/ct+

(3)

k1 =1, +(1—8)k1

PtIJJttPt

m1
T
t
Pt
j:

The money transfer from the government reflects the income from money creation.

= M1 —M1_1 = (.i, — 1)M1_, where

= —.

Capital depreciates at rate 5.

The effective labor of a worker is ni[. The wage is related to hourly effort Øby

(4)

£ is the market's valuation of labor, determined in general equilibrium as described
below. Equation (4) has two separate interpretations depending on whether wages are
flexible or sticky. Under flexible wages it represents the ability of a worker to earn a
higher wage by exerting greater effort. An individual worker treats the marginal value of

labor, Q, as given with respect to his actions. Therefore, he views each 1 percent
expansion in effort q5 to result in a ' percent real wage increase. Under sticky wages the

worker takes not only f2. but also the real wage as given. Therefore, to be employed, the
worker has to provide an effort dictated by

6

(4')

Ø =(/)".
Under flexible wages, consumer maximization yields two static first-order

conditions for choosing effort and hours worked and two dynamic first-order conditions
for choosing investment in capital and investment in real money balances.

=

(5)
1—n1Ø1

(6)

(7)

k1+1'

1—2

2O

1—n,

1—n,q5,

/3—E,[

1

Pc1
9

=

R,1/I÷1 +1—S —
]—
c,1/9,1

t+1't

x P,c

= c, [1

+

W.

1—9, P1c,

'%(L) u

(8)

where

1—Os

2 (j!i-)v

J

is consumption magnified by a factor equal to one plus the

foregone interest cost of real balances held per unit of consumption.
With flexible wages equations (1), (5), and (6) yield the relative time devoted to
market work and the relative rates of exertion in market and home activity.

"
i—n,

..J—r

1—21—9,P,

Along a steady-state path with common growth n consumption and real wages, as we will

have below, hours supplied to the market are constant. Exertion in market work relative

7

to at home is constant at all times. If the parameters y and ? are equal then
furthermore, neither

nor ,

varies cyclically.

Ify > 2, then

equals one;

is greater than one.

This further implies that both Ø and Ø will vary opposite fluctuations in market hours.

If the wage is predetermined then workers are not free ex-post to choose effort.
First-order condition (5) becomes irrelevant, with q5 instead determined by the constraint

in (4'). In a typical sticky wage model, if the real wage is too high ex-post, hours are
reduced to drive up the marginal product of labor. Here by working harder workers
maintain the choice to work longer hours. In fact, even though the wage is sticky the

labor market continues to clear. (Recall Figure 1.)

Firms:
There are a large number of identical firms operating under constant returns to
scale in capital and effective labor. Firms hire capital and labor each period to maximize

profits (IY — WN1 — R,K,) subject to the production function

(9)

Y

A1Kl_a(QNy)a.

cP represents aggregate effort level; A reflects temporary productivity shifts, whereas Q,
reflects a deterministic trend of technology that grows at rate g.

The first order conditions for capital and labor are

(10) -L=MPK =(1_a)AtKt_a(QtNtT)c
(11) XLMPN1 =a4iKtl_aQN_l(1[a.

8

The first-order condition for labor yields a wage rate per efficiency unit of labor equal to

4 =a4tQ(N)1_a.
The wage rates for workers must be specified a period in advance—this is the

source of wage stickiness. The wage is chosen to minimize the expected cost of labor in
efficiency units, recognizing that the wage dictates the level of effort that firms can

require. The first-order condition for this choice can be written as:

(12) W1; W+iEr[

1n1+1

+ict+i

=

1—2 E1{' —
1—1

)n11

1—

Rational Expectations Equilibrium:
The markets for goods, labor, and money clear each period. A rational expectations
equilibrium is a set of stochastic processes for the endogenous variables

{1', K1, N, Ø, c, , m1, .P, W , R, } that satisfies (3), (4'), (6)-(8), (1 O)-( 12), and market
clearing for exogenous processes (A,,91,u1,Q,}. The model is solved numerically using a
log-linear approximation of the system of first order conditions and constraints of the

stationary economy around the steady state as in King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988)2

3. Calibration of Model Parameters and Shocks

In our model the labor market clears, despite short-run wage stickiness, thanks to
fluctuations in market effort. Consequently, the model's predictions for fluctuations in
hours and output depend not only on the conventional elasticity of labor supply, but also

on how desired hours are affected by these fluctuations in effort. That, in turn, depends

on the parameters and 2. As an example, in the limit as yand 2 approach one hours and
2

Given the existence of trends in technology and the money supply, we need to transform the economy so
that it admits a stationary solution. We can do so by dividing real variables by the technology index and
nominal variables by the previous period's money stock. (To save on notation, we use the same variables
for the transformed stationary variables.)

9

effort are perfect substitutes. Consider a nominal shock that drives up the real wage and
effort by one percent. Workers' hours simply decrease by one percent, holding output
(and welfare) constant. More generally, however, the increase in real wage and effort
leads to a lesser decrease in hours, an increase in output, and a fall in effective leisure I,

Calibrating the Elasticity of Labor Supply:

Let denote the elasticity response of hours to the real wage, holding current
consumption expenditures constant. The model implies an elasticity of one for (1—n) with

respect to the wage. (See equation (5).) Therefore it implies a value of approximately

.E!! for . We set the compensated elasticity of labor supply, , equal to one. This value
is much lower than what is typically employed in simulations of real business cycles, but is

quite large relative to most estimates from cross-sectional and panel data (Ghez and

Becker, 1975, MaCurdy, 1981, and Altonji, l986).

Calibrating
As discussed above, the optimal ratio of effort in market work relative to that in

consumption is - = y(1
0

Thus knowing

- is sufficient to determine a relationship

between the parameters 2 and '. Quantifying

exactly is not feasible. We start from a

presumption that . is greater than (or equal to) one. Passmore, et. al. (1974), in the
World Health Organization publication Handbook on Human Nutritional Requirements,

present energy expenditures for work in various occupations as well as for a range of
leisure activities, These calculations are shown in Table 1. Results are given separately

Several studies have examined how time is divided between market and non-market pursuits based on
time use diaries. (Examples include Hill, 1983, Juster and Stafford, 1985, 1991.) From Juster and
Stafford (1991), a sample of men in the United States in 1981 report spending 48 hoursper week in
market work, including commuting, and 42 hours in social entertainment and various sorts of passive and
active leisure. For women the comparable number of hours are respectively 26 and 42. These numbers
suggest a value for
of one or perhaps somewhat larger.

I0

for a 65 kg man and a 55 kg woman. All figures are in terms of kilo-calories expended

over an 8 hour period. For the 65 kg man leisure activities exhibit a range per 8 hours of
700 to 1500 kilo-calories, for the 55 kg woman the range is 580 to 980 kilo-calories.
Occupations are classified as light, moderately active, very active, and exceptionally

active. The exceptionally active occupations (lumberjacks, blacksmiths, rickshaw pullers)
are relatively uncommon in modern rich economies. If we compare moderately active

occupations to leisure activities, we see that work is associated with about 30 percent
greater energy expenditure than the midpoint of the range for leisure activities. In addition
to physical and caloric considerations, most leisure and consumption activities are
presumably less tiresome mentally than typical market work. Based on these

considerations, we set the ratio-I at --. (We explore the robustness of the results to this
choice.) This implies )t is related to ' as a =

Calibrating yfrorn WWJI experiences:
How desired hours respond to exogenous changes in effort reflects parameter )'.

But we do not see a practical way to estimate this response. As a result of World War II,
many workers in manufacturing faced dramatic changes in their workweeks. The U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) took advantage of these variations to study the impact
of hours of work on efficiency and absenteeism. The results of these studies are reported
in Studies of the Effects of Long Working Hours, BLS (1944) and Hours of Work and

Output, BLS (1947). By measuring how workers vary effort in response to an enforced
change in hours, this provides an alternative way to judge to what extent hours and effort
are substitutes.

Productivity, output per hour, equals Ø[. From equation (5) for effort choice,
b,fl,

=L
1—n,Ø, 21—0,

W,n,

1,

If consumption expenditures move one-for-one with earnings

then q$n1 is constant. This implies changes in productivity per hour are related to changes

in hours according to

11

(13)

L1ln(-) =

yz1ln() = -lln@).

nt

Thus the response of productivity to the wartime changes in hours yields a value for i'

More generally, the ratio of consumption to earnings will vary with the large

changes in hours. Given that wartime changes in hours were transitory and restrictions
were placed on consumer purchases during the war, workers probably devoted some of
the extra earnings from longer hours to savings. As an extreme, suppose that
consumption was not affected by the wartime changes in hours. Substituting equation (4)
for the real wage in (5), changes in productivity are, in this case, related to changes in
hours by

(13') Aln() = y ln(1) —y[
ii,

1—(1—nq')

]

ln(n, ) =

-(
5—27

)A 1n(n),

where reflects a first-order approximation. The last equality follows from setting
equal to 315 to be consistent with the calibrations above. Productivity falls less if

consumption does not vary. We first use the war data to observe how much productivity
declined in response to an expansion in hours. We then use that response to calibrate two
extreme values for ybased on consumption varying one-for-one with earnings or being
unaffected.

TheBLS examined 78 case studies covering 3,105 workers in 34 plants across a
variety of industries. Each case included anywhere from 1 to 5 changes in hours.4 In
order to estimate the response of effort to changes in hours workers must be choosing

their level of effort. We are concerned that this may not be true for workers paid at an

The BLS visited over 800 plants; but most did not meet the requirements of the study. From Bulletin
917: "In order to permit the effects of various schedules of hours to emerge clearly, it was necessary to
rule out all other variables. A plant, therefore, could not be studied if during the various periods to be
surveyed, hours were no! maintained consistent/v atfairlyfixed and definite schedules. During these
periods, the operations performed by the workers to be studied had to remain essentially unchanged, and
the number of identical workers involved had to be reasonably large.

12

hourly rate. Therefore we restrict our attention to cases involving piece rate workers.5
We further restrict attention to cases where the pace of work is described as dictated by

the worker, as opposed to by machine. We also required that terms of compensation were
essentially unaltered across the changes in hours. We are left with 27 groups of workers
and 62 hours changes.6
Implicit in this calculation is that productivity is not affected by an increase in

hours worked per week except through effort. If an expansion in hours is associated with
a decrease in capital per worker this could lower productivity. We do not believe this was

the case for these workers. Adding work on Saturdays or Sundays or lengthening a shift
should not reduce capital per worker. Furthermore, the study selected groups of workers
where the number and mix of workers in the group did not change too significantly.

Many of the large increases in hours are associated with the United States' entry

into the war. Conversely, many of the large decreases reflect the end of the war. Entry
into war may have provided a strong psychological stimulus to productivity, particularly

for workers producing munitions and other goods directly related to the war effort. For
the case of 18 workers involved in machining metal parts BLS (1947) states, '11 is

pertinent to an analysis of the findings in this p/ant that workers became aware of/he

demandfor company's products in the war effort ..." For this reason, we introduce a
control variable, i.War, that equals 1 for periods reflecting entry into the war, equals -1
for periods reflecting the end of the war, and equals 0 otherwise.

Results are presented in Table 2. The first column regresses the reported percent
change in efficiency solely on the percent change in hours. (The change in hours is net of
any change in absenteeism.) The estimated impact on efficiency, though negative, is fairly
small and only marginally significant. The regression in Column 2 controls for L\War. The

The study was heavily weighted toward groups paid by piece-rate, as this made it easier to measure
workers' output. Bulletin 917 reports that, on average, workers on hourly rates maintained greater
efficiency in response to an increase in hours than did those on piece rates.
6

One case corresponds to 150 workers. All others correspond to a number of workers between 8 and 48.

11 of these changes occur prior to the war. 16 represent increases in hours from before to after Pearl
Harbor. 18 are changes during the war. 16 represent changes from before to after VJ Day. 1 occurred
entirely after the war.

13

war is associated with a very significant positive impact on productivity of 5.6 percent.
Productivity now shows an estimated elasticity of—.26 with respect to hours (with a

standard error of .07). Lastly, Column 3 interacts AWar with a zero/one dummy variable,
that equals one for the 42 hours changes that are for workers producing goods directly

related to the war effort. The impact of the war on productivity is about 8.0 percent for
these workers.7 The impact of hours on productivity is estimated fairly precisely at an
elasticity of—.25 (standard error of .06).

We take the estimated impact on productivity as a .25 percent decrease for each

.

percent increase in hours. If consumption varies one for one with earnings this implies a

value for y of .25. If consumption is not varying this implies a value for ' of

In the late 1800's and early in this century a number of manufacturing enterprises
exhibited dramatic reductions in the workweek. This often occurred in conjunction with
adopting three-shift operation in place of two shifts. Goldmark (1912) reports the impact
these changes had on productivity per hour for several companies where, for various

reasons, particularly good records were maintained. In Table 3 we report these results for
3 cases pertaining to piece-rate workers. In each case we believe it is reasonable to
assume that the ratio of labor to effective capital was relatively unaffected by the altered

production schedule. The two factories that cut the workweek in 1893, the Salford Iron
Works in Manchester England and the Engis Chemical Works near Liege, Belgium, both
displayed increases in productivity that offset considerably more than half the reduction in

hours per week. For the Zeiss Optical Works in Jena, Germany, which reduced daily
hours from 9 to 8 in 1900, productivity increased more than proportionately to the
reduction in hours, actually resulting in an increase in production. All three cases support

higher values for that suggested by the WWII experience.
For our benchmark case we choose a value for y equal to -. This is near the top

of the range of values implied by the WWII evidence of .25 to . We explore robustness
to a wider range of values.

Examples of products not directly related to war are dental equipment, tobacco products, candles, and
cough drops. The variable War is not significant for these workers.
14

Calibrating Money Demand:
First-order conditions (7) and (8) imply that money demand is proportional to

consumption and has an interest rate (i1) elasticity of-u. There is a very large empirical

literature estimating u. We take ii = 0_i as a reasonable value given the range of estimates
(e.g., Laidler, 1985). We set the parameter x equal to .9999. For a value of 0.1 for u and
a nominal interest rate of 8 percent this implies a real balance-consumption ratio, -h-, of

0.51. For the United States for 1954 to 1996 the observed ratio for -, measuring
money by M2, is 0.24. The small value of '- renders the effect of real balances on
consumption demand nearly zero.

Table 4 summarizes the parameter values we have discussed in this section, It also
lists parameters we have calibrated at values common in the literature, such as labor's

share a and the depreciation rate 5

Estimating the Aulocorrelailon of Shocks:
We consider three disturbances to the economy: disturbances to technology A, to
preferences &., and to the rate of money growth

We denote a variable's percentage

deviation from its steady-state value by adding a circumflex [e.g. A = log(A IA)]. We

assume that S = [A1

0, /] reflects a stationary stochastic process,
PA

0

0

(14) S=pS,_1+,, p= 0 p0 0
0

,

PA'PUP/I <1,

e, =[SA, s

0

(15) 9=Ece1.
We estimate this process three ways to be consistent first with a model with flexible wages
and constant effort, then with a model with sticky wages and constant effort, and finally
with a model with sticky wages with an effort response.
15

With constant effort we can measure shifts in productivity A, in a conventional
manner using the Solow residual. But more generally the Solow residual reflects
variations in effort

- (1- a)K, - aW, = A, +
With flexible wages , is directly related to ñ through equations (1), (5), and (6). Under
sticky wages, similarly, E,.1q51 can be directly related to E,_1ñ1 given the wage setting in

equation (12). After subtracting ayE,_1 [q5,] from the Solow residual for 1, we project

what remains on lagged and predetermined variables to construct the variable E1_A,.

(This is described in greater detail in Appendix A.) Then, given that E,A, has the same

autocorrelation as 4, we use the series for E,1 A, to estimate PA

If wages are flexible, preference shifts can be related to observed variables using
equations (5) and (6) as

=

This parallels Hall (1986), Parkin (1988), and

Baxter and King's (1991) use of the static first-order condition to measure preference

shocks. If wages are sticky, then this relationship holds in expectation as oft-I. As in the
treatment of A,, we first use this relationship to construct E,_19,, then estimate p9 from
its autocorrelation.

Lastly, we need to calibrate the autocorrelation parameter p ofmonetary shocks.
Our reading of the literature provides no consensus on an appropriate measure of

monetary shocks. Short of such a measure, we proceed as follows to construct a measure
of money growth that is consistent with our model. The money demand equation requires
that nominal money holdings be proportional to nominal expenditures on consumption and
exhibit an elasticity with respect to the nominal interest rate (i,) of —u.

i,=(P,+a,)-v(1+i,
".)
16

Taking first differences and employing a value for u of.1, this yields a measure of
disturbances to the rate of growth in money. A problem with this measure is that, if we
are incorrect in assuming elasticities of money demand of 1 and —.1 with respect to

nominal consumption and nominal interest rates, then our measure of nominal shocks will

be correlated spuriously with spending and interest rates. To mitigate this problem, we
instrument for changes in the variable with the federal funds rate, the growth rate of non-

borrowed reserves, the ratio of non-borrowed reserves to total reserves, and their one
period lagged values. These variables are often used in the literature as measures of
monetary policy (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder, 1992, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans,

1996, Sims and Zha, 1994, and Strongin, 1995). We will refer to the resulting series as
our instrumented monetary shocks.
Estimation of the three shocks, with results, is described in detail in Appendix A.

4. Results for Cyclical Fluctuations
The cyclical behavior of hours and productivitj.'

We contrast three models with respect to their predictions for how output,
consumption, investment, productivity, and prices respond to shocks. The models being:
a standard flexible wage model, a model with sticky nominal wages and rationing in the

labor market, and the model we have introduced with sticky nominal wages where the

labor market clears through endogenous effort. First, however, we examine the behavior
of these variables for the U.S. economy with a particular emphasis on the cyclical behavior
of productivity.

Table 5 presents the standard deviations, first-order autocorrelations, and
contemporaneous correlations with real GDP for the eight series real GDP, consumption,

investment, hours, prices, real wage, labor productivity, and the Solow residual (TFP) for

the U.S. economy. The series are annual Hodrick-Prescott filtered data for 1954-1996.
Prices and the real wage reflect the GDP deflator. The hours series are from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and reflect a correction for changes in the composition of the

workforce by age and education.8 The series for the real wage, labor productivity, and

TFP are corrected in a consistent manner. As has been often documented, variability of
hours is nearly as large as that in output, with the standard. deviation in the real wage and

labor productivity less than half that of hours. Note that fluctuations in hours are actually
more persistent than fluctuations in labor productivity or TFP, in contrast to typical results

for models that have been calibrated. Prices are very countercyclical for the period 1954

to 1996, with a correlation of-.57 with output.
Table 6 presents correlations of the real wage, labor productivity, and the Solow
residual with hours contemporaneously as well as for leads and lags of up to 3 years. Real
wages and TFP exhibit contemporaneously correlations of .43 and .45 with hours, but
labor productivity and hours are largely uncorrelated. Fluctuations in all three variables

dramatically lead fluctuations in hours. For both labor productivity and TFP the
correlation at a lead of 2 years is over .5.
With sticky wages, but endogenous effort, an unexpected increase in prices

reduces the real wage, causing a decrease in effort and TFP. It is well known that price
and TFP are strongly negatively correlated in the data. For instance, Figure 2a shows the
impulse responses from a bivariate VAR of inflation and TFP for the period 1960-1995.

A linear time trend is included. The number of lags included equals 2 (representing 2

years). The VAR is structured with inflation entering first in the ordering. TFP responds
to 1 percent increase in inflation by decreasing initially by about .25 percent and by even

more in the following year. However, the response of TFP to inflation does not clearly
capture the relation between nominal shocks and effort if there are important cyclical

shocks to technology. The negative impact of productivity shocks on prices might create
a negative association between inflation and TFP even if effort does not vary.

Ideally, we would like to isolate the response of TFP to innovations in inflation

due solely to exogenous monetary shocks. Figure 2b repeats the VAR presented in Figure
2a, but replacing the rate of inflation with our instrumented monetary shocks. (See

8

The adjustments for labor force composition are described in detail in BLS (1993). Without correcting
the standard deviation of hours is 2.19 percent instead of 2.01 percent. Without correcting the
correlations of labor productivity with output and hours equal .30 and -.2 1, rather than the corresponding
values in Table 3 of .48 and .06.

18

Section 3.) TFP responds to a 1 percent increase in (instrumented) money growth by
decreasing quite dramatically by about .3 to .4 percent in the first two years.9

Impulse responses for the models
We examine impulse responses to technology, preference and monetary shocks for

each of the three models.'° First consider a technology shock of one percent. The
responses of the flexible wage model with constant effort are given in Figure 3a. These

responses are standard. Investment responds much more than consumption and output,
with consumption's response being humped shape. The real wage (and labor productivity)
responds much more, and much more persistently, than hours.1'

Now consider the response, Figure 3b, for a sticky-wage model with no response
in effort (y= 0). For the first year, during which the nominal wage is predetermined, the
impact on the real wage is simply the opposite of the response of the price level. The
price level falls by about 2/3 of a percent. The induced increase in the real wage of 2/3 of
a percent is somewhat smaller than the real wage increase under flexible wages of about

0.9 percent. Because employment is demand determined, this leads to a somewhat larger
increase in employment and output in the first year.
The response of the model with sticky wages but endogenous effort — Figure 3c —
is intermediate to the flexible-wage and standard sticky-wage results. The path for the real

wage looks much like the simple sticky wage model. The sticky nominal wage causes the

real wage to increase by less than its flexible wage counterpart. This leads to a reduction

in the productivity of effort (Ø[) by 1/4 percent. Hours increase by about 0.6 percent,
which is greater than the response of 1/3 percent under flexible wages and smaller than the

The results in Figure 2a, using inflation and TFP, are qualitatively robust to reordering the variables.
For Figure 2b, the results still show a negative response in TFP to the monetary shock; but it is smaller
and not statistically significant at the 5% level.
10 Recall that for each model, the persistence of shocks corresponds to the autocorrelation of the shocks
estimated from that model. In practice, the differences in persistence of shocks across models is very
similar; so this has little impact on the appearance of the impulse responses.

19

response of 1 percent under the standard sticky model. Overall, the expansions in output,
consumption, and investment look very much like that under completely flexible wages.

Next we examine the responses of these economies to a preference shock

reflecting a one-percent increase in 9 The responses of the flexible wage economy are
given in Figure 4a. The preference shock causes both consumption and investment to
expand, with the increase in consumption modestly larger. Output expands about 3/4
percent the first year, declining gradually to be about 0.4 percent above trend in the fifth

year. Prices and real wages are countercyclical. Prices fall by 1/2 percent in the first year.
Real wages fall by about 1/3 percent initially, but only slightly by the fifth year.

The response of the standard sticky-wage model to the preference shock, an
increase in consumption demand, is quite perverse. Looking at Figure 4b, the increase in
consumption drives up the demand for real balances causing prices to drop. This, in turn,
increases the real wage by about 1/4 percent in the first year. Because the level of
technology and the capital stock are unaffected in the first year, this increase in the real
wage necessarily generates a fall in employment and output. So an increase in demand for
consumption actually results in a contraction in output in the first year, with the increase in
consumption more than offset by a drop in investment. As nominal wages adjust
investment and output subsequently increase.
Again the response of the sticky wage model with effort — Figure 4c — is

intermediate to the other two models. The real wage rises initially, similarly to the simple

sticky wage model. But this induces an increase in productive effort at work that
increases the marginal product of labor. This increase in effort exceeds the increase in real
wage and results in an expansion in hours. The increase in hours in the first year is
substantially less than for the flexible wage model. But thanks to the increase in effort,

output expands nearly as much as under flexible wages. Note that hours and output both
peak in the second year of the shock, with hours in particular showing a very strong

humped shape response. Furthermore, real wages (and labor productivity) and TFP

We also examined a flexible-wage model with endogenous effort. Effort moves very little. Bus and
Cho (1994) and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1993) achieve greater movements in effort under
flexible wages by adding adjustment costs for hours.

20

clearly lead the expansion in hours and output. By the time hours peak, TFP is back to
normal and the real wage and labor productivity are below trend. The response of the
model with sticky wages and endogenous effort to a preference shock is the only example
of an impulse response, among the three models and three shocks we consider, that

generates productivity leading hours. From Table 6, this is a striking feature of the data.
Lastly we examine responses to a shock of one percent to the monetary growth
rate. The impact on the economy with flexible wages is extremely small (no real variable

departs as much as .001 percent from its steady-state value), so we skip to the two sticky
wage models. Results for the sticky wage model without effort response appear in Figure

5a. The impact on hours and output is very dramatic. The decline in real wages induces a
transitory increase in hours of 4 percent and in output of nearly 3 percent. The expansion
is almost entirely through investment spending, which increases by about 8 percent. The
monetary shock creates a persistent expansion in consumption, but not in output.
With endogenous effort, Figure 5b, the impact of the monetary shock is almost
neutralized by the decrease in effort brought about by the decrease in the real wage.

Hours still expand significantly by about 2 percent, as opposed to 4 percent. But this
increase in hours is largely offset by a decline in effort so that the increase of effective

labor in the market is very small. The impact on consumption, investment, and output is
also small relative to the case of sticky wages with no effort response. The fall in effort
created by the 1 percent monetary shock translates into a one-period drop in TFP of a
little more than one percent. This is in the direction we find for a VAR estimated on U.S.
data, as reported above; but the model's response is several times larger in magnitude.

C'yclical moments for the models

In Appendix B we present and discuss moments for time series generated from

each of the three models in response to shocks to technology, preferences, and monetary

growth. (The shocks are quantified as described in Appendix A.) Here we summarize
those findings

Allowing for an effort response substantially improves how well a sticky-wage

model matches the major features ofU.S. business cycles depicted in Tables 5 and 6. In

21

particular, fluctuations in hours become much more persistent (as in the data); and the
correlation between fluctuations in hours and labor productivity also becomes much closer

to that observed for the data. Comparisons with the flexible-wage model are less clear.
The sticky-wage with effort model does much better than the flexible-wage model in

producing that productivity strongly leads the cycle, but is somewhat outperformed in a
couple of dimensions — persistence of productivity movements and the contemporaneous

correlation of hours and labor productivity.

Welfare costs of wage slickijiess
Consumption expenditure and effective leisure behave very similarly for our model

with sticky wages and variable effort as they do under flexible wages. This suggests that
the welfare consequences of wage stickiness are far lower for our model than in a standard

sticky-wage model. We illustrate for the case of nominal shocks to

We set

equal

to .63 based on the time series for the instrumented monetary shocks. We set the standard
deviation of shocks equal to .33 percent. This is roughly consistent with observed price
variability for all the models we consider. (See Appendix A.)
Under sticky wages and constant effort, the cost to welfare of the wage rigidity is

equivalent to a loss of 0.23 percent of steady-state consumption. (Details on calculating
welfare costs are contained in Appendix C.) This is consistent with estimates in Cho,

Cooley, and Phaneuf(1997), which range from .05 to 1.2 percent of steady-state output.

For our base model with endogenous effort, withy =- and steady-state - equal to

.., the welfare cost of nominal shocks is only 0.0020 percent of steady-state consumption.
Thus the cost is reduced by two orders of magnitude.12 For annual consumption of
$30,000 this translates into a cost of only 60 cents per year. It is a long-standing puzzle
why wage agreements do not build in more indexing and flexibility. Our model, by
allowing an effort response, suggests the cost of wage stickiness may be extremely small.

12

If we do not scale down the monetary disturbances the welfare costs of sticky wages are 6.37 percent of

consumption with constant effort, but only 0.06 percent with the effort response.

Thus it may require only very small costs of writing wage flexibility into labor
arrangements to rationalize sticky wages in practice.

We examined several other parameterizations of the mode! with endogenous

effort. We first let marginal variations in effort be less productive by setting y =, while

maintaining . equal to -. (implying 2 = .069). This increases the welfare cost of wage
rigidity to .003 6 percent of steady-state consumption. The steady-state ratio of . affects

the cost of fluctuations in effort. If we make . equal to one, by setting both yand A.
equal to -i-, then sticky wages create essentially a zero welfare cost. ("Effective" time in

production and consumption are unaffected by sticky wages to a first-order approximation

if yequals A.) Conversely, holding 'equal to , but reducing 2 to make

equal to 3

increases the welfare cost to .0 124 percent of steady-state consumption. But note this
remains only about one-twentieth the magnitude of welfare costs in the absence of an
effort response.

5. Conclusions
We examine the impact of wage stickiness when employment has an effort as well

as hours dimension. Despite wages being predetermined, the labor market clears through
the effort margin. Sticky wages do create inefficient fluctuations in exertion at work
relative to at home. But the consumption—leisure margin is much less distorted than if no
response in effort is allowed.

We compare our model quantitatively to two models without an effort margin, one

with flexible wages and one with sticky wages. Though movements in real wages for our
model behave very much as in the typical sticky wage setting, fluctuations in hours

worked are intermediate to the responses in the standard flexible-wage and sticky-wage

models. Furthermore, the impact the sticky wage has on hours worked is largely offset by
variations in effort at work. As a result, output and consumption behave much like in the

23

flexible-wage economy. We find that allowing for variations in effort significantly help a
sticky-wage model match the behavior of U.S. business cycles.

Because the impact of monetary shocks on hours is largely offset by opposite
movements in effort, welfare costs of wage stickiness appear to be much smaller, by

perhaps two orders of magnitude, if one allows an effort dimension. This result may help
explain the apparent lack of short-run flexibility in actual wage practices.

24

Appendix A: Estimating the Models' Shocks:
The three disturbances to technology, preferences, and the rate of money growth are
described by equations (14) and (15) of the text.
As discussed in the text, with variable effort the Solow residual reflects variations in effort
as well as technology A,,

-(1-a)K,-czW,=A,+a7Ø,
Under sticky wages, optimal wage setting in equation (9) yields an implied value for
is set such that the expectation of
reflects its flexible wage counterpart of
Intuitively,

For ' 2 this implies small movements in E,Ø,, to satisfy energy constraint (1). We
subtract ayE,Ø,, from the Solow residual at time /+1 to yield a variable with expectation at time t
equal toE,A,÷1 = PRA!

We construct the expectation of the corrected 1+1 Solow residual based

on a projection on variables { 1 ,Y ,N, ,N,, k,, ,
then estimate

, (-),() } to obtain E,A,,. We

,

from the first-order autocorrelation of E1A,,, which equals the autocorrelation

of A,. Finally, we divide E,A,1(= pRA,) by 3,., to obtain our time series for A,
=

Under flexible wages, first order conditions (5) and (6) reveal the preference shifts 0 as
Under sticky-wages condition (5) for effort choice is irrelevant, However,

given the choice for W in equation (9), the relationship holds as of t+ I up to an expectation
error as

=

, where E, [e

J

=

1

Taking expectations of a log-linear

approximation yields
= (1- O)E, [——i +

—

1.

,

Note E, [9,,..,] has the same autocorrelation as 0, = p0 E, [0, 1. We use predicted values from
regressing O,* on {

,

,1.

c,, c,_1 (-p-), (--) , K,.1 , K,, K,,

,

,.

(__), (i,-'—) ) to obtain E,

I

Similarly to the treatment of A, , we use the first-order autocorrelation of E, [0,, I to estimate Po

then divide E,
I by p0 to obtain a series for 0, (We proceed in a similar manner for the
model with sticky wages but no effort choice,)
Our monetary measure is based on calibrating nominal money demand and imposing, as is
standard, that money supply equals demand. We then instrument for this variable with several
financial variables and growth rates in monetary aggregates. This is discussed at length in Section
3 of the text. It is well known that given the estimated growth rate of any monetary aggregate,
stochastic general equilibrium models generate nominal variables that are far more volatile than the
data. We find that, for all three models considered, our measure of money also leads to far more
volatility in prices than we see in the data. For this reason, we scale down the monetary
disturbances to one-fifth their estimated size to match the volatility of price.

25

Given the series for {A,9,,ui} ,the stochastic process (14)-(15) is estimated by OLS
using annual data for the United States for 1960-1995. Linear time trends are included. Estimates
for p and e are as follows (with the monetary innovation scaled to one fifth). Under flexible
wages,
.90

=

0

0

.

(.06)

1.35
,

(09)

0

0

.63

.10 —.11

&/2 =102[ —.11 .01

.31
.01].

(.13)

under sticky wages,
.90

0

0

(.06)

0

.86

1.29

lI2 = 102

0

(.09)

0

0

.63

.42

.42

—

.09

1.15 — .08

.09 — .08

.30

1.43

.21

—

.21

1.21

(.13)

and under sticky wages with endogenous efforts,
.93

=

0

0

(.06)

0
0

,

(09)
0

.63

l/2 =l02[ —.09 —.09

(.13)

26

.09

.30
_.09].

Appendix B: Cyclical nwments for the models
We now compare the moments for time series generated from each of the three models to
those reported for U.S. data in Table 4. The generated series are also H-P filtered. The shocks to
the models consist of the technology, preference, and monetary shocks estimated under each model,
as described in Appendix A.

Results for the flexible wage model are contained in Tables Al and A2. The model
generates fluctuations in output and hours that are respectively .82 and .78 times the size of those
observed in the data. Labor productivity, by contrast, is somewhat more volatile for the model
than in actual data. The model generates persistent movements in real variables, though, with the
exception of labor productivity, not as persistent as in the data. The model generates much less
persistent movements in prices than we see in the data. This statement holds as well for the other
two models we consider. From Table A2 we see that the model generates contemporaneous
correlations of labor productivity and TFP with hours of respectively —.05 and .40. These are
quite close to those estimated for U.S. data (.06 and .45). For the model movements in labor
productivity and TFP modestly lag movements in hours, In the data, as discussed in the text, they
very strongly lead hours.
Results under sticky wages and constant effort appear in Tables A3 and A4. Hours are
more variable for the model than in the data. The sticky-wage model, even augmented with
technology and preference shocks, fails to produce the observed persistence of economic time
series. This is particularly true for hours, which display a first-order correlation of .53 in the data
but only .05 for the sticky wage model. (This problem is well known in the literature. For a recent
discussion see Chari, et. al., 1996.) From Table A4, the correlation between TFP and hours is .22.
Unlike the data, hours and labor productivity are quite negatively correlated, with a correlation of
—.42 compared to .06 for the data. Fluctuations in TFP do lead fluctuations in hours as in the data.
Finally, we present results for the model with sticky wages but varying effort in Tables AS
and A6. Broadly speaking, the time-series properties of this model are similar to those of the
flexible wage model. Output is a bit more volatile than for the flexible wage model, and therefore
closer to the volatility depicted in Table 3 for the U.S. economy. Looking at Table A6, the model
generates a contemporaneous correlation between hours and labor productivity of—. 16 and
between hours and TFP of .13 Both correlations fall below those for the flexible wage model and
below those for the data. This model does generate fluctuations in both labor productivity and TFP
that lead those in hours worked. But this behavior is not as striking for the model as what we
observe in the data. If we consider alternative parameters for the model that strengthen the
importance of preference shocks, for example by reducing the elasticity response of labor supply,
this creates a stronger leading pattern in labor productivity and TFP. But it also makes the
contemporaneous correlation between hours and labor productivity more negative, in contradiction
of the data.

The finding that TFP leads hours under sticky wages partly reflects the positive covariance
between preference and productivity shocks. In particular, if we set the covariance of the two real
shocks equal to zero, then productivity does not lead hours under sticky wages with constant effort.
In response to an increase in e consumption increases causing prices to decrease. With a sticky
wage this initially increases the real wage and, under constant effort, decreases hours. But this is
transitory; hours expand after nominal wages can respond—see figure 4b. If the preference shock

27

is positively correlated with the technology shock then TFP leads hours. TFP goes up due to the
technology shock. The delayed response in hours reflects the preference shock. These effects are
relevant, but less important, for our sticky-wage model with an effort response. With responses in
effort, productivity leads hours even if the covariance between the two real shocks is zero, though
this effect is less striking.

28

Appendix C: Welfare costs of wage stickiness
Monetary disturbances are essentially neutral with respect to flexible-wage versions of the
model. Therefore, for monetary disturbances, the welfare cost of sticky wages can be measured
based on the economy's deviations from its steady state. Let U denote the lifetime utility
associated with consumption of goods, real balances, and leisure for the economy calculated at its
steady-state level. Similarly, let U, denote lifetime utility for the realizations of the economy under

sticky wages. Then U = U, — U =

is the utility cost incurred in t.

,8''E, [ii,j, where

Let D represent the welfare cost from sticky wages in consumption units, so that
log(x —

D) — log x = U.

We can express D in terms relative to steady-state consumption as

Ignoring money balances, which are unimportant, the period / utility cost can be written
= E[Ologc1 +(1—O)1og—[Ologc+(1—O)logl],

where c and / are steady state values. Its second-order Taylor approximation is

-i)_14E(c,
E[11-E(c,
-c)+--E(
2 c _c)2 2 2
C
/
Generally speaking, ELIc, I c under sticky wages. We approximate E[c, J as follows

(ignoring productivity shifts).
E[c, I

SE[y1 I = SE[L

+ (i)'" (L - L) + L(1 -

L

L

1(1 a)L K ..
—

—..

where L, =

()'

-ii-

K

K,

—a

KK

- a)('" ((

-

L
- L)I

N, and S, is the ratio of consumption to output in steady-state.

Finally, ü, can be expressed in terms of percentage deviations of variables from steadystate as

+ O(1 - a)E[(f)L].
E{z2] _OEf,]2 2(1 - O)E[I2 iOa(l a)E[()j2
1

29

References
Altonji, Joseph (1986) "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy, 94, s176-s215.
Baxter, Mariane and Robert King (1991) "Productive Externalities and Business Cycles,"
Discussion paper 53, Institute for Empirical Macroeconomics, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis.

Becker, Gary (1965) "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal 73,
493-508.
Becker, Gary (1985) "Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor," Journal
of Labor Economics, 3, S33-S58.
Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder (1988) "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission," American Economics Review 82, 901-921.

Bus, Mark and Jang-Ok Cho (1994) "Cyclical Factor Utilization," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 33 (2) 3 19-54.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (1944) Studies of the Effects of Long Working Hours, BLS
Bulletins 791 and 791A.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (1947) Hours of Work and Output, BLS Bulletin 917.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (1993) Labor Composition and US. Productivity Growth,
1948-90, BLS Bulletin 2426.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Bichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (1993) "Labor Hoarding and the
Business Cycle," Journal of Political Economy 101, 245-273.
Chari, V.V. Patrick Kehoe and Ellen McGrattan (1996) "Sticky Price Models of the
Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?"
NBER Working Paper No. 5809.
Cho, Jang-Ok, Thomas Cooley, and Louis Phaneuf (1997) "Welfare Costs of Nominal
Contracts," Review of Economic Studies 64, 465-484.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1996) "The Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds, Review of Economics
and Statistics 78, 16-34.

30

Ghez, G. R. and Gary Becker (1975) The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Lfe
Cycle, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, Columbia University
Press.

Goidmark, Josephine (1912) Fatigue and Efficiency. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Hall, Robert (1986) "The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations," in R.J.
Gordon (ed.) The American Business cycle: Continuity and change. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hartley, Peter (1992) "The Effect of Minimum Wage Laws on Labour Markets," in
Proceedings of the HR. Nicholls Society, Vol. 13, Melbourne, Australia.
Hill, Martha (1985) "Patterns of Time Use," in Time, Goods and Well-Being, edited by
F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.

King, Robert, Charles Plosser and Sergio Rebelo (1988) "Production, Growth and
Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 21, 195-232.
Laidler, David (1985) The Den2andfor Money: Theories and Evidence, 3rd Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.

Mankiw, Gregory (1997) Macroeconomics. New York: Worth Publishers.
MaCurdy (19811) "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting," Journal
of Political Economy, 89, 1059-1085.

Oi, Walter Y. (1990) "Employment Relations in Dual Labor Markets ('It's Nice Work if
You Can Get It')," Journal of Labor Economics, 8, S124-S149.
Parkin, Michael (1988), "A Method for Determining whether Parameters in Aggregative
Models are Structural," Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, 29,
2 15-252.

Passmore, Reginald, B.M. Nichol, and M. Narayana Rao (1974) Handbook on Human
Nutritional Requirements. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (1994) "Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?,"
Manuscript, Yale University.
Strongin, Steven (1992) "The identification of Monetary Policy Disturbances: Explaining
the Liquidity Puzzle, Journal of Monelaiy Economics 35, 463-498.

</ref_section>

Table 1 — Energy Expenditures (in kilo-calories per 8 hours) for Sleeping,

Non-work Activities, and Working, from Passmore, et. al.,
handbook on .f-fu,nan Nutritional Requirements (1974)

Sleeping

Non-working Activities

65 Kg Man

55 Kg Woman

500

420

700 — 1500

580 — 980

Working Activities
Light

1100

800

Moderately active

1400

1000

Very active

1900

1400

Exceptionally active

2400

800

Classifications of occupations by intensity:
Light
Men:

Office workers, professionals (lawyers, doctors, accountants, teachers, etc.),
shop workers.
Women: Office workers, housewives with mechanical household appliances, teachers
and most other professionals

Moderately active
Men:
Men in light industry, students, construction workers (excluding heavy
laborers), many farm workers, soldiers on inactive service, fisherman.
Women: Women in light industry, housewives without mechanical household
appliances, students, department-store workers.
Veiy active
Men:

Some agricultural workers, unskilled laborers, forestry workers, army recruits,
soldiers on active service, mine workers, steel workers, athletes.
Women: Some farm workers (especially in peasant agriculture), dancers, athletes.

Exceptionally active
Men:
Lumberjacks, blacksmiths, rickshaw pullers.
Women: Construction workers.

32

Table 3 — Results from Studying the Impact of Reduced Workweeks on Productivity of

Piece-Rate Workers, described in Goidmark, Fatigue and Efficiency (1912)
Case

Description

Salford Iron Works,
March 1, 1893, reduce weekly
Manchester England, 1893 hours from 53 to 48.

Engis Chemical Works,

near
Liege, Belgium, 1893

Results

Hours reduced by
almost 10 percent

Productivity for 3/1/93 to 2/28/94
compared to previous six years.

Productivity (per
hour) increased by
about 8.8 percent.

Beginning 1893 change from 2shift production to 3-shift
production, reduce daily hours
from 10 to 8.

Hours reduced by 20
percent.
Productivity increased
by 12.4 percent.

Productivity for 1893 compared to
1889-1892.

Zeiss Optical Works, Jena,
Germany, l9OO

April 1, 1900 daily hours reduced
from 9 to 8.

Hours reduced by
about 11 percent.

Productivity for 4/1/99 to 3/31/00
compared to 4/1/00 to 3/31/01.

Productivity increased
by 16 percent.
(Results are similar
across ages and
occupations.)

L.G. Fromont, the engineer who founded and managed the Engis works reported his
findings on the shortened workweek to the Belgian Chemical Society and the Association
ofEnginers of the Liege School in 1897.
Ernst Abbé, a physicist, university professor, inventor, and owner of the Zeiss Optical
Works, reported his results in two lectures before the Society for Political Economy of
Jenain 1901.

34

Table 2 — Response of Productivity to Hours Worked

Column 1

Column 2

Column 3

.047

.045

.042

(.011)

(.009)

(.008)

zlHours

—.123

—.264

—.250

Hours

(.065)

(.069)

(.059)

Intercept

iWar

.056

(.014)

iWar.War related

.080
(.0 15)

N

.04

.22

62

62

62

33

Table 4 — Parameter Values for the Benchmark Case

Parameters

Description

cx = 2/3

Labor share in output

= 0.98

Discount factor

= 0.1

Depreciation rate

g = 0.02

=I

Growth rate of technological progress
Labor supply elasticity

n = 0.5

= 3/2

Steady-state hours of work
Ratio of effort in the market and home

= 1/3

Ability to substitute hours and effort in the market

=

1/

Ability to substitute hours and effort at home

u=

.1

Interest rate elasticity of money demand

x = .9999

Relative share of consumption in utility

o = 0.6332

Steady-state value in preference

4

35

Table 5 — Volatility, persistence, and cyclicality: U.S. time series 19541996#

Variable (x)

cy,

o / GOULpUt

cor(xt, Xt1)

cor(x, output)

Output

2.29

1.00

.57

1.00

Consumption

1.32

.58

.67

.88

Investment

6.39

2.79

.41

.83

Hours

2.01

.88

.53

.91

Price

.97

.42

.81

-.57

Real wage

.94

.44

48

.49

Labor productivity

.97

.42

.46

.48

Solow residual

1.29

.57

.45

.82

Table 6 — Lead and Lag correlations with hours at 1.

Variable (x)

x(t-3)

x(t-2)

x(t-1)

x(t)

x(t+1)

x(t+2)

X(t+3)

Real wage

-.28

-.01

.38

43

-.09

-.36

-.28

Labor productivity

.14

.54

.65

.06

-.38

-.23

-.14

Solow residual

.16

.51

.76

.45

-.28

-.46

-.39

Output: real GDP. Consumption: expenditure on non-durables and seR'ices, Investment: fixed
investment. Hours: employed man-hours. Real wage: average hourly earning. Labor productivity: output
divided by hours. Quantities are divided by populalion of age over 20. All variables are annual and H-P
filtered with the weight parameter 100.

36

Table A5 — Volatility, persistence, and cyclicality: Sticky wages & effort response

Variable (x)

c

Y' I 5output

Output

2.03

1.00

.44

1.00

Consumption

1.40

.69

.48

.95

Investment

3.89

1.91

.40

.96

Hours

1.53

.75

.35

.60

Price

1.60

.78

.50

-.90

Laborproductivity

1.61

.79

.12

.66

TFP

1.61

.79

.20

.85

cor(xt, XL1)

cor(x, output)

Table A6 — Lead and lag correlations with hours at I: Sticky wages & effort response

Variable (x)

x(t-3)

x(t-2)

x(t-1)

x(t)

x(t+1)

Laborproductivity

-.01

.10

.33

-.16

-04

.00

.01

TFP

-.02

.15

48

.13

00

-.07

-.10

39

x(t+2)

x(t+3)

Table A3 — Volatility, persistence, and cyclicality: Sticky wages & constant effort

Variable (x)

a,,

o/

Output

2.10

1.00

.37

1.00

Consumption

1.22

.58

.50

.73

Investment

5.46

2.60

.10

.92

Hours

2.29

1.09

.05

.82

Price

1.40

.66

.54

-.69

Labor productivity

1.31

.62

.08

.14

TFP

1.21

.57

.39

.71

CO1(Xt, xti)

cor(x, output)

Table A4 — Lead and lag correlations with hours at 1: Sticky wages & constant effort

Variable (x)

x(t-3)

Laborproductivity
TFP

x(t-2)

x(t-1)

x(t)

x(t+1)

-.02

.11

.32

-.42

.10

.08

.07

-.06

.14

.45

.22

.04

-.06

-.09

38

x(t+2)

x(t+3)

Table Al — Volatility, persistence, and cyclicality: Flexible wages

/

Variable (x)

ci..

Output

1.89

1.00

.41

1.00

Consumption

1.27

.67

.47

.93

Investment

3.80

2.00

.37

.95

Hours

1.58

.83

.35

.79

Price

1.38

.72

.51

-.88

Laborproductivity
TFP

1.13

.59

.44

.54

1.20

.63

.39

.85

cor(xt, X11)

cor(x, output)

Table A2 — Lead and lag correlations with hours at 1: Flexible wages

Variable (x)

x(t-3)

x(t-2)

x(t-1)

x(t)

x(t+1)

x(t+2)

Labor productivity

-.09

-. 0

-.09

-.05

.12

.15

.11

TFP

-.10

-.03

.12

.40

.20

.05

-.04

37

x(t+3)

Figure 1 Labor market equilibrium: sticky wage with effort

w/P
S (high effort)
S

MPN (high effort)
MPN
0

N'N" N

N

40

Figure 2a Impulse response of VAR: inflation rate and TFP

Response of INFLATION to INFLATiON

Response of INFLATION to TFP

Response of TFP to INFLATION

Response of TFP to TFP

1._

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
1

2

3

4

10

1

41

2

3

.

+

8

9

10

Figure 2b Impulse response of VAR: growth rate of money measure and TFP

Response of MONEY to MONEY

Response of MONEY to 1FF
1.5

1.0

0.5

fin
-0.5

-1.0
1

2

Response of TFP to MONEY

4

5

5

7

8

9

10

9

10

Response of 1FF to TFP

15

IC

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

#.,tt"

0.0

3

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

42

2

3

4

5

6

7

6

Figure 3a Impulse response to 1% increase in productivity: flexible wage

flexible wage w/o effort: Y, I (--)

I

N, W/P (—)

2

10

J••:50I0
0.4

5

10

43

10

Figure 3b Impulse response to 1% increase in productivity: sticky wage

6

00

sticky wage wlo effort: Y,

N, W/P (—)

(—)

2

5

•0

10

C

5

10

PandW(—)

-'

44

10

Figure 3c Impulse response to % increase in productivity: sticky wage with effort

3

sticky wage with effort: Y, I (--)

N, WIP (—)
1

2
0.5

I
o

I

5

10

0

C

0.5

5

10

PandW(—)

0

0.8
-0.5

0.6

o

5

—1

10

0

effort in the market

10

effort at home

0

-0.2

0

5

0

5

10

0

45

5

10

Figure 4a Impulse response to 1% increase in preference shock: flexible wage

flexible wage wlo effort: Y, I (—)

N WIP (—)

I

2

0.5

00

5

10

0.5

.:

46

10

Figure 4b Impulse response to 1% increase in preference shock: sticky wage

2

N, W/P (--)

sticky wage wlo effort: Y, (--)
1

0
0

-2
-4
o

/
5

-1

10

0

C
0.5

0

5

10

PandW(—)

0.4

-0.5

0.3
0.2

0

5

-1

10

47

0

5

10

Figure 4c Impulse response to 1% increase in preference shock: sticky wage with effort

sticky wage with effort: Y, I (--)

N, W/P (—)

C

PandW(—)

.:

0.5

0

10

effort in the market

effort at home

°

10

48

10

Figure 5a Impulse response to 1% increase in money growth: sticky wage

10

sticky wage w/o effort: Y, t (--)

N, W/P (—)

5
0

-5

0

5

-5

0

10

C

5

10

P and W (—)

0.5

5

10

10

49

Figure 5b Impulse response to 1% increase in money growth: sticky wage with effort

1•

sticky wage with effort: Y, I (--)

N, W/P (—)

4

0.5

2

0

0
5

-2
0

10

5

10

PandW(—)

C

2

0.06
0.04

1

0.02

00

I

5

10

00

5

10

effort at home

effort in the market

2

0
1
—1

5

0o

10

50

5

10

