                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE CHOICE OF STRUCTURAL MODEL
                             IN TRADE-WAGES DECOMPOSITIONS

                                            Lisandro Abrego
                                             John Whalley

                                          Working Paper 7312
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7312


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




This paper forms part of a project on Globalisation and Social Exclusion supported by the Targeted Socio
Economic Research programme of the European Union. An earlier version was presented at a conference
at Nottingham, March 27-28, 1999. We are grateful to Bob Anderton, Paul Brenton, Jonathan Haskel,
Matthias Luecke, and Ken Wallis for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Choice of Structural Model in Trade-Wages Decompositions
Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 7312
August 1999
JEL No. F00, F1, J2
                                          ABSTRACT

        This paper explores the use of structural models as an alternative to reduced form methods when
decomposing observed joint trade and technology driven wage changes into components attributable to
each source. Conventional mobile factors Heckscher-Ohlin models typically reveal problems of
specialisation unless price changes accompanying trade shocks are small, and can also produce wide
ranges for the decomposition for parameterisations consistent with the joint change. A differentiated goods
model which generalises Heckscher-Ohlin removes problems of specialisation and concentrates the range
of decompositions more narrowly, but introduces larger demand side responses to trade shocks which
greatly reduce the effect of trade. The conclusion offered is that the choice of structural model matters for
decomposing observed wage changes into trade and technology components, and that reduced-form
methods which do not discriminate between alternative structural models may not be that informative for
such decompositions.



Lisandro Abrego                                          John Whalley
CSGR                                                     Department of Economics
University of Warwick                     University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK                                     Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
Lissandro.Abrego@warwick.ac.uk                           and NBER
                                                         J.Whalley@warwick.ac.uk
                                                          2

I        INTRODUCTION

         This paper addresses the ongoing debate on the principal sources of increased wage dispersion in

the form of an elevated premium paid to skilled labour in OECD countries in recent years. Many papers

have been written on the subject, and most focus on increased trade and skill biased technological change

as the two principal causes.1 Lawrence and Slaughter (1993), Krugman and Lawrence (1993), Leamer

(1996), Baldwin and Cain (1997) and others conclude that the role of trade is small; Wood (1994, 1995,

1998b) points to a dominant role for trade. Conclusions in this literature rest largely on reduced form

regressions. Some, such as Murphy and Welch (1991), and Borjas et al. (1991) estimate the factor

content of trade and use these estimates via exogenous (literature based) labour demand elasticities to infer

the wage change attributable to trade. They then compare this to observed wage changes. Others, such

as Leamer (1996), Baldwin and Cain (1997), Haskel and Slaughter (1999), and Harrigan and Balaban

(1999) use estimating equations derived from explicit general equilibrium models.

         Our purpose here is to explore the use of structural models as an alternative to reduced form

methods when decomposing observed joint trade and technology driven wage changes into the components

attributable to each source. We first use a Heckscher-Ohlin type trade model with two factor inputs (skilled

and non-skilled labour) and two outputs (skilled labour intensive, and non-skilled labour intensive outputs),

where the economy in question is a taker of goods prices on world markets.2 Skilled and unskilled labour


         1
          Immigration, reduced labour market imperfections, and foreign direct investment enter as possible
additional factors in some literature (Blau and Kahn, 1996; Borjas et al, 1997; Fortin and Thomas, 1997; Card, 1998;
Blonigen and Slaughter, 1999).

         2
        The structure differs from the 2 country, 2 good, 2 factor Heckscher-Ohlin model in which relative factor
abundance across countries determines the pattern of trade. Our model contains two goods, two factors and
homogeneous products, but there is only one (small price taking) country and our base case pattern of trade is
                                                            3

are mobile between sectors, but are internationally immobile. In this model, trade shocks are modelled as

world price changes, and technology shocks as factor specific shocks. We model these as changes in

production function parameters in our two sectors. We calibrate the model both to UK data for 1990, and

to the relative wage changes observed for the joint technology/trade shocks over the period 1980-1995.

We then explore the use of the model for decomposition experiments by first removing technology only,

and then subsequently removing trade, and computing equilibria for each case. These allow for an

assessment of the separate role of trade and technology in contributing to observed changes in wage

inequality over the period.

         Results using simple Heckscher-Ohlin as the structural model for decomposition suggest that with

conventional functional forms this model is unlikely to be suitable for analysis of actual country experiences.

First, the model can only be solved for relatively small shocks with the CES functional forms used in the

model (or indeed any convenient functional form), since the production frontier is close to linear and so

specialisation accompanies even small changes.3 Second, there are significant degrees of ambiguity

associated with the decompositions for the small changes that the model is able to be solved for. These

indicate that there is a range of parameterizations for the model which are consistent with the same reduced

form data, but these parameterizations yield divergent decompositions of the same joint change. Estimated

reduced forms do not allow for discrimination between these alternative parameterizations for use in

decomposition.


determined by the own country comparative advantage, not relative factor abundance.

         3
          Fixed-factor variants of the same model can be used to remove specialisation, but these have the property
that price shocks are largely borne by the fixed factors, rather than by the mobile skilled and unskilled labour types .
                                                     4

        We then consider an alternative differentiated goods model of which the Heckscher-Ohlin model

is a special case. In this, imported goods and non-exportable domestic products are imperfect substitutes

in demand, and as the substitution elasticity between domestic products and imports approaches infinity the

model reverts to the more classical Heckscher-Ohlin form. For finite substitution elasticities, this model

weakens, and typically removes the specialisation properties of simple Heckscher-Ohlin models, allowing

actual joint technology and wage changes to be decomposed into constituent parts. It also incorporates

endogenous domestic price determination in response to world price changes within imperfect pass through

of world price changes onto prices of domestically produced goods (in simple Heckscher-Ohlin models all

external shocks fully impact domestic goods prices). It also allows for direct model calibration to import

demand elasticity estimates, something that in simple Heckscher-Ohlin is considerably more difficult.

        Analysing decompositions of the same UK data with this model reveals strikingly different results

relative to simple Heckscher-Ohlin_specialisation problems recede, and the range of decomposition results

for given joint changes is substantially narrowed, in part because trade shocks can now be absorbed on the

import demand side of the model without full transmission to domestic producer prices. The increase in

inequality attributed to trade changes can change sign depending upon whether the demand side substitution

elasticity between domestic and foreign goods is greater or less than one. These demand side effects thus

play a key role in trade-wages decompositions.

        We interpret our results as showing how alternative structural models with different properties can

be built for decompositional analysis, each consistent with the same joint shock, but with sharply different

results. Using a simple Heckscher-Ohlin type model, close to what is found in some of the trade and wages

literature, only small changes can be analysed and these, in turn, offer a wide range of decompositions from
                                                    5

alternative data consistent parameterizations. With a product differentiation model, large changes can be

analysed and across alternative parameterizations decomposition results are relatively robust, but with

demand side effects entering the model the contribution of trade to inequality is much reduced. We suggest

that exploration of alternative structural models rather than reduced forms may be the way forward to more

satisfactorily sort out trade and technology effects on wage dispersion.
                                                          6

II        THE TRADE AND WAGE INEQUALITY DEBATE

          Recent literature on trade and wages focuses on understanding the quantitative significance of trade

in explaining the sharp increase in OECD wage inequality which has occurred during the 1980s. This issue

is important because of the associated pressures for protection which arise if trade is deemed to be the main

source of increased inequality. This increase in inequality has been documented for a number of OECD

countries, most notably the US and the United Kingdom (e.g., Davis, 1992; Kosters, 1994; OECD, 1997;

Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997). The pattern has been observed across different types of workers

according to their skills (low vs. high skill), education level (college vs. non-college graduates), and

experience. Even among “observably similar workers” wage inequality has increased (e.g. Davis, 1992).

There has also been some documentation of a rise in unemployment in European countries without major

increases in wage inequality (Kosters, 1994; OECD, 1997; Dewatripont et al., 1998)—as well as of a

decline in wage inequality in some key developing countries (Korea, Venezuela, Colombia and Brazil)

(Davis, 1992; UNCTAD, 1997; Wood, 1997). A large literature has evolved on the explanation of

increased wage inequality, especially for the US case.4

          Two major factors have been identified as responsible for this phenomenon: increased trade with

developing countries and technological change biassed against unskilled labour. The great majority of

research has concluded that unskilled-biassed technological change, rather than increased trade, is the main

source of the surge in wage inequality in the1980s.5



          4
           See, for instance, the surveys by Burtless (1994); and Brenton (1998). Also see Deardorff and Hakura
(1994).

          5
           Exceptions to this conclusion include Borjas et al. (1991); Wood (1994); and Feenstra and Hanson (1996).
                                                          7

         This literature uses a variety of econometric models.6 Early papers focussed on how trade changes

labour demand via the factor content of trade (e.g. Borjas et al., 1991; Murphy and Welch 1991, and Katz

and Murphy , 1992). They typically ran regressions which linked labour demand (by type of labour) and

trade flows, and then used actual trade flows to infer the changes in labour demand they imply. They then

combined these labour demand changes with wage elasticity of labour demand estimates culled from the

literature to infer what portion of actual wage changes are due to trade changes. This work generally came

to the conclusion that the portion of actual wage change attributable to trade is small.

         These estimates, based on factor content of trade calculations, were later criticised by Wood

(1994) who argued that trade is a considerably more important factor than these analyses show. He argued

that, for many products and especially those from developing countries, there is no comparable domestic

product, and so factor substitution effects attributed to trade using conventional elasticities are understated.

He also argued that technological response to trade will occur in expectation of future trade surges, and

so some of what is attributed to technology in factor content analyses should in reality be attributed to trade.

         Later papers in the area (e.g., Lawrence and Slaughter, 1993; Baldwin and Cain, 1997; Haskel

and Slaughter, 1999, and Leamer, 1996) take a different approach and work with estimating equations

derived from explicit general equilibrium models of a Heckscher-Ohlin type. Lawrence and Slaughter, for

instance, relate changes in relative skilled and unskilled wage rates to changes in prices of skilled and

unskilled labour intensive products. Highlighting key measurement issues, they suggest that for the US the


The latter identify outsourcing as a significant cause.

         6
           Francois and Nelson (1998) are seemingly the other authors who use an applied general equilibrium model
to look at the effects of trade and technology on wage inequality. They set out a modelling approach, rather than
analyze decompositions in detail.
                                                         8

changes in product prices appear to be opposite from those needed to generate increased wage inequality

(i.e. unskilled intensive product prices rise rather than fall). Their conclusion is that unskilled-biased

technical change is the main source of increased wage inequality and that trade is relatively unimportant.

        Finally, more recent work regresses measures of factor shares on measures of outsourcing

(Feenstra and Hanson, 1996; Anderton and Brenton, 1998; Autor et al., 1998) concluding that trade may

be more important than in earlier analyses. Anderton and Brenton (1998), in particular, find that trade is

more important when only trade with developing countries rather than with all countries is used as an

explanatory variable.

        Virtually all of these analyses use reduced-form data in their estimations, with little or no work

explicitly employing structural models7 even though structural models are needed to make a meaningful

decomposition of an observed relative wage change into a portion due to trade and a portion due to

(skill-biassed) technological change. Because the model parameters which are consistent with given

reduced-form data are not unique, different parameterizations can generate a different decomposition

between trade and technological change as sources of an observed combined change in inequality. Some

attention to structural models may be required.




        7
         An exception is Leamer (1996), where a structural form is estimated.
                                                     9



III     A HECKSCHER-OHLIN INEQUALITY DECOMPOSITION FOR THE UK

        We first explore decompositions of combined wage and technology shocks using some numerical

simulations from a simple and theory-consistent Heckscher-Ohlin general equilibrium model calibrated to

UK data. We describe this data in more detail in an appendix.          We use 1990 data on production,

consumption, factor use, and trade, aggregated into a two commodity unskilled labour intensive and skilled

labour intensive product and industry classification to calibrate the model. Data on trade shocks and wage

changes cover the period 1976-1990 and 1980-1995 respectively. Technology shocks are implied for the

model by the wage outcome over the period and the data on trade shocks.

        We use a two-good (importable/exportable), two factor (skilled/unskilled labour) Heckscher-Ohlin

CES model to incorporate both trade shocks and changes in skilled-biassed technological change. We

perform decompositional analysis by first generating a parameterization for the model which is consistent

with the combined trade and technology shock (as reflected in data on wage change). We then remove

individual components of the joint change from the model to assess the contribution of each to the observed

total change generated by the joint shock.

        There are, however, alternative parameter values which can be chosen for the functional forms used

in the model which imply that this structural model form can be parameterized in different ways, even though

each of which gives the same wage inequality change for a combined trade and technology shock. There

are in fact many such parameterizations, while each potentially gives different decompositional results and

we are able to show substantial ambiguity in the resulting decompositions using this model for different

parameterizations. In the simple Heckscher-Ohlin case, specialisation also occurs even for only small goods
                                                             10

price changes since the production frontier in such models is close to linear for convenient functional forms

(see Johnson (1966)).

        The ambiguity for the small size decompositions that we can perform with the model can be

reduced either by restricting key elasticity parameters—such as production substitution elasticities between

skilled and unskilled labour—to a narrow range of values, appealing to literature estimates (Hamermesh,

1993) or by moving to increasingly constrained calibration in which we require more than calibration to only

the combined wage change over the period. Experience with the model nonetheless suggests that the simple

Heckscher-Ohlin model is a poor performer in decompositional analysis.




Production

        For our simple Heckscher-Ohlin case, we consider a small open price taking economy that

produces two goods, M and E (importable and intensive in unskilled labour, and exportable and intensive

in skilled labour, respectively), both of which are traded at fixed world prices. The production of each good

requires the use of two factors: skilled labour, S, and unskilled labour, U. Each good is produced using a

constant returns to scale CES technology, with constant elasticity of substitution between S and U.


                [                               ]
                                                    1

        Y i = γ i βi U i i + ( 1 - βi ) S i i
                        -ρ                 -ρ   -
                                                    ρi   ,   i= M ,E                                     (1)

where Yi represents output, ãi denotes units of measurement, âi is a share parameter, and ñi determines the

                                                                     1
elasticity of substitution, çi, between Ui and Si, with ηi =             .
                                                                  1 + ρi




Labour Market
                                                                   11

        We take the endowment of unskilled and skilled labour to be fixed (there is no labour-leisure

choice), and to equal U and S respectively. Full employment of each type of labour is assumed. We also

assume competitive labour markets so that each type of labour is paid its marginal value product, i.e,

                                   1+ ρ i

        W U = βi Pi (Y i / U i )            / γ i ρi             ( i= M , E )                            (2)

                                             1+ ρ i

        W S = (1 − β i ) Pi (Y i / S i )              / γ i ρi       ( i= M ,E )                         (3)




where W U and W S denote unskilled and skilled wage rates respectively, and Pi is the (fixed) world price

of good i.




Trade

        Imports and domestically produced goods are homogeneous, as is also the case with exports (i.e.

trade is of Heckscher-Ohlin form). This homogeneity assumption implies that trade flows involving any good

are only one-way, i.e. one of the goods is exported and the other imported.

In equilibrium trade balance will hold, i.e.,

          ∑      Pi T i = 0                                                                              (4)
        i=M ,E



where the Ti denote the net trade of the country in the two goods, M and E. If good i is exported, domestic

production less consumption is positive; if good i is imported, this difference is negative.
                                                       12

Equilibrium and Market Clearing Conditions

        Given the small open economy assumption, equilibrium in this model is given by unskilled and skilled

wage rates, such that the two domestic labour markets clear, i.e.

        ∑ U =U ,
            i
                    i   i= M , E                                                                            (5)


        ∑S =S ,
            i
                i       i= M ,E                                                                             (6)


        Consumption of each good i is given by the difference between production and trade, i.e.

        Ci = Y i - T i , i = M , E                                                                          (7)

where C i denotes consumption of good i.

        Production of each good, in turn, is given by using equations (2), (3), (5) and (6) and solving for

Y i along with W U and W S as part of the equilibrium.




Decomposing the Effects of Trade and Technology on Wage Inequality

        We can use the Heckscher-Ohlin model presented above to investigate the decomposition of a total

wage rate effect from a joint trade-technology shock into a separate trade related and technology

components. To do this, we consider trade shocks to be represented by world price shocks which generate

more trade. We take such shocks to be given by falls in the relative price of unskilled intensive to skilled

intensive products. Our data for the UK indicate a relative price fall of 7.9% for unskilled-intensive

products over the period 1976-1990.8 Given the data on wage change over the sample period, we


        8
         This estimate is based on information from Neven and Wyplosz (1996), as set out in the appendix.
                                                    13

determine the technology shock by residual as that needed to yield the observed wage change as a model

solution in the presence of the combined trade and technology shock. We then treat technology shocks

as changes in the share parameters applying to skilled and unskilled labour in sector production functions.

We focus on technological change which is factor specific, assuming in our analysis that such changes occur

only for unskilled labour. As share parameters in each production function sum to one, an adverse shock

biased against unskilled labour, lowers the share parameter on unskilled labour relative to that for skilled

labour for the same sector.




Specialisation and Simple Heckscher-Ohlin

        This simple Heckscher-Ohlin type model immediately proves unsatisfactory for the task of

decomposing UK data on wage inequality into separate trade and technology components because of the

near linearity of the production frontier alluded to above, and the associated problems of specialisation.

This is a well known numerical property of production frontiers generated from conventional functional

forms and fixed economy wide endowments (see Johnson (1966)). If alternatively a production frontier

with sufficient curvature to prevent specialisation were directly specified, the problem would remain that

there is no known way to recover sector production functions consistent with such a frontier, and they

anyway would be inconsistent with the observed base case (1990) equilibrium data.

        We can, however, solve the model for smaller trade and technology changes than those observed,

and such solutions raise further problems since they also indicate ambiguity in decomposition for such

changes. To illustrate this, we have simulated the effects of a joint 1% fall in the world price of the

unskilled-intensive good relative to the skilled intensive good, and a 1% technological change adverse to
                                                          14

unskilled labour to provide some sense of model behaviour under such changes. We represent this latter

change by a 1% reduction in the share parameter on unskilled labour in the production of both goods, so

as to represent pervasive unskilled-biased technological change, which, as we indicate earlier, the bulk of

the literature finds to be responsible for the surge in wage inequality during the 1980s (e.g. Berman, Bound

and Griliches,1994; Baldwin and Cain, 1997).9




Results

         In Table 1 we report two alternative model parameterizations chosen such that, given the combined

trade and technology shocks, both generate the same change in relative wages (-5.68% in Table 2), but

with different decomposition results for the portion due to trade and to technological change. As we note

above, there are, in fact, many such parameterizations that can be determined, and Table 1 presents merely

two that we have been able to find using a GAMS (Generalized Algebraic Modelling System) code which

endogenously determines model parameterizations consistent with the combined change we specify.

         Table 1 presents these two model parameterisations. They differ substantially in share parameters

and production side elasticities which are chosen, in part, to illustrate the ranges of ambiguity involved in

decomposition experiments as much as representing firm literature estimates. In both parameterizations the

importable good utilises unskilled labour intensively—which we, for now, take as a stylised fact for the UK

and other OECD economies. We have only varied production parameters elasticities of substitution and

labour shares, leaving demand parameters unaltered since this is a small open economy model.


         9
           Haskel and Slaughter (1998) propose the sectoral variety , rather than the pervasive one, of skilled-biased
technical change as the relevant technology factor.
                                                     15

Table 2 presents decomposition results for each of the two model parameterizations. These are obtained

by first only allowing technology to change, and then only the world price change to occur, and computing

a new equilibrium in each case. The resulting wage change is compared to that observed under the joint

shock (shown in Table 2). Although the overall change in wage inequality is the same for both

parameterizations, the relative importance of trade and technology in each case is different. For

parameterization A, the technology shock is dominant, whereas for parameterization B the opposite occurs.

Were we to regress, say, factor price changes from the joint shock on goods price changes (the trade

shock) and some measure of the technology change, such a regression does not allow differentiation to be

made between competing parameterizations of the structural model, all of which are consistent with reduced

form data, but each of which gives a different decomposition.

        In passing we also comment on a further feature of Heckscher-Ohlin_that large wage changes

occur from only relatively small product price changes. This reflects the same feature alluded to earlier, that

with a production frontier close to linear, a small change in output prices from a trade shock (1% here)

moves the economy a substantial distance along the frontier with a large change in output composition and

hence a large relative wage change. In our UK simulations, the result of this is that changes in goods prices

that constitute only a small fraction of the actual change over the period we consider here, nonetheless

generate wage effects stronger than those observed. Thus, using Heckscher-Ohlin models to analyse

decomposition for economies in which significant output price and relative wage changes have

simultaneously occurred is a further problem for such models.
                                                  16

                                            Table 1
                         Two Parameterisations of a UK Trade Model
               Each Giving the Same Joint (Trade and Technology) Wage Changes


                                       Parmeterisation A            Parmeterisation B

                                     Good M            Good E     Good M     Good E
Share parameters

 Production

   Unskilled labour                     0.87               0.51       0.55          0.50

   Skilled labour                       0.13               0.49       0.45          0.50

 Consumption                           0.44              0.56       0.44       0.56

 Elasticities of substitution

 Production                           0.40               4.5          3.75          5.5

 Consumption                                      1.25                       1.25


                                         Table 2
        Decomposition Results on the Relative Importance of Trade and Technology
  for a Total Wage Change of -5.68% (implied by a 1% trade and a 1% technology shock)


                                                                      A                    B

 %Change in WU /WS for joint trade and technology change             -5.68                -5.68

 Fraction of change in WU /WS due to technology                      0.60                 0.37

 Fraction of change in WU /WS due to trade                           0.40                 0.63
                                                         17

IV  TRADE AND TECHNOLOGY DECOMPOSITIONS IN A DIFFERENTIATED
GOODS MODEL

        As we note above, the most commonly used structure in which to conduct analyses of the

contribution of trade and technology to wage inequality is a two-factor (high/low skilled labour), two-good

(high skilled intensive, low skilled intensive) Heckscher-Ohlin trade model. In this structure, the key

parameters affecting the decomposition of the total wage effect into component parts are production side

parameters_shares and elasticities. But the results in the preceding section suggest that this model may be

inappropriate for the conduct of such analyses. This is because such models typically have close to linear

production frontiers, and so for a small shock complete specialisation can occur, and also wide variations

in decompositions occur across parameterizations.

        In this section we examine an alternative structural model with differentiated goods, similar to the

one set out in de Melo and Robinson (1989), and recently discussed in Bhattarai et al. (1999). In this

model, imports and domestically produced goods are imperfect rather than perfect substitutes. Imports are

not produced domestically, and one of the domestically produced goods is not traded. The model remains

a two produced goods, two factor model with two traded goods, but embodies three goods in aggregate

when the consumption side is included.10 Imports and exports are traded at fixed world prices. The

domestic goodwhich is an imperfect substitute for importsand the exportable are the two produced

goods. Each uses skilled and unskilled labour. Imports and the (non-exportable) domestic good enter

consumption. This structure removes the problems with specialisation associated with the simple

Heckscher-Ohlin model when performing trade-technology decompositions since imports are not produced


        10
             In de Melo and Robinson’s model, three goods are also considered two of which are domestically
                                                       18

domestically. This differentiated goods model generalises the Heckscher-Ohlin model, since as the elasticity

of substitution in demands between domestically produced goods and imports approaches infinity, it

asymptotically approaches Heckscher-Ohlin.

        Model results using the same UK data as above show both that large change decompositions can

now be made and that demand side parameters are critical for the results of such decompositions. When

the substitution elasticity in preferences between domestic products and imports is one, terms of trade

shocks can be fully accommodated on the demand side by an offsetting quantity adjustment in the imported

goods not domestically produced. No impacts on wage rates of skilled and unskilled workers occurs since

all the adjustment is now in consumption of the non-produced traded good. The sign of the wage rate

impact also changes as this elasticity goes above or below one. These are radically different properties to

those found for simple Heckscher-Ohlin models, indicating how critical the choice of structural model is for

wage-technology decompositions.




Model

        Denoting imports by M, exports by E, and domestic goods by D, preferences are defined over M,

D and E, with D and E being the produced goods. Using the same two factor inputs U and S, high and

low skilled labour, production occurs for only two of the three goods, D and E. Effectively the same two-

by-two structure is preserved, but differentiated goods are imported and domestically produced. Unlike

in the Heckscher-Ohlin model above, preferences now enter the picture and a product price is

endogenously determined, even in the small country case.


produced, but only two of them (the imported and the domestic good) enter preferences.
                                                   19

        Thus, preferences are denoted by

        U ( M D , ED )                                                                             (8)

where ED denotes demands for the exportable good, MD is the composite of imports, M, and the domestic

import substitute, DD, i.e.

         M D = H ( M , DD )

and technology by

         DS = D ( U D , S D )                                                                      (9)

         E= E ( U E ,SE ) ,                                                                       (10)

where U D , S D , U E , and S E denote inputs of high and low skilled labour used in domestic good and

export production; DS is production of the imperfect substitute domestic good.

        The economy is a taker of prices for exports and imports, P E , PM , but now the price for the

domestic good P D is endogenously determined. The per unit cost functions for the production of E and

D, consistent with zero profits, are

         P D = g D ( W U ,W S )                                                                   (11)

                      U  S
         P E = g E ( W ,W )                                                                       (12)

where W U and W S are the wage rates of high and low skilled labour, g D and g E and are per unit costs

functions.

        Full employment conditions for factors yield

         f UD . D D + f UE . E = U                                                                (13)
                                                     20

          f SD . D D + f SE . E = S                                                                      (14)

where f UD , f UE , f SD , f SE are per unit cost minimising factor demands for U and S in the production of D

and E.

         The representative household in this economy maximise the utility function (8) subject to the budget

constraint

                                     U    S
         P D D D + PM M + P E E D = W U +W S                                                             (15)

         In equilibrium, the price of the domestically produced good P*D , will be determined such that

market clearing occurs in D, i.e.

         DD = DS                                                                                         (16)

         No market clearing is required in either E or M. Walras Law, which holds for demand functions

generated from utility maximisation subject to a budget constraint, also implies that trade balance will hold,

i.e., in equilibrium

         PM M = P E E                                                                                    (17)

         In this model, relative to the simple Heckscher-Ohlin model discussed earlier, one additional

endogenous variable, P D , enters the model. Additional parameters enter the model in terms of

preferences over DD and M. Thus, in the case where the elasticity of substitution in preferences between

DD and M is unity, changes in world prices of imports can be fully accommodated by changes in import

volumes. In this case, trade shocks have no impact on domestic production patterns, and hence no impact

on the relative wages of skilled and unskilled labour.          In such a case in trade and technology

decompositions, the role of trade in affecting the relative wages of the skilled and unskilled will be zero. In
                                                           21

addition, we note that empirical studies of import demand elasticities (Stern et al., 1976; Reinert, 1992,

and Shiells and Reinert, 1993) consistently produce estimates in the neighbourhood of one; and in a CES

function the own price demand elasticity approaches the negative of the substitution elasticity as the relevant

share parameter approaches zero.




Results

        With specialisation problems removed in the model, we are able to consider the full change in

relative wages and goods prices in a decomposition exercise for the UK economy. The number we use for

the change in the relative price of the unskilled-intensive good is –7.9% (based on Neven and Wyplosz ,

1996), and for the fall in wages of the unskilled relative to the skilled is –15% (Haskel, 1996).11 In the

absence of estimates of technological change fully consistent with the units of measurement used in the

production functions in our model, we determine the size of technological change residually, given the

observed relative wage and product price changes. As in the previous section, we assume that technological

change is biased against unskilled labour.

          Table 3 reports results for a decomposition experiment of this data conducted for this model with

a substitution elasticity in preferences of unity. In this case, independently of the parameterization used for

the model, the fraction of the change in WU / WS due to trade is zero because trade shocks are fully

accommodated on the demand side of the model. In Table 4 we report of decomposition results for

parameterizations where the elasticity of substitution in preferences departs from unity. We consider


        11
             Both estimates are for the UK, and are discussed in more detail in the appendix.
                                                       22

elasticity values above and below unity, and roughly consistent with literature estimates of import demand

elasticities. In all cases, the contribution of trade to wage inequality is small, but changes sign as the

elasticity of substitution in consumption moves below one, so that it is only when this elasticity is greater than

one that the trade shock causes WU / WS. The reason for the small impact of the trade shock is that, with

imports and their domestic counterparts (D) now being imperfect substitutes, this is accommodated basically

by changes in demand rather than productionexactly the opposite to the outcome under the simple

Heckscher-Ohlin model.

        The intuition for the change of sign of the trade shock effect is as follows. When the world price

of imports decreases, if the elasticitiy of subsitution in preferences is less than one, the resulting increase in

the volume of imports is not enough to offset the price fall, so that if trade is to remain balanced,

exportsand production of Emust go down. The latter implies that production of the import-competing

good, D, will then go up, and since D is intensive in U, WU / WS will increase. Similarly, with a consumption

elasticity above one, the trade shock causes production of D to decrease, and WU / WS falls.

        From this, we conclude that the choice of structural model makes a significant difference to the

conclusions of any trade-technology decomposition experiment analysing the sources of recent changes in

wage inequality for OECD countries. For the simple Heckscher-Ohlin case widely discussed in the

literature, only small shocks can be analysed because of specialisation problems, and along with these

restrictions wide ranges for decompositions are obtained for model parameterisations consistent with the

observed combined wage change. Using a differentiated goods model, large changes can be analysed since
                                                  23

specialisation is not a problem but much (or most) of the trade shock is absorbed on the demand side,

sharply raising the contribution of technology.
                                                   24


                                             Table 3
                 Trade-Technology Decomposition in Differentiated Goods Model
                   where the Substitution Elasticity in Preferences Equals One


1.      Parameterizations

                             Parameterization A                  Parameterization B

Share                    Good D                 Good E       Good D              Good E
Parameters

Production

Unskilled labour            0.62                 0.52         0.53                0.46

Skilled labour              0.38                 0.48         0.47                0.54

Consumption                 0.56                 0.27         0.56                0.27

Elasticities

Production                  1.25                 1.25         2.0                 2.0

Consumption                          1.0                                1.0



 2       Decomposition Results on the Relative Importance of Trade and Technology for a
         Total Wage Change
                                                                A                  B

 % change in W U / W S in UK data for joint technology and
 trade change                                                  15.0               15.0

 Fraction of change in W U / W S due to technology              1.0               1.0

 Fraction of change in W U / W S due to trade                   0.0               0.0
                                  25




                               Table 4

 Range of Technology-Trade Decompositions over Alternative Values
          for the Elasticity of Substitution in Preferences (ó)




Range for fraction of change
in WU / WS due to
technology                     1.01-1.00          1.00-0.98


Range for fraction of change
in WU / WS due to trade        -0.01-0.0          0.0-0.02
                                                     26

VI       SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

         This paper uses general equilibrium numerical simulation techniques to explore the significance of

the choice of structural model when assessing the contribution of trade and technological change to the

increased wage inequality documented for a number of OECD countries for the 1980s, (most notably the

US and the UK). Using a simple Heckscher-Ohlin model, we first show both how problems of

specialisation can occur for large trade shocks and different model parameterizations are consistent with

a given change in wage inequality from trade and technology shocks which yield different decompositions

of the combined change into trade and technology components. We also use a differentiated goods model

with imports and domestically produced goods as imperfect rather than perfect substitutes, since this

removes the problem of specialisation. This model, however, also introduces demand side considerations

through substitution in preferences between domestic goods and imports.

         Our results with the second model indicate an ability to examine large rather than only small trade

shocks in decomposition experiments, but also much reduced variation in results across parameterizations.

This is because now, depending upon the value of the elasticity of substitution in consumption, the demand

side of the model can absorb a large portion of any trade shock (indeed all of the trade shock when this

elasticity is one).

         From these results we suggest that it is important to explicitly explore the properties of particular

structural models in decompositions, rather than only appealing to them as theoretically consistent models

for reduced form analyses. The choice of structural model, perhaps not surprisingly, seems to matter for

such decompositions.
                                                   27



REFERENCES

Anderton, B. and P. Brenton (1998) “The Dollar, Trade, Technology and Wage Inequality in the USA,”
       Mimeo.

Autor, D., L. Katz and A. Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor
                  Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1169-1213.

Baldwin, R.E. and G.G. Cain (1997) “Shifts in US Relative Wages: The Role of Trade, Technology and
                             NBER Working Paper No. 5934.

Bhattarai, K., M. Ghosh and J. Whalley (1999) “On Some Properties of a Trade Closure Widely Used
       in Numerical Modelling. Economics Letters 62:13-21.

Brenton, P.A. (1998) “Rising Trade and Falling Wages: A Review of the Theory and the Empirics,” in
       Brenton, P.A., and Pelkmans, J. (ed.), Globalization and European Workers. London:
       MacMillan, forthcoming.

Berman, E., J. Bound and Z. Griliches (1994) “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labour within US
      Manufacturing: Evidence from Annual Survey of Manufactures,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      109: 367-98.

Blau, F. and L. Kahn (1996) “International Differences in Male Wage Inequality: Institutions versus Market
                  Journal of Political Economy 104: 791-836.

Blonigen, B. and M. Slaughter (1999) “Foreign-Affiliate Activity and U.S. Skill                    NBER
       Working Paper No. 7040.

Borjas, G., R. Freeman and L. Katz (1991) “On the Labour Market Effects of Immigration and Trade,”
        in Borjas, G. and R. Freeman (eds.), Immigration and the Work Force. Chicago: The University
        of Chicago Press.

Borjas, G., R. Freeman and L. Katz (1997) “How Much Do Immigration and Trade Affect Labour
       Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers of Economic Activity: 1-85.

Card, D. (1998) “Falling Union Membership and Rising Wage Inequality: What’s the Connection?”
       NBER Working Paper No. 6520.

Davis, S. (1992) “Cross-Country Patterns of Changes in Relative Wages,” NBER Macroeconomics
                                                  28

       Annual: 239-91.

Deardorff, A. and D.S. Hakura (1994) “Trade and Wages: What are the Questions,” in Bhagwati, J. and
       M. Kosters (eds.), Trade and Wages: Levelling Wages Down?. Washington: AEI Press.

De Melo, J. and S. Robinson (1989) “Product Differentiation and the Treatment of Foreign Trade in
      Computable General Equilibrium Models of Small Economies.” Journal of International
      Economics 27: 47-67.

Dewatripont, M., A. Sapir and K. Sekkat (1998) “ Labour Market Effects of Trade with LDCs in
  Europe." In Dewatripont, M., A. Sapir and K. Sekkat (eds.) Trade and Jobs in Europe: Much
  Ado about Nothing. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Feenstra, R. and Hanson, C. (1996) “Globalization, Outsourcing and Wage Inequality,” American
        Economic Review, May, 240-45.

Francois, F. and D. Nelson (1998) “Trade, Technology and Wages: General Equilibrium Mechanics,”
       Economic Journal 108: 1483-1499.

Fortin, M. and L. Thomas (1997) “Institutional Changes and and Rising Wage Inequality,” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 11: 75-96.

Gottschalk, P. and T. Smeeding (1997) “Cross National Comparisons of Earnings and Income
  Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 633-87.

Hamermesh, D.S. (1993) Labour Demand. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Harrigan, J. and R. Balaban (1999) “US Wages in General Equilibrium: The Effects of Prices, Technology,
       and Factor Supplies, 1963-1991,” NBER Working Paper No. 6981.

Haskel, J. (1996) “Declining Wages for Unskilled Workers.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1490.

Haskel, J. and M. Slaughter (1998) “Does the Sector Bias of Skilled-Biased Technical Change Explains
                                    NBER Working Paper No. 6565.

Haskel, J. and M. Slaughter (1999) “Trade, Technology and U.K. Wage Inequality,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 6978.

Johnson, H.G. (1966) “Factor Market Distortions and the Shape of the Transformation Frontier.”
       Econometrica 34: 686-98.
                                                   29

Katz, L. and K. Murphy (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 35-78.

Kosters, M. (1994) “An Overview of Changing Wage Patterns in the Labour Market,” in Bhagwati, J. and
        M. Kosters, op. cit.

Krugman, P. and R. Lawrence (1993) “Trade, Jobs and Wages,” NBER Working Paper No. 4478.

Lawrence, R. and M. Slaughter (1993) “International Trade and American Wages: Giant Sucking Sound
                        Brookings Papers of Economic Activity 161:226.

Leamer, E. (1996) “In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Effects on U.S. Wages,” NBER Working Paper
      5427.

Murphy, K. and F. Welch (1991), “The Role of International Trade in Wage Differentials,” in Koster, M.
      (ed.), Workers and Their Wages: Changing Patterns in the United States: Washington: AEI
      Press.

Neven, D. and C. Wyplosz (1996) “Relative Prices, Trade and Restructuring in European Industry.”
       CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1451.

OECD (1997) “Trade, Earning and Employment: Assessing the Impact of Trade with Emerging
 Economies on OECD Labour Markets,” Employment Outlook, OECD.

Reinert, K. (1992) “Armington Elasticities for United States Manufacturing Sectors.” Journal of Policy
        Modelling 14: 631-39.

Shiells, C. and K. Reinert (1993) “Armington Models and Terms of Trade Effects: Some Econometric
                                      Canadian Journal of Economics 26: 299-316.

Stern, R. M. et al. (1976) “Price Elasticities in International Trade: An Annotated Bibliography.” London:
        Macmillan.

UNCTAD (1997) Trade and Development Report. Geneva: UNCTAD.

Wood, A. (1994) North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Wood, A. (1995) “How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9: 57-80.

Wood, A. (1997) “Opennes and Wage Inequality in Developing Countries: the Latin American Chalange
      to East Asian Convenitonal Wisdom,” World Bank Economic Review 11: 33-57.
                                               30


Wood, A. (1998b) “Globalisation and the Rise in Labour Market Inequalities,” Economic Journal 108:
        1463-82.
</ref_section>
                                                     31

                                                APPENDIX

                           UK DATA USED IN MODEL BASED TRADE
                            AND TECHNOLOGY DECOMPOSITIONS


          This appendix describes the UK data used for the parameterisation of both the Heckscher-Ohlin

and differentiated goods model. We have calibrated both model to a 1990 data set on UK production,

trade, and factor use as well as data on relative wage and product price changes over the 1980s in the case

of the differentiated goods model. Production and trade data come from the UK input-output matrix for

1990. The data on trade are adjusted for model consistency. Wage and employment data by sector and

skill category have been obtained from Labour Market Trends and the New Earnings Survey for 1990.

All these data are aggregated into the two-good, skilled and unskilled intensive classification.

          The data on relative price changes for goods are taken from Neven and Wyplosz (1996). They

disaggregate import price changes for manufacturing both by sector (which they also disaggregate according

to different factor skill intensities) and origin of imports (between developed and developing countries),

and cover the period 1976-90. This source, together with information on the composition of UK imports

by origin for 1990, gives a decline in the relative import price of the unskilled-labour intensive good of

7.9%. The data on the decline of relative earnings by UK unskilled workers (15% over the period 1980-

95) that we use for the decomposition exercise in our differentiated goods model comes from Haskel

(1996).

          The definition of ‘unskilled’ and ‘skilled’ workers we utilise corresponds to manual and non-manual

workers as defined in UK official statistics. The production sectors included in our unskilled-intensive sector

are: agriculture, textile and textile products, leather and leather products, wood and wood products, rubber
                                                    32

and plastic, and basic metal and metal products. Our skilled-intensive sector is then made up of the

remaining sectors. If we exclude agriculture, our unskilled-intensive sector roughly corresponds to the

activities considered as unskilled-intensive in Neven and Wyplosz (1996). These sectors were all net

importers in 1990. This aggregation produces a ratio of unskilled to skilled labour 1.86 for the unskilled-

intensive sector, and 0.91 for the skilled-intensive sector in our 1990 base year. The domestic and export

good sectors in our differentiated goods model correspond to the unskilled-intensive and skilled-intensive

sectors, as defined above.
