                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PRE-RETIREMENT CASHOUTS AND
                               FOREGONE RETIREMENT SAVING:
                                  IMPLICATIONS FOR 401(K)
                                   ASSET ACCUMULATION

                                            James M. Poterba
                                             Steven F. Venti
                                              David A. Wise

                                           Working Paper 7314
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7314


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




We are grateful to Michael Noel for excellent research assistance, to Stan Panis for providing us with
tabulations from the Health and Retirement Survey, to Unicon Inc. for providing us a copy of the CPS
Utilities, to David Laibson, Andrew Samwick, and especially John Shoven for helpful discussions, and to the
National Institute on Aging and National Science Foundation (Poterba) for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pre-Retirement Cashouts and Foregone Retirement Saving:
Implications for 401(k) Asset Accumulation
James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 7314
August 1999
JEL No. J26
                                           ABSTRACT

          This paper presents new evidence on the potential importance of 401(k) assets in contributing to
the retirement resources of future retirees. We use data on past 401(k) participation rates by age and
income decile, along with information on average 401(k) contribution rates, to project the future 401(k)
contribution trajectories of households that are currently headed by individuals between the ages of 29 and
39. We allow for the possibility of pre-retirement withdrawal of 401(k) assets when individuals experience
employment transitions. By combining data from the Health and Retirement Survey on the likelihood of
"cashing out" a 401(k) account conditional on a job change, with data from other sources on the probability
of job change, it is possible to estimate the prospective pre-retirement "leakage" from 401(k) accounts.
Our central findings are that for households reaching retirement age between 2025 and 2035, 401(k)
balances are likely to be a much more important factor in financial preparation for retirement than they are
today. We estimate that average 401(k) balances in 2025 will be between five and ten times as large as
they are today, and would represent one-half to twice Social Security wealth (depending on investment
allocation and based on current Social Security provisions). For persons retiring in 2035 we estimate that
401(k) balances will be three-quarters to two and one-half times Social Security wealth. Moreover, we
find that pre-retirement withdrawals have a small effect on the balance in 401(k) accounts. We estimate
that these withdrawals typically reduce average 401(k) assets at age 65 by about five percent. This is
largely because most households who are eligible for a lump sum distributionwhen they change jobs choose
to keep their accumulated 401(k) assets in the retirement saving system. These households either leave
their assets in their previous employer's 401(k) plan, or they roll the assets over to another retirement saving
account, such as a new 401(k) or an Individual Retirement Account. Most of those who do withdraw
assets have very small accumulated balances. By comparison, the expense ratio charged by the financial
institutions administering 401(k) accounts has a larger effect on retirement resources than the possibility of
pre-retirement withdrawal.

James M. Poterba                                     Steven F. Venti
Department of Economics, E52-350                     Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 6106 Rockefeller Center
50 Memorial Drive                                    Dartmouth College
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307                             Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                             and NBER
poterba@mit.edu                                      steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu
David A. Wise
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
dwise@nber.org
      The way households support themselves in retirement is changing rapidly.

Historically, households in the United States have relied on a combination of Social

Security, employer-provided defined benefit pensions, and personal saving to support

their retirement years. In the last fifteen years, however, retirement saving programs

such as 401(k) plans have become an increasingly common component of household

retirement planning. Today, more than 35 million workers participate in 401(k) saving

plans, and the annual contribution flow to these plans exceeds $100 billion. The tax-

deferred nature of wealth accumulation in 401(k)-type plans, coupled with often

generous employer matching contributions that enhance the value of employee

contributions, make these plans a powerful vehicle for accumulating retirement wealth.

Mass market books, such as lwaszko and O'Connell (1999) and Merritt (1997), have

extolled the wealth-building power of 401(k) accounts.

       In Poterba, Venti, and Wise (hereafter PVW) [1998a], we showed that even with

conservative assumptions about the future growth of 40 1(k) contributions, the average

40 1(k) balance for households reaching retirement in 2025 will be approximately equal

to the average actuarial present value of Social Security benefits. This represents

 roughly a ten-fold increase in the importance of 401(k) accumulations between the late

 1990s and 2025.

        Although 401(k) plan accumulations are likely to account for a very substantial

 share of the net worth of future retirees, unlike Social Security benefits, they can be

 affected by a number of individual decisions. Individuals who work at firms that offer

 401(k) plans must decide whether or not to participate in their employer's plan. Those

 who do not participate forego the opportunity to accumulate retirement wealth in this

                                           Page 2
tax-deferred form. Conditional on participating, individuals must decide how much of

their earnings to contribute to the plan.

       When 401(k) participants leave jobs at which they have participated in a 401(k)

plan, they can withdraw their accumulated 401(k) assets from the retirement saving

system. When such withdrawals occur before the recipient is 59 1/2, they are taxed as

ordinary income, as all 401(k) payouts are, and they are also subject to a 10 percent

"early withdrawal" penalty tax. Participants who leave their jobs can also choose to

leave their 401(k) accumulation in their former employer's plan, or to roll-over their

assets either into an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) or into the 40 1(k) plan of a

new employer. The flexibility afforded by these three options enhances the portability

of 401(k) benefits. It reduces the risk, not uncommon in defined benefit pension plans,

of forfeiting pension benefits as a result of job change. However, the flexibility

associated with the 401(k) withdrawal option raises the possibility that 401(k)

participants may draw down their account balances before retirement, and thereby

reach retirement without assets in a 401(k) account.

       A number of recent studies have noted that conditional on choosing to withdraw

assets from the 401(k) system, i.e. conditional on receiving a "lump sum distribution,"

many individuals use their withdrawal in a way that does not preserve retirement saving.

In PVW [1998b], we showed, however, that older workers, and those who receive larger

lump sum distributions, are much more likely to preserve the retirement benefits of their

lump sum distributions through IRA rollovers or other forms of saving. These findings,

based on data from the current Population Survey, are confirmed in Sabeihaus and

Weiner's (1999) analysis of tax return information.

        Until recently, there was no information on the probability that a worker leaving a

                                            Page 3
job would decide to withdraw assets from the employer's 401(k) plan and therefore

receive a lump-sum distribution. Analyzing the behavior of those who received lump

sum distributions therefore provided only a partial account of benefit leakage from

401(k) plans. In an important recent study, however, Hurd, Lillard, and Panis [19981

analyze data on the disposition of defined contribution pension assets when workers

change jobs. They analyze information from the Health and Retirement Survey and

find that very few participants in these pension plans select the withdrawal option when

they leave their jobs.

         In this paper we draw together previous research on withdrawals from retirement

saving plans to gauge the importance of such withdrawals on the saving balances of

future retirees. We expand the algorithm for projecting future 401(k) balances that we

developed in PVW (1998a) to allow for job changes during an individual's working life,

and the associated risk of 401(k) asset withdrawal. While we abstract from many

detailed features of the asset withdrawal process, we allow for age-specific job

termination risks, and for balance-specific probabilities of withdrawing assets from a

40 1(k) account. We also allow for realistic expenses of managing the assets in 40 1(k)

plans.

         We find that even though a substantial number of workers change jobs, and

could withdraw their 401(k) assets, the modest withdrawal rate and the small size of

most withdrawals reduce retirement saving only modestly. Our central estimates

suggest that the opportunity to take 401(k) withdrawals reduces retirement saving at

retirement by approximately five percent. Even after allowing for pre-retirement

withdrawals, we find that 40 1(k) saving will expand rapidly over the next three decades,

and that 401(k) assets at retirement are likely to grow, on average, to be roughly as

                                          Page 4
important as current Social Security wealth in contributing to households' retirement

financing.
       This paper is divided into six sections. The first summarizes the recent studies

that have explored the importance of lump sum distributions from 401(k) plans and

other retirement saving plans. The second section describes our algorithm for

projecting the 401(k) balances of future cohorts of retirees, and particularly our attempts

to allow for pre-retirement asset withdrawals. We calibrate our model using data from

the 1993 Survey of Income and Program Participation and the Health and Retirement

Survey. Section three presents evidence on how actual 401(k) balances for households

in the Health and Retirement Survey compare with the balances that our algorithm

would have predicted for these households, had we not known their actual plan

balance. The fourth section reports our projected future account balances and

examines the importance of pie-retirement withdrawals in affecting these balances.

Section five reports preliminary statistics on 401(k) participation from the 1995 Survey

of Income and Program Participation, and uses these data to provide some indication of

the plausibility of our projected rates of 401(k) expansion. Finally, a brief concluding

section suggests several directions for further work.



1.     What Do We Know About Lump Sum Distributions and 401(k) "Leakage"?

       The growth of retirement saving accounts, in particular 401(k) accounts, during

the last two decades has substantially expanded the financial assets of many U.S.

households. The expansion of personal retirement saving has raised new questions

about the impact of individual financial decisions on preparation for retirement. Poterba

and Wise (1999) note that there are several dimensions, including plan participation,

                                          Page 5
contribution level, asset allocation, date of asset withdrawal, and whether or not to

annuitize account payouts, along which individuals can influence their 401(k) retirement

accumulation.

      One of the most important decisions individuals face is whether to draw down

assets in retirement saving accounts before retirement. A number of summary

statistics on the prevalence of lump sum distributions have raised concern about the

possibility that households are not preserving their retirement saving. The most recent

data on the extent and use of such distributions are from the U.S. Department of Labor

[1995]. The data are based on the September 1994 "Retiree Pension and Health

Benefits Supplement" to the Current Population Survey. This survey shows that 9.1

million individuals (all over the age of 40) reported that they had received at least one

lump sum distribution from a pension plan or retirement saving account. This is nearly

ten percent of the over-40 population, and it is an even greater share of the labor force

in this age range.

       The mean lump sum distribution, measured in 1994 dollars, was $22,309. More

than half of these distributions (52.8 percent) were received by workers who were

between the ages of 30 and 49 at the time of the distribution. The CPS questionnaire

included information on lump sum distributions from a range of different retirement

plans. Payouts from defined benefit plans in which the separating employee had

accumulated only a small vested pension benefit, from traditional defined contribution

pension plans, as well as from 401(k)-like retirement saving programs were included in

the CPS survey. Of the 9.1 million lump sum distributions reported in the survey, 2.7

million were identified as from defined benefit plans, 5.3 million were from defined

contribution plans, and 1.1 million distributions were received by individuals who could

                                          Page 6
not identify the type of plan that they were from.

       Probably the greatest concern with the substantial number of lump sum

distributions is that many of their recipients report that they did not use their

distributions to provide income in retirement. Table 1 shows the uses lump sum

distributions reported in the 1994 Current Population Survey supplement. More than

one quarter of those who reported a single primary use of their lump sum distribution

(1 .82 million of the 6.86 million respondents with a primary use) indicated that their

distribution was used to finance a consumer durable purchase or to pay other

expenses. Only 33.9 percent reported that they rolled-over their lump sum distribution

into an IRA or a retirement plan with a new employer. A substantial additional group,

comprising 39.5 percent of the primary-use respondents, indicated that their distribution

was used for something that could be construed as saving, but was not targeted for

retirement income support. Responses in this category include depositing the lump

sum distribution in a saving account, paying off debts, or using the proceeds for home

renovations.

       Previous work, including Chang (1996) and PVW (1998b), has shown that the

use to which a lump sum distribution is put is a function of household age and the size

of the distribution. Thus an asset-weighted version of Table 1 would show a different

allocation of lump sum distributions than the person-weighted tabulation that is actually

reported in the table. Older workers, and those with larger distributed balances, are

more likely to choose a rollover option or to report that they saved their distribution.

The fraction of lump sum distribution dollars that are withdrawn from the 401(k) system

is much smaller than the fraction of individuals who receive lump sum distributions who

report that they withdrew funds from their retirement saving. There is also some

                                            Page 7
evidence, reported for example in Bassett, Fleming, and Rodriguez (1998), and Chang

(1996) that the share of lump sum distributions that are rolled over into saving vehicles

or new retirement saving accounts has increased over time.

       The critical difficulty with using data on lump sum distributions to study asset

leakage from the 401(k) system is that individuals who leave jobs with 401(k) plans can

choose whether or not to receive a lump sum distribution. The sample of lump sum

distribution recipients provides no insight on the probability that an individual

experiencing a job separation will decide to withdraw funds from the 401(k) system.

The individual could also choose to allow the 401(k) balance to remain with the

previous employer, or to roll the 401(k) balance into a 401(k) plan at a new employer.

Neither of these options would trigger a lump sum distribution. If most individuals

experiencing a job separation choose one of these options, then the probability of

401(k) leakage might be quite small even if most of those taking lump sum distributions

do not roll over their 401(k) assets.

       Hurd, Lillard, and Panis (1998) use data on individuals in the Health and

Retirement Survey (HRS) who experience a job change between either the first and

second survey waves, or between the second and third waves, to estimate the

probability of asset withdrawal. Their findings show that only 20.5 percent of the

workers leaving defined contribution pension plans (including 401(k) plans), and 16.4

percent of those leaving jobs with defined benefit plans, choose to cash out their

accumulations in the form of lump sum distributions. Moreover, the cash-out probability

is lower for those with large balances. Only 6.7 percent of the assets held in defined

contribution plans by those who experience job termination are withdrawn from the

retirement saving system. These statistics suggest that the possibility of withdrawing

                                           Page 8
assets from a 401(k) plan is not likely to have a large impact on the prospective growth

of assets in these plans.

      Engelhardt (1999) performs a related calculation using data from the HRS.

Using data on individual reports of past lump sum distributions, he "accumulates" the

value of these withdrawals under the counter-factual assumption that they had been left

in retirement saving accounts. He finds that for the median household that received a

lump sum distribution, the current value of this distribution is between 8 and 11 percent

of the value of Social Security wealth and other pension wealth. The range depends on

assumptions about the way 401(k) participants invest their assets.

      These findings suggest that lump sum distributions from 401(k)-type plans have

probably not had a large effect on the accumulated balances in these retirement saving

accounts. However, it is still possible that such distributions will have a larger effect on

future accumulations in these accounts, since 401(k) plans will be available to more

young workers in the future than in the past. Young workers have much higher job

turnover rates than older workers. The calculations we present below are designed to

provide new insight on the prospective importance of such pre-retirement payouts.



2.     An Algorithm for Projecting Future 401(k) Balances

       This section describes our approach to forecasting the 401(k) balances at

retirement for currently working cohorts. We build on our prior work, reported in PVW

(1998a), but expand our previous algorithm to incorporate job change, lump sum

distributions, and potential asset leakage from the 401(k) system into our analysis. We

also introduce administrative costs of asset management into our forecasting algorithm.



                                           Page 9
       Our procedure for projecting the 401(k) assets of future retirees relies on a

cohort representation of data on 401(k) participation and contribution behavior. The

notation C(j) refers to the cohort of age j in 1984. C(27), for example, refers to the

cohort aged 27 in 1984. Figure 1, which is reproduced from our earlier paper, shows

401(k) eligibility rates for six cohorts that are based on SIPP data for 1984, 1987, 1991,

and 1993. Our analysis focuses on the C(25) and C(15) cohorts, which were 33 and

23, respectively, in 1993. For the C(25) cohort, age 55 occurs in 2015, and age 65 in

2025. The C(15) cohort reaches each of these ages ten years later.

       To ensure adequate sample sizes, each of the "cohort" points plotted in Figure 1

is based on a group of families with household heads born in a five-year interval. The

C(25) cohort therefore includes families with heads aged 23-27 in 1984. The C(25)

cohort is identified by the oval symbols. The eligibility rate of this cohort was roughly

15% in 1 984, but it had risen to almost 45% by 1993 when the cohort was 33 years old.

A similar increase in eligibility is evident for each of the other five cohorts. It is also

clear that there is a very large "cohort effect". At any age each successively younger

cohort has a higher contribution rate than the cohort five years older. This difference is

approximately 20 percentage points. For example, 44% of the C(27) cohort was

401(k)-eligible when this cohort was 35 years old, compared with about 20% of the five-

year-older C(32) cohort when it was 35.

       The information in Figure 1 illustrates the cross-section relationship between age

and eligibility at each survey date. The seven markers along the top of the figure

represent the 1993 cross-section relationship, between age and eligibility. It shows

rising eligibility at young ages, followed by a plateau. Comparable data for earlier years

show a less pronounced effect of age on eligibility.

                                            Page 10
      2.1 Projecting Future 401(k) Participation Rates

       Extrapolation of cohort trends would quickly lead to the implausible projection of

eligibility rates of over 100%. On the other hand, it is equally clear that when the C(27)

cohort reaches age 40 its eligibility rate will be greater than the rate of the C(32) cohort

at age 40. Thus instead of extrapolating the cohort data, we parameterize the

relationship between age and eligibility, assuming that the apparent cohort effects in the

figure are year effects and simply represent the spread of 401(k)s with time. With

reference to Figure 1, this means that we estimate eligibility by allowing the cross-

section relationship to shift upward over time. When we allow for both cohort and year

effects in regression equations in which 401(k) participation rates are the dependent

variables, the cohort effects are typically not statistically significantly different from zero

and the time effects exhibit most of the explanatory power.

       The difficulty with extrapolating past experience to project future 401(k) balances

can be illustrated by reference to the C(27) cohort. If 401(k) plans continue to spread,

then the 1993 cross-sectional relationship between eligibility and age will clearly

understate the future eligibility of the C(27) cohort. In part this is simply because

401(k)s will undoubtedly continue to expand. But, in addition, the 1993 relationship is

determined in part by how the past diffusion of 401(k) plans occurred. If the diffusion of

plans has been slower in small firms with younger workers than in large firms, then the

cross-section relationship would tend to look as it does in the figure. In the 1993 cross-

section there is a noticeable reduction in eligibility with age. This is much less apparent

in the 1984 cross-section. Thus we can only use formal estimates as a guide to future

patterns.

       We assume that by 2013, which is twenty years after the 1993 survey on which

                                            Page   ii
our data are based, the eligibility rate for 55-year-olds (the C(27) cohort) will be 50

percent higher than the eligibility rate of the cohort that was 55 in 1993. This

assumption is based on the past growth in eligibility and participation rates reported on

IRS Form 5500 and in Current Population Survey (CPS) data. Form 5500 reports1

show that the number of 401(k) participants increased by 52 percent over the five-year

period between 1988 and 1993. Employment grew by 4% over this period. Data from

the CPS show a 45% increase in the participation rate in 401(k) plans, which is roughly

consistent with the Form 5500 data. The Form 5500 data also show that aggregate

401(k) contributions increased by 76 percent, or by much more than the increase in

participation. Aggregate earnings increased about 25% over this period, so if the

average fraction of earnings contributed were stable, the growth in earnings and

participation would predict a 77 percent increase in aggregate contributions. This is

very similar to the observed change.

2.2    Cross-sectional Age-Participation Profiles and Participation Projections

       Our projections are based on recent 401(k) participation data along with

assumptions on the future evolution of both eligibility and participation. We recognize

throughout our analysis that there is an important relationship between earnings,

eligibility, and participation, and we allow for this by estimating cross-sectional probit

equations relating eligibility or participation to age and indicator variables for earnings

deciles. We model participation for household i as:

                                10

(1)
                               d= I


where A is age and the Dd are indicator variables which identify the household's

earnings decile. The most important parameters are the Yd ,which indicate the effect of

                                           Page 12
earnings decile Dd on participation. These coefficients are the basis for our stratification

of 401(k) accumulation patterns by household earnings. In PVW [1 998a}, we report

estimation results from models like (1) for eligibility, participation given eligibility, and

participation, using 1988 and 1993 SIPP data. We do not reproduce those results here.

       We use our projection algorithm to explore future 401(k) balances for

households headed by individuals in the C(25) cohort, the C(15) cohort, and for a

cohort that is exposed to a mandatory 401(k)-type program with universal contributions.

The last case resembles some of the proposals that have recently been discussed in

the U.S. Social Security reform debate.

       To project future 401(k) asset accumulation for the C(25) cohort, we assume that

when this cohort is 55 years old (in 2015) it will have a 401(k) participation rate 50

percent higher than that of the cohort that was 55 in 1993. We further assume that its

participation rate at 65 will be five percent higher than this, that is, 55 percent higher

than that of the cohort that was 55 in 1993. The projections by earnings decile start

from the 1993 401(k) participation rates. Because higher income households have

higher participation rates, the projections yield a widening difference between the

participation rates of high- and low-income families as they age. Tthe extent of this

dispersion is likely to be one of the most uncertain features of our projections.

        Figure 2, also drawn from PVW (1998a), illustrates the C(25) projection, as well

as the C(15) projection. To further place the projections in the context of the historical

data, a projection for the C(27) cohort is also shown in the figure.

        The members of the C(15) cohort were 15 years old in 1984. Even though this

cohort is only ten years younger than the C(25) cohort, we find it substantially more

difficult to make plausible assumptions about their future 401(k) participation rates. We

                                             Page 13
think of the C(15) projections as representing 401(k) accumulation in a setting in which

participation is substantially higher than with the C(25) projections, but considerably

short of universal coverage. We believe that future 40 1(k) participation will indeed be

higher than the C(25) projections suggest. Our C(1 5) projections assume that 401(k)

participation rates for the median wage earner are 20 percentage points greater than

the C(25) rates. Rates for the highest and lowest decile workers in the C(1 5) cohort are

assumed to be slightly less than twenty percent greater than those of comparable

workers in the C(25) cohort.2 This twenty percentage point increase in 401(k)

participation for cohorts ten years apart is modest compared with what we have

observed in recent years. In Figure 1, for example, we find that 401(k) eligibility has

risen by twenty percentage points for cohorts only five years apart. Our projections

therefore assume future 401(k) eligibility growth at roughly half the recent rate.

       Finally, we consider a third scenario for future 40 1(k) growth, in which everyone

contributes a fixed share of their salary to a 401(k) plan. Universal coverage might

arise if 401 (k)s spread even more rapidly in the future than they have in the past, or it

might arise as part of a mandatory saving program. Various types of mandatory saving

systems have been suggested as one way to address the prospective funding

difficulties of the Social Security system.

2.3    Earnings Histories

       Our projections of future 401(k) balances assume that all households that

contribute to a 401(k) plan contribute nine percent of their earnings. In PVW (1 998a),

we show that the average contribution rate as a share of earnings is extremely stable

across earnings deciles. There is, of course great variation across households within

deciles, but we are primarily interested in forecasting averages. A household's earnings

                                              Page 14
history is therefore a critical determinant of its 401(k) accumulation.

       The starting point of our algorithm is a set of "pseudo-earnings histories" of

Health and Retirement Survey respondents beginning at age 25. In analyzing the HRS

earnings histories, we have divided the families in the HRS into deciles according to

their 1992 earnings. In principle, the Social Security earnings histories of the HRS

respondents can be used to determine average earnings by age within each decile.

Venti and Wise (1997) note, however, that there is one important limitation to this

method. Historical earnings are reported only up to the Social Security earnings limit,

while actual earnings in the top two or three deciles may be substantially higher than

Social Security reported earnings. Because of this limitation, we rely on information in

the annual March Current Population Survey (CPS) data files, which report earnings

well above the Social Security maximum.3 The ratio of the CPS maximum to the Social

Security maximum has ranged from a low of just under 2 in 1981 to a high of over 20 in

1964. In 1991 the CPS reported earnings up to a maximum of $200,000, while the

Social Security maximum was $53,400.

       Our procedure for constructing earnings histories for HRS households is as

follows. We first identify earnings deciles, as described above, using the 1992 earnings

of each HRS family. Then, using the March CPS data we calculate earnings deciles by

age for the years 1964-91. Using published data on median earnings prior to 1964, we

extrapolate this series back to 1956, thereby obtaining earnings histories by decile for

the years 1956 to 1991.     Finally, we assign each HRS household to a CPS decile

according to the household's 1992 earnings decile. The CPS earnings histories begin

at age 25 and a given household is assumed to have been in the same decile since age

25.

                                           Page 15
2.4 The Projection Algorithm

       Given a household's "pseudo-earnings history," we construct a "pseudo-401 (k)

contribution record." Within each earnings decile, each household is randomly

assigned to 401(k) participation status, based on the 401(k) participation probabilities

discussed above. Then, as the household ages, we vary its 401(k) participation status.

In PVW (1 998a), we assumed that if a household had a 40 1(k) account at a given age,

it remained a 401(k) participant until retirement. In the present paper, we allow for job

separations that lead some 401(k) participants to become non-participants.

       To illustrate the procedure, we suppress variation across earnings deciles, which

we use in our actual projections. We define a as the participation rate in 401(k) plans

at age a. Suppose that La is the probability that an a-year-old person with a 401(k)

plan leaves his employer. This event will end a 401(k)-participation spell, although it is

possible that another 401(k) participation spell will begin when the affected individual

finds another job.

       The difference between the fraction of the population participating in 401(k)

accounts at ages a and a+1 reflects two offsetting flows. These are the fraction of the

population that enters 401(k) participation at age a, Ea, and the fraction of the

population that participated in a 401(k) plan at age a, but left the 401(k) system by age

a+1. The fraction of the population that leaves a 401(k) job at age a is La*Pa. The net

change in 401(k) participation at age a is therefore:

 (2)     Pa+1_PaEa_LaPa

We know the values of a+l and a' and we can estimate the probability of job leaving.

We can therefore derive the flow of new entrants to the 401(k) system that is necessary

                                          Page 16
to generate observed age-specific participation rates. This is just

(3)         Ea   =1a+i1a(1La)
where a denotes the probability of 401(k) participation at the beginning of the year

when a cohort is age a, and La denotes the probability of leaving 401(k) participation

during the year when the cohort is age a.

       New 401(k) entrants must be drawn from the non-participant pool at age a. The

probability that an a-year-old nonparticipant will join a 401(k) plan (ia) is simply the


ratio of the fraction of the population that represents new 401(k) entrants, Ea, to the

fraction that is currently not participating in 401(k) plans, 1 - Pa*(1La). This implies that


(4)          j —
              a—
                         Ea            1+i(11a)
                   1J(1La)               1J(1La)
       It   is possible for someone who joins the 401(k) participant group to be a previous

401(k) participant. This means that the number of current 401(k) participants will, in

general, differ from the number of individuals who have ever participated in a 401(k). It

also implies that some new entrants to 401(k) participation at age a will have positive

401(k) balances as a result of 401(k) participation on a prior job.

       We should note in passing that this algorithm for projecting the evolution of

40 1(k) participation corrects a previous modeling error. If there is no chance of leaving


a 401(k) job, so La =0 as in our previous work, thenJa =(+1 — P1)/ (1— P), from


equation (4). In PVW(1998a), we incorrectly set the probability that non-participants

would become 401(k) participants to (P1 —            . Thus we underestimated the


                                           Page 17
probability of joining a 401(k) plan, which had the effect of understating the fraction of

currently young households who would participate in a 401(k) plan before retirement.

This under-estimated the future importance of 401(k) account balances. We note the

size of this error below.

       Our projections consider three possible rate of return scenarios, corresponding

to nominal rates of return of 6 percent, 9.3 percent, and 12.7 percent on 401(k) assets.

We think of these returns as the returns, on average, on an all bond portfolio, a 50-50

split between bonds and stocks, and an all stock portfolio. Ibbotson Associates (1997)

reports that the historical average pretax return on corporate bonds has been 6 percent

per year, while large-capitalization stocks have returned an average of 12.7 percent per

year since 1926. These returns are the pretax returns available on a portfolio with no

management fees. Because most 401(k) plans are administered by financial

intermediaries who charge for their services, we also consider the effect of reducing the

feasible return on the bond portfolio by 35 basis points, and the return on the equity

portfolio by 70 basis points. Our calculations highlight the importance of such asset

management costs in determining 401(k) wealth at retirement.

       We also demonstrate the effect of the randomness of stock and bond returns.

We do this by drawing annual returns for our bond and stock portfolios from the

empirical distributions of returns on corporate bonds, and large company stocks, in

Ibbotson Associates (1997). We construct 1000 projections using this random draw

algorithm, and then show the distribution of returns, It is important to emphasize that

randomness represents macro variation, which affect all plan members. We do not

account for variation among participants due to differences in asset allocation among

our three assets. Nor do we give attention to individual variation within earnings deciles

                                           Page 18
due to different 401(k) participation rates. And, of course, we do not account for

additional variation that would result from investment in individual stocks for example.

In future work we will address this individual risk.

        We now turn to the problem of modeling the dynamics of 401(k) account

balances. When a household leaves a job with a 40 1(k) plan, one of two things may

happen to the accumulated asset balance. In principle, a job leaver could decide to

divide a 401(k) accumulation between these alternatives, but we assume that there are

no fractional account balances.

       First, the job-leaver may decide to preserve the assets in the retirement system.

They could leave the assets in the former employer's 401(k) plan, although no further

contributions would be made, or to roll the assets over into an IRA. In this case, the

assets will continue to accumulate until retirement. We use 1Qa to denote the

probability that 40 1(k) assets remain in the retirement system at the time of a job

transition.

       Second, with probability a' a job changer can decide to withdraw the assets

from the 401(k) system. This would trigger a lump sum distribution, and would create

"leakage" from the stock of retirement assets. We use the notation Aa to define 401 (k)

plan assets for a household of age a, and Ba to denote the asset balance of job leavers

who cash out their 401(k) assets. We allow Qa to depend on the size of the 401(k)

account balance (Aa) at the time of the job termination, so a a (Aa).

        The equation for the evolution of 401(k) balances is therefore:

 (5)          Aa+iAa(l+r)+Ca+i+iJa+iBa.



                                           Page 19
where Ca+i denotes the 401(k) contribution rate as a fraction of income, and


 1a+1 denotes household income. We can express Ba as the product of three terms:



(6)      Ba = Aa La Qa (Aa),

These are respectively the 401(k) balance at the beginning of the year when a cohort
turns age a, the probability of leaving the 401(k) job during that year, and the probability

of withdrawing the balance conditional on leaving the job. We allow the job-leaving

probability to vary with age, and the probability of asset withdrawal conditional on job

separation to depend on the accumulated asset balance. We calculate Qa separately

for each household, so it depends on each household's accumulated 401(k) balance.

In future work we hope to expand the set of household characteristics that affect each

of these probabilities.

2.5 Calibrating the Rates of Job Separation and Cash-Out

       Two key parameters that determine the magnitude of 401(k) leakage are the

age-specific job leaving probability, La, and the asset-balance-specific probability of

cashing out a 401(k) plan balance, Qa(Aa).

       There is a substantial literature on both the rate at which jobs end, and the

characteristics of individuals and jobs that are associated with job termination. For

example, Farber (1997) reports age-specific rates of job losing, and Neumark, Polsky,

 and Hansen (1999) present recent evidence on both job turnover rates and job tenure

 distributions from the Current Population Survey. None of the existing literature

 provides precisely the values of La that we require. This is because we are interested in

job termination rates for employees at firms that offer 401(k) plans. Some previous

                                           Page 20
evidence suggests that job termination rates are lower at firms that offer pension plans,

and that termination rates are also declining in the length of the job's tenure. Gustman

and Steinmeier (1995) report, for example, that in the 1984 and 1985 Surveys of

Income and Program Participation, men aged 31-50 without a pension had a 19.5

percent annual separation rate. In the same data set, men with either a defined benefit

or an defined contribution pension plan had a 6.1 percent separation rate.

       To provide more recent evidence on mobility rates, we analyzed data from the

retrospective section of the Health and Retirement Survey. By working backwards from

the current job, it is possible to assemble information on both pension coverage on

previous jobs, and on the respondent's age at the time when the job ended. Table 2

reports our findings for separation rates at jobs with defined contribution pension plans.

The job mobility rates are much lower than those in most other studies of labor market

turnover. For 40-year-old men, for example, the rate is only 1.2 percent per year. This

may be an artifact of the long-term retrospective nature of the HRS questions, or it may

be the result of other factors.

       Since we are not sure why the HRS-based mobility rates are so low, and since

very low mobility rates will make the risk of withdrawals from the 401 (k) system seem

very small, we are reluctant to use the HRS findings without some modification. We

have therefore assumed that the job-leaving probability (La) for persons aged 25-34 is 6

percent. We assume that this probability declines to 4.5 percent for those aged 35-44,

4 percent for those aged 45-54, and then rises to 5 percent for those aged 55-64. We

believe that a case can be made for using even lower mobility rates, in which case the

impact of potential 401(k) leakage would be even smaller than our findings below

suggest.

                                         Page 21
       In calibrating Qa(Aa), the probability of withdrawing assets from a 401(k) plan as a

function of the accumulated asset balance, we rely on the work of Hurd, Lillard, and

Panis (1998). They provide the only comprehensive analysis of dispositions from

defined contribution plans. Their analysis uses the Health and Retirement Survey to

calculate the probability of various uses of existing defined contribution plan balances

conditional on a job separation. We treat their probabilities of retaining an account

through the former employer's 401(k) plan (their probabilities refer to all defined

contribution plans), rolling assets over into an IRA or other tax-advantaged saving

vehicle, and annuitizing the 401(k) balance, as "rollovers." Each of these dispositions

has, in a different way, the effect of preserving the 401(k) balance so that the assets

can be used to support retirement consumption. A fourth option in their classification

scheme, cashing out the 401(k) balance, is the one that we regard as triggering asset

leakage from the 401(k) system.

       Hurd, Lillard, and Panis (1998) find that the likelihood of cashing out is strongly

related to the size of the 401(k) account balance. They provided us with unpublished

tabulations that indicate the cash-out probabilities for various 401(k) balances, as well

as the number of observations in the HRS dataset that were used to estimate each of

these balance-specific probabilities. Table 3 reports these probabilities and associated

summary statistics. We use the data in Table 3 to randomly assign the balances of job

leavers to cash-out or rollover status.

       One difficulty that arises in using a set of balance-specific probabilities for asset

withdrawal, as we do here, is that the Hurd, Lillard, and Panis (1998) findings relate to

balances at a single point in time. We need to apply them to potential 401(k) cash-outs

over an entire working lifetime. To do this we assume that 401(k) balances at different

                                          Page 22
dates can be converted to balances in 1992 dollars using a 3.2 percent annual inflation

rate.

3.      Validating the Algorithm: Projecting 401(k) Balances for Current HRS
        Households

        Before projecting the 401(k) assets at retirement for future cohorts of retirees, we

tried to evaluate the ability of our algorithm to predict the observed 40 1(k) balances of

current cohorts of retirees and near-retirees. We use our algorithm to predict 401(k)

balances for households in the Health and Retirement Survey. We did this using a

"basic" version of our algorithm, without any administrative costs for 401(k) asset

management and with certain returns. In essence, we ask whether the SIPP cohort

data on 40 1(k) participation, together with the CPS data on contributions, can explain

the observed distribution of 401(k) balances in the HRS. While a high correspondence

between actual and predicted values in this case does not necessarily demonstrate the

validity of our algorithm, it provides at least one way of checking for the plausibility of

our findings.

        Table 4 reports the mean 1992 assets of the HRS respondents, stratified

according to earnings decile. (This table is drawn from PVW (1998a). It provides a

point of reference against which to evaluate our projected 401(k) balances. The table

reports only mean asset balances because our 401(k) balance projections focus on

means. While the median asset holdings for many categories are substantially beTow

the mean holdings, the primary comparison that we make is between 401(k) balances

and Social Security wealth. Mean and median Social Security wealth are very similar.

        We estimate accrued Social Security wealth at age 65 for the HRS respondents,

assuming that each respondent were to work until that age. A family's Social Security


                                           Page 23
wealth is the simple sum of the mortality weighted present value of each member's

benefit stream; we do not consider survivorship benefits, which could raise the total

value of Social Security wealth by more than one third. These accrued benefit levels

are converted to 1992 dollars using the Social Security Administration's intermediate

forecast of the average annual interest rate provided by the Board of Trustees of the

OASDI trust fund. For comparability, the projected 401(k) balances discussed below

also assume that a person works until age 65. The actual HRS 401(k) balances

reported in Table 4, however, are 1992 balances when the respondents were 51 to 61.

Personal retirement balances could easily double by the time the respondents attain

age 65, through the combined effect of asset returns and additional contributions during

remaining years of employment.

      When the 401(k) program began in 1982, members of the 1992 HRS sample

were 41 to 51 years old. We assume that in 1982, these families began to participate

in 401(k) plans at rates estimated from the SIPP and to contribute at rates estimated

from the CPS. We ask how close simulated balances based on these assumptions are

to the actual 1992 balances of the HRS respondents.

       We first use the SIPP data to estimate participation profiles by age for the

cohorts whose members were 51 to 55 and 56 to 60 in 1992, at the time of the HRS.

Then, to estimate contributions, we use family earnings histories, derived as described

above. Within each earnings decile, beginning in 1982, we randomly assign families to

participation status, based on SIPP estimates of participation by age and earnings

decile for each of the two cohorts.5 We then randomly assign job change and cash-out

status, also as described above. Based on our estimates from the CPS data, we

assume a contribution rate of eight percent in all years between 1982 and 1992. This is

                                         Page 24
somewhat less than the average rate of 8.7 percent -- including both employee and

employer matching contributions -- reported in the 1993 CPS data, and the nine percent

rate that we assume throughout our projections of future 40 1(k) balances. This is

because there is some evidence that 401(k) contribution rates have increased over

time, and we are trying to track the 1982-1992 experience.

       Table 5 shows our projected 401(k) balances, as of 1992, for the HRS sample.

This table is similar to a table in PVW (1998a), but it is based on an algorithm that

allows for job terminations. The table reports results stratified by earnings decile. On

average the simulated values do not differ greatly from the observed balances reported

in the HRS. Using the bond rate of return seems to give the closest match. Even the

simulated balances by earnings decile are typically not far from the HRS reported

balances. These results suggest that with roughly accurate assumptions about

contribution and participation behavior, we are able to replicate the actual distribution of

401(k) balances. We do not necessarily view our ability to track the p evolution of

401(k) balances as a strong endorsement for the future success of our algorithm,

because our historical success does not provide any evidence that our assumptions for

the future are plausible.

4.     Projections of 401(k) Balances of Future Retirees

       We now use our projection algorithm to estimate the balances at age 65 of future

cohorts. We assume that our estimated earnings profiles represent the past earnings

of the HRS families, and we estimate what they would have accumulated in a 40 1(k)

had they had the participation rates that we project for the 0(25) and the C(1 5) cohorts.

We also consider what would have happened if there had been universal 40 1(k)

coverage in past years. The projections reported below assume a 35 basis point

                                          Page 25
annual administrative cost on 401(k) investments in bonds, and a 70 basis point cost on

stock investments.

       Table 6 reports the results of our projections for the C(25) cohort, the group that

will turn 65 in 2025. The first column of the table shows the average value of Social

Security wealth for each earnings decile. The remaining columns show our projected

401(k) balances when the C(25) cohort reaches age 65. These values are reported in

1992 dollars, for comparability with the first column. Our projected 401(k) balances are

the pretax balances in 401(k) accounts. A family with these balances would pay taxes

as the 40 1(k) balance was drawn down, so the after-tax value of the 40 1(k)

accumulation is smaller than what we report. In contrast, no tax will be paid on most

Social Security benefits. To place our estimates in perspective, it is helpful to refer to

the family wealth data in Table 4. One statistic that provides a useful point of reference

is the mean actual 1992 balance in 401(k) accounts for HRS respondents: $10,808.

We can compare the average value of projected 401 (k) balances against this

magnitude. In addition, we can compare the 401(k) balances to Social Security wealth,

under current provisions, and these values are shown in the first column of the table.

       Table 6 shows two components of 401(k) accumulation, or potential

accumulation, for each asset allocation assumption. The first column is the sum of the

projected 401(k) balance and the balances in any "rollover accounts" at age 65. Since

we view assets that are kept within the retirement saving system as tantamount to

401(k) assets, we group these two asset categories together. We do not report the split

between 401(k) and rollover assets, although in many of our projections, the rollover

balance actually exceeded that in the 40 1(k) account. We suspect that this reflects job

mobility rates that are too high, over some age ranges, for our 40 1(k) participants. We

                                          Page 26
also report the value of "foregone saving" for each earnings decile. This is the

additional amount that would have been available for retirement support had the assets

not been cashed out. It is the value of simulated 401(k) withdrawals accumulated to

age 65 under various assumptions about the rate of return on 401(k) assets.

Engelhardt (1999) presents a similar statistic for actual lump sum distributions claimed

by HRS respondents.

       The results in Table 6 suggest that pre-retirement withdrawals from 40 1(k) plans

do not have a significant effect on 401(k) balances at retirement. For those who will

reach retirement in 2025, the C(25) cohort, we project 401(k) assets at retirement

ranging from $57,900 to $181,400, depending on our assumption about how the assets

are invested. These levels are large relative to the average Social Security wealth of

$103,400 for these households, and they are much larger than the (actual) mean 401(k)

balance of $10,800 in 1992, when the HRS respondents were 51 to 61.

       For each projection, the ratio of projected 401(k) to Social Security wealth varies

a great deal depending on lifetime earnings. Because the C(25) projections assume the

continuation of current low participation rates in the lowest income deciles, families in

the first and second income deciles accumulate very little in 401(k) assets, no matter

what the rate of return. Beginning with the third decile, however, 401(k) assets at

retirement would likely be substantial relative to Social Security wealth. For families

with incomes in the upper four deciles of the income distribution, the mean 401(k)

balance exceeds Social Security wealth provided at least half of the 40 1(k) assets were

allocated to stocks. The after-tax income associated with the 401(k) balance could still

fall below the value of Social Security payments for some of these households, since

401(k) distributions are likely to be taxed more heavily than Social Security benefits.

                                          Page 27
       If 401(k) participants invest all of their assets in stocks, and if stocks continue to

deliver returns like those in the last seven decades, then 401(k) plus rollover wealth

would exceed Social Security wealth (on average) in the five highest income declies.

Since Social Security benefits do not rise substantially with lifetime income above

roughly the median of the income distribution, it is not surprising that 401(k) balances,

which are based on contributions that were proportional to earnings, become larger

than Social Security benefits at higher income levels. We suspect that our C(25)

projections underestimate future 401(k) participation by low-income households, but we

have yet to find a way to address this difficulty.

       As emphasized above, in comparing the projected differences in participation

rates by earnings decile, it is important to recognize that actual experience for particular

households could well be quite different from our mean projections, even if our average

participation rates are realistic. The dispersion of 401(k) accumulations is substantial in

every earnings decile.

       The second column in each panel of Table 5 reports the value that 40 1(k) assets

that were withdrawn in the form of lump sum distributions would have attained if they

had been allowed to remain within the 401(k) system. The results show that the value

of this "foregone saving" is small relative to the value of 401(k) balances for most

earnings deciles. On average, the foregone saving is less than five percent of the value

of the 401(k) and rollover balance. For households in the bottom deciles of the

earnings distribution, the foregone saving is larger relative to the 401(k) accumulation.

This is because we have assumed that the probability of cashing out a smaller 40 1(k)

balance is larger than that for a larger balance. Households in the bottom part of the



                                           Page 28
earnings distribution are more likely to have small balances than are households higher

up in the earnings distribution.

       One way to place the magnitude of such lump sum distributions in perspective is

to note that the impact of a 35 or 70 basis point annual administrative charge on 40 1(k)

accounts is much larger, in terms of assets at retirement, than the impact of lump sum

distributions. The foregone saving, due to pie-retirement withdrawals, reduces

accumulated assets in the all bond portfolio by 3.5% and in the all stock portfolio by

4.4%. If we had not charged 401(k) accounts with any expenses for investment

management, the projections would have ranged from $61,200 to $209,200, or

between five and thirteen percent greater than the projections we report. That is, the

administration expense reduces accumulated balances in the bond portfolio by 5.4%

and balances in the stock portfolio by 13.3%. Thus reductions in administration

expenses could do more to increase saving than reduction in pre-retirement

withdrawals

       Table 7 presents information similar to that in Table 6, except we now focus on

the C(15) cohort. Under the C(15) assumptions, the mean 401(k) balances at age 65

range from $74,300 to $247,100. These projections imply substantially larger 401(k)

assets relative to Social Security wealth for the lower earnings deciles than the earlier

C(25) projections. In the C(1 5) case, even the families in the third decile could

accumulate pretax 401(k) assets that could be an important fraction of Social Security

wealth. If 401(k) accounts were invested in assets that earned returns as high as those

on equities in the last seventy years, then even those in the fourth income decile would

accumulate 401(k) assets that were larger, on average, than their Social Security

wealth.

                                          Page 29
      Finally, Table 8 presents additional information like that in Tables 6 and 7,

except that we now consider the case of universal coverage for 401(k) plans. In

modeling universal coverage, we assume that all workers contribute to a 401(k) plan,

but that they may withdraw their accumulated 401(k) balance if they change jobs. One

could alternatively model the case in which account balances must be held until the

individual reaches age 65. By adding together our 401(k) and rollover balance, and the

foregone saving entry, we can evaluate the balance that would accumulate in such

accounts.

      We project that universal 401(k) coverage, even with withdrawals allowed at job

change, would result in substantially higher mean 40 1(k) balances at age 65 than either

our C(25) or C(15) participation assumptions. The differences are particularly

pronounced in the lower part of the income distribution. We project mean 40 1(k)

balances at age 65 ranging from $98,100 to $356,300, depending on the asset

allocation for 401(k) accounts. Universal coverage could yield mean pretax 401(k)

balances that would exceed Social Security wealth in all but the lowest lifetime earnings

decile, at least if 401(k) investors earned returns comparable to those on equities over

the last seven decades. In the case of universal coverage, 401(k) assets would almost

surely represent an important share of Social Security wealth even in the lowest income

deciles.

       The results in Tables 6 through 8 can be used to assess the importance of our

earlier modeling error in the definition of a By adding together the "401(k) +


Rollover" column, and the "foregone saving" column, we can estimate the total 401(k)

balance at retirement if there were no potential withdrawals. Appendix Table A-i


                                         Page 30
reports new calculations that are comparable to our previous estimates. In particular,

our previous calculations did not allow for administrative costs on 401(k) investments.

The results in Table A-i preserve this assumption, and therefore differ from the results

in Tables 6 and 7. Comparing the results in Appendix Table A-i with those in our

earlier paper suggests that our modeling error understated the projections by about 20

percent.

      All of our projections so far assume that 401(k) investors earn the same return in

every year, conditional on their asset allocation. In practice, both stock and bond

returns are random, and there is substantial uncertainty surrounding the retirement

wealth that will be associated with a given contribution history. To consider this

possibility, we replaced our assumption of certain returns with a random returns

scenario. We illustrate our findings for the C(25) cohort. In each year of our projection,

we draw one value from the post-1926 distribution of actual bond and stock returns

reported in Ibbotson Associates (1997). Because returns are now random, the

projected value of 40 1(k) balances at retirement will differ across projections,

depending on the random returns that happen to be drawn in a given projection. We

ran one thousand such projections for the C(25) cohort, and tabulated our findings.

       Table 9 shows the distribution of the mean 401(k) wealth at retirement, averaged

across all earnings deciles. The entries in this table are comparable to the last row of

Table 6. The results are graphed in Figure 3. The results show that the median 401(k)

balance at retirement, especially when a substantial share of the 401(k) portfolio is

invested in equities, is below the mean. In the case of a 50-50 bond-stock portfolio, for

example, Table 6 shows a mean 401(k) and rollover balance of $98,800, while the

median value is $94,600. The mean in this case lies between the 50th and 60th

                                          Page 31
percentiles of the distribution. For the all stock case, the mean is between the 60th and

70th percentiles of the distribution of realized outcomes. The most appropriate single

measure is unclear. The results also draw attention to the great differences between

the bond and stock distributions. For example, 95% of bond returns are below $85,800,

but only slightly more than 20% of stock returns are below this level.

       We plan further work in the future on random asset returns and the growth of

401(k) balances. The results above, however, make clear the wide variation in potential

system-wide returns, especially stock market returns.

5.     An Early Review of Post-1993 401(k) Participation and Contribution
       Behavior

       The projections of future 401(k) growth reported above were based on 1993 data

from the Survey of Income and Program Participation. We now have data for 1996,

from the SIPP, which permits us to evaluate the plausibility of our 1993-based

projections. We have not yet recalibrated the projections to use the 1996 data,

because we are waiting for some additional SIPP information on pension coverage and

household net worth.

       The 1996 SIPP data suggest that, if anything, our projections for 401(k)

expansion have been conservative. Figure 4 is just like Figure 1, but with two additions.

The 1996 data have been added for each cohort, and data for two younger

cohorts—C(22) and C(17)—have been added. The C(27) starting point for our earlier

projections is circled. It is clear that eligibility rates have continued to rise. The figure

shows age-specific 401(k) eligibility rates for different age cohorts.

       Figure 5 shows participation rates for these same cohorts, including the 1996

data. The participation rate increases between 1993 and 1996 were very substantial.


                                           Page 32
Following the dotted lines on the figure can identify differences between the

participation rates of successive cohorts at selected ages. For example, the

participation rate of persons in the C(27) cohort at age 38 was about ten percentage

points higher that the rate of persons in the C(32) cohort at age 38. The difference

between the C(17) and C(22) cohort at age 28 is 8 percentage points. Recall that our

projections assume that 401(k) participation rises by twenty percentage points every ten

years. Note that while we refer to the latest data as being from 1996, in fact, these

data were collected closer to 2 1/2 years after the 1993 survey. Thus the annual

increase in eligibility has been greater than the graphical comparison implies.6

        Figure 5 includes the information in Figure 2 as well as 1996 data and data for

the C(22) cohort. The actual eligibility rate of the C(27) cohort at age 38 is in fact

somewhat greater than our projected rate. In addition, the C(22) rate at age 33 is well

above the projected rate for the C(25) cohort at that age. These comparisons suggest

that our projections are conservative, at least over their first few years. One of our

future plans is to use the 1996 data, along with new SIPP-based information on asset

balances, to recalibrate our benchmark participation and contribution rates for different

ages.



6.      Conclusions and Future Directions

        This paper presents new evidence on amount of retirement saving that currently-

working households are likely to accumulate in their 40 1(k) plans. Today's young and

middle aged households have much higher 40 1(k) participation rates than current

retirees did at similar ages. In addition, the rate of 401(k) participation has risen and

seems likely to continue to rise for all age groups. As a result, 401(k) saving is likely to

                                           Page 33
play a much larger part in the financial preparation for retirement of future retirees than

of current and past retirees.

       We present new estimates of the amount of such saving that households

reaching age 65 in 2025, and in 2035, are likely to accumulate. We improve on

previous estimates by explicitly recognizing the possibility of pre-retirement withdrawals

from the 401(k) system through lump-sum distributions, and by allowing for asset

management costs associated with 401(k) accounts. We find that lump sum

distributions have a relatively small impact on the amount of saving that households

accumulate in 401(k) accounts. The possibility of taking lump-sum distributions

appears to reduce retirement accumulations by only about five percent relative to what

they would be if households were prevented from taking such distributions. This effect

is smaller than the effect of allowing for modest administrative expenses for these

accounts.

       Our calculations assume that participation and contribution behavior would be

the same if there were no lump sum distributions as they are at present. In fact, the

option of withdrawing assets as a lump sum may encourage 401(k) participation by

some households. Recognizing the potential effect of 401(k) plan provisions on

participation decisions is a topic we reserve for future work.

       Projecting the average 401(k) account balance for those who will retire two and

three decades into the future is necessarily fraught with great uncertainty. Some

sources of uncertainty, such as systematic changes in household attitudes toward

saving, or reforms of the Social Security system that alter the basic structure of financial

preparation for retirement, are difficult to predict. There are other sources of

uncertainty in our projections, however, that can be reduced with further empirical work.

                                           Page 34
       One difficulty with our current algorithm is that it is based on data that are less

reliable for younger individuals than for older ones. With respect to lump sum

distributions, the Current Population Survey only asks individuals over age 40 about

their pension benefits and past lump-sum payouts. The Health and Retirement Survey,

the other premier source of information on pension benefits, is limited because the

basic sampling frame was individuals between the ages of 51 and 62 in 1992. Although

the HRS includes retrospective questions that elicit some data on employment

transitions before individuals joined the HRS panel, there is naturally some concern

about the quality of the resulting data for job separations that occurred long ago. Job

transitions that occur early in an individual's career typically do not involve large 401(k)

balances, but because there are many years remaining before the individuals receiving

these balances would retire, they could grow to represent substantial retirement

resources.

       A second area in which our algorithm could be improved is in the link between

job separation and job tenure. Jobs that have already lasted a long time tend to have

lower probabilities of ending than "younger" jobs. At the moment, our algorithm allows

for age-dependent probabilities of job separation, but we have not allowed for an

individual's job tenure, or an individual's earnings decile, to affect the probability of a job

transition and the associated possibility of a 40 1(k) withdrawal. The ideal database for

our purposes would identify workers who participate in 401(k) plans and then permit

estimates of job change probabilities conditional on age, earnings, and the worker's job

tenure. The significant expansion of the set of questions about pension coverage in the

1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation should provide much of the

information that is needed for such a detailed calculation.

                                           Page 35
       Finally, our analysis has focused on retirement as an event that occurs at age

65. In practice, some 401(k) participants are likely to leave the labor force before that

age, and therefore to begin drawing down their 40 1(k) account balances earlier than our

assumptions imply. Other workers may remain in the labor force after age 65,

particularly in future decades when the Social Security retirement age is higher than at

present. For these workers, 401(k) assets are likely to be larger than our projections

suggest, both because they will have more years for accruing tax-deferred returns and

because they will contribute for more years than our calculations suggest. Allowing for

a distribution of retirement ages is something we hope to incorporate in future versions

of our algorithm.

       In addition, although we give some attention to the system-wide risk due to

randomness in market returns, we do not treat the additional individual risk due to

401(k) participation and individual asset allocation decisions.




                                          Page 36
                                    REFERENCES

Bassett, W. F., M. J. Fleming, and A. P. Rodriguez. 1998. How workers use 401(k)
plans: The participation, contribution, and withdrawal decisions. National Tax Journal
51: 263-289.

Chang, A. 1996. Tax policy, lump-sum pension distributions, and household saving.
National Tax Journal 49: 235-252.

Engelhardt, G. V. 1999. Pre-retirement lump-sum distributions and retirement income
security: Evidence from the health and retirement survey. Mimeo, Dartmouth College.

Farber, H. S. 1997. The changing face of job loss in the United States, 1981-1 995.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 55-1 28.

Fernandez, P. A. 1992. Preretirement lump sum distributions. in Trends in Pensions,
1992, J. Turner and D. Belier, eds. Washington: U.S. Department of Labor.

Gustman, A. and T. Steinmeyer. 1995. Pension Incentives and Job Mobility.
Kalamazoo, Ml: Upjohn Institute.

Hurd, M., L. Liilard and C. Panis. 1998. An analysis of the choice to cash out,
maintain, or annuitize pension rights upon job change or retirement. Working Paper
DRU-1979-DOL, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Iwaszko, K. and B. O'Connell. 1999. The 401(k) Millionaire. Villard Books.

Merritt, 5. 1997. How to Build Wealth with Your 401(k): Everything You Need to Know
to Become More than a Millionaire Over the Course of Your Working Lifetime. Halyard
Press.

Neumark, D., D. Polsky, and D. Hansen. 1999. Has job stability declined yet? New
evidence from the 1 990s? Michigan State University, mimeo.

Poterba, J. M., S. F. Venti, and D. A. Wise. 1998a. Implications of rising personal
retirement saving. In Frontiers of the Economics of Aging, ed. D. Wise, 125-167.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Poterba, J. M., S. F. Venti, and D. A. Wise. 1998b. Lump sum distributions from
retirement saving plans: Receipt and utilization. In Inquiries in the Economics of Aging,
D. A. Wise, ed., 85-105. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Poterba, J.M. and D. A. Wise. 1999. Personal retirement accounts and personal
choice. In Personal Saving, Personal Choice, D. A. Wise, ed. (Stanford: Hoover
Institution Press).

Sabelhaus, J. and D. Weiner. 1999. Disposition of lump sum pension distributions:

                                         Page 37
Evidence from tax returns. National Tax Journal 52 (September, forthcoming).

U.S. Department of Labor. 1995. New Findings from the September 1994 Current
Population Survey. Washington: U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare
Benefits Administration.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1997. Private Pension Plan Bulletin: Abstract of 1993 Form
5500 Annual Reports. Washington: U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare
Benefits Administration.

Venti, S. F. and D. A. Wise. 1997. Lifetime earnings, saving choices, and wealth at
retirement. Harvard University, mimeo.

Woods, John R. 1996. "Pension Benefits Among the Aged: Conflicting measures,
Unequal Distributions." Social Security Bulletic, 59 (Fall), 3-30.

Yakoboski, P. 1993. New evidence on lump sum distributions and rollover activity.
EBRI Notes. Washington: Employee Benefit Reesarch Institute.

Yakoboski, P. 1994. Retirement program lump sum distributions: Hundreds of billions
in hidden pension income. EBRI Issue Brief 146, Washington: Employee Benefit
Reesarch Institute.

Yakoboski, P. 1997. Large plan lump sums: Rollovers and cashouts. EBRI Issue Brief
188. Washington: Employee Benefit Reserch Institute.




                                        Page 38
Table 1: Uses of Lump Sum Pension Plan Distributions Reported in September
                          1994 CPS Supplement
                                   Number of Recipients   Percent of Primary
 Use of Lump Sum Distribution
                                       (millions)          Use Recipients
Retirement Saving                         2.32                 33.9%
Business or Home Expansion, or            1.46                  21.3
Repaying Debts
Other Saving or Investments                1.25                 18.2
Current Spending                           1.82                 26.6
Total Identifying Primary Use              6.85                 100.0
Multiple Uses                              1.53                  ----
Other Uses or No Response                  0.73                  ----
TOTAL                                      9.10                  ----
Source: U.S. Department of Labor (1995), Table C5.




                                     Page 39
   Table 2: Probability of Leaving a Job at Various Ages, Conditional on Job
                Offering a Defined Contribution Pension Plan
           Age                         Men                        Women
           30                         1.25%                        1.73%
           35                          1.47                         1.36
           40                          1.19                         1.18
           45                          2.05                         1.69
           50                          3.51                         4.21
           55                          5.26                         4.26
Source: Authors' tabulations using Wave 1 of the Health and Retirement Survey.




Table 3: Probability of Cashing Out a Defined Contribution Plan, Conditional on
                            Opportunity to Withdraw
             Funds and on Size of Defined Contribution Balance
401(k) Ba!ance at Time of       Number of Sample
                                                           Cash-Out Probabilit
   Separation ($1992)             Observations
        <$ 2000                       60                          60.00
        2000-5000                      44                         38.64
       5000-10000                       40                        27.50
       10000-15000                      30                        13.33
       15000-25000                      52                        21.15
      25000-50000                       46                         2.17
      50000-1 00000                    41                          4.88
         > 100000                      34                          2.94
            ALL                        347                        23.92
Source: Tabulations from the Health and Retirement Survey by Constantijn Panis.




                                      Page 40
                    Table 4: Mean 1992 Assets of HRS Families
                                      Asset Category
                        Total
                                            Total    Non-
                    Wealth        Employer Personal Retire-                   Social
Earnings    Total                                             401(k)
 Decile            Excluding      Pension                                    Security
           Wealth                           Retire-   ment    Assets
                     Social        Assets                                    Wealth
                                             ment   Financial
                    Security
First       270238   208721          39162         9679    44964       620      61517
Second      228538      154438       40002         11114    27692     1025      74100
Third       251170      167115       34394          9857    27194     2648      84055
Fourth      269872      176423       36749         10586    29904     2192      93449
Fifth       301348      199755       52522         20754    36609     4049     101593
Sixth       378252      270121       75745         21483    45592     6366     108131
Seventh     415763      301077       94361         31245    46029    11322     114686
Eighth      479383      354268      105368         40228    61423    13514     125115
Ninth       590440      458410      133091         44373    84192    19767     132030
Tenth      1007740      864328      219055        109441   148277    48709     143412
ALL         415833      312441       82212         30465    54724    10808     103392
Source: Authors' tabulations from 1992 Health and Retirement Survey, Wave 1. All
entries are measured in 1992 dollars.
Note: The sample includes all families with head aged 51 to 61, at least one member
employed, and having matched Social Security records. The Social Security wealth
does not include the value of spousal survivorship benefits. It is the sum of benefits
based on the husband's and the wife's earnings.




                                        Page 41
        Table 5: Mean of Simulated 401(k) Balances, and 401(k) Plus Rollover
                  Balances. Health and Retirement Survey Families
         Observed         Means of Simulated 401(k)             Means of Simulated 401(k)
Earnings   HRS                   Balances                        and Rollover Balances
 Decile
                          Bonds       50-50       S&P 500       Bonds       50-50
First             620         164         175            185         183       196        208
Second           1025         666         710            753         755       809         862
Third            2648        1677        1794            1908     1968        2110        2251
Fourth           2192        2665        2853           3038      3133        3373        3621
Fifth            4049        4205        4504            4797     5023        5407        5781
Sixth            6366        6467        6929            7383     7743        8341        8924
Seventh         11322        9407       10079           10739    11316        12184      13038
Eighth          13514       13990       14997           15987    16766        18027     19289
Ninth           19767       20612       22106           23574    24806       26716      28619
Tenth           48709       29677       31788           33863    35944       38688      41409
All             10808        8953        9593           10223    10764       11585      12400
Source: Authors' tabulations and projections from 1992 Health And Retirement Survey.




   Table 6: Projected Mean 401(k) and "Rollover" Balances at Retirement, and
  Foregone Saving Due to 401(k) Withdrawals: C(25) Cohort with 35 Basis Point
         Reduction for Bonds and 75 Basis Point Reduction for Stocks
                                                   50-50 Bond/Stock
                         All Bond Portfolio                                All Stock Portfolio
              Social                                     Porfollo
Earnings                              Fore-                     Fore-                 Fore-
Decile       Security   401(k) +                  401(k) +                 401(k) +
             Wealth                   gone                      gone                   gone
                        Rollover                  Rollover                 Rollover
                                     Saving                    Saving                 Saving
First          61.5        0.7         0.2           1.4          0.3        2.7        0.6
Second         74.1         5.1        0.5           9.2          0.9        17.3       1.8
Third        84.1          11.7        0.9          20.7         1.6        38.8        3.1
Fourth       93.4          22.1         1.4        38.8          2.5        72.9        4.8
Fifth        101.6         29.4         1.6        50.7           3         93.9        6.1
Sixth       —108.1         40.2          2         69.2          3.8         128        7.8
Seventh      114.7        67.4          2.4        116.6         4.8        216.4       10.1
Eighth       125.1        89.3          3.2        153.5         6.3        283.4       13.2
Ninth        132.0        123.4         3.7        210.5         7.7        386.7       16.1
Tenth        143.4        189.4         4.8        317.6         9.5        574.2       19.6

TOTAL          103.4        57.9        2.1         98.8         4          181.4       8.3
Note: All entries in thousands of 1992 dollars



                                              Page 42
  Table 7: Projected Mean 401(k) and "Rollover" Balances at Retirement, and
 Foregone Saving Due to 401(k) Withdrawals: C(15) Cohort with 35 Basis Point
        Reduction for Bonds and 75 Basis Point Reduction for Stocks
                                                   50-50 Bond/Stock
                          All Bond Portfolio                            All Stock Portfolio
              Social                                     Porfolio
Earnings                               Fore-                    Fore-               Fore-
Decile       Security    401(k) +                 401(k) +              401(k) +
             Wealth                    gone                     gone                gone
                         Rollover                 Rollover              Rollover
                                      Saving                   Saving              Saving
First          61.5          2          0.4          3.8          0.8    7.5         1.6
Second         74.1        10.7         1.1         19.4          2.1    37.6        4.2
Third          84.1       21.8          1.7         39.6           3     76.5        6.2
Fourth         93.4       36.7          2.3         66.3         4.3     128.1       8.8
Fifth         101.6       47.3          2.5           84           5     160.1       10.6
Sixth         108.1       61.7           3          109.3          6     207.8       12.9
Seventh       114.7       89.7          3.4         159.5         6.9    304.7       14.9
Eighth        125.1       112.4         4.2         198.4         8.7     377        18.7
Ninth         132.0       145.6         4.5          255          9.6     482        20.5
Tenth         143.4       215.4         5.6         370.7        11.5    689.9       24.2

TOTAL         103.4        74.3         2.9         130.6      5.8       247.1       12.2
Note: All entries in thousands of 1992 dollars.




                                              Pa2e 43
  Table 8: Projected Mean 401(k) and "Rollover" Balances at Retirement, and
    Foregone Saving Due to 401(k) Withdrawals Assuming Universal 401(k)
   Participation with 35 Basis Point Reduction for Bonds and 75 Basis Point
                              Reduction for Stocks
                                                     50-50 Bond/Stock
                          All Bond Portfolio                             All Stock Portfolio
              Social                                      Porfolio
Earnings                                Fore-                    Fore-               Fore-
 Decile      Security    401(k) +                   401(k) +             401(k) +
             Wealth                     gone                      gone               gone
                         Rollover                   Rollover             Rollover
                                       Saving                   Saving              Saving
First         61.5          11.3         2.5          22.4         4.9    47.3        10.1
Second        74.1         33.1          3.6          64.7         7.3    134.5       15.6
Third         84.1         49.9           4           96.3         8.1    198.4       17.9
Fourth        93.4         65.2          4.4          124.5        8.9    254.8       18.9
Fifth         101.6        80.6          4.6          151.5        9.7    305.7       21.8
Sixth         108.1        95.9          5.1          178.4       10.6    356.7        24
Seventh       114.7        113.5         4.6         209.3         9.7    415.7       21.9
Eighth        125.1        133.9         5.4         244.2        11.4    480.8       25.7
Ninth         132.0        163.6         5.4         295.5        11.6    577.2       25.6
Tenth         143.4         234          6.5         413.3        13.6    792.1       29.1

TOTAL           103.4       98.1        4.6              180     9.6      356.3       21.1
Note: All entries in thousands of 1992 dollars.




                                               Page 44
Table 9: Distribution of Projected Mean 401(k) and "Rollover" Balances at
Retirement, and Foregone Saving Due to 401(k) Withdrawals: C(25) Cohort,
      1,000 Draws from Empirical Distribution of Returns Adjusted for
 Administrative Costs (35 Basis Points for Bonds and 75 Basis Points for
                                  Stocks)
                                        50-50 Bond/Stock
               All Bond Portfolio                               All Stock Portfolio
                                             Porfolio
                            Fore-                    Fore-                    Fore-
 Percentile 401(k) +                  401(k) +                  401(k) +
                            gone      Rollover       gone       Rollover      gone
               Rollover
                           Saving                   Saving                   Saving
5                39.9        1.3        50.3          1.8         49.6        1.7
10               43.3        1.4        57.7          2.1         60.6        2.2
20               46.4        1.6        68.1          2.5         81.6        3.1
30               49.7        1.7         76.7         2.9        102.2        4.1
40               52.1        1.8         83.7         3.3        123.5        5.1
50               56.1        1.9         94.6         3.7        145.8        6.3
60               59.1_       2.1        103.5         4.2        177.1        7.8
70               63.1        2.3        115.1         4.7        211.4        9.6
80               68.8        2.5        127.9         5.4         255         12.2
90               76.6        2.8         149          6.5         345         16.9
95               85.8        3.2        178.3         7.8        450.2        27.2
Note: All entries in thousands of 1992 dollars.




      Appendix Table Al: Projected 401(k) Balances at Retirement Reported in
                         Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1998a)
                Cohort C(25) (Age     65 in 2025)            Cohort C(15) (Age 65 in 2035)
 Earnings
  Decile        Bonds         50-50        Stocks        Bonds             50-50      Stocks
First               974          1839          3699            2556          4927       10123
Second             5759         10691         21175           12605         24000       48841
Third             13092         24173         47843           24506         46469       94560
Fourth            24820         45500         89863           41142         77766      158417
Fifth             32848         59385        115971           53390         99686      201061
Sixth             45282         81172        159549           69710        129458      260355
Seventh           74286        134308        262478           98953        184478      372183
Eighth            98624        177764        346543          124006        229812      461382
Ninth            134707        240686        465290          159150        292720      583877
Tenth            204271        357826        680483          233532        420937      825739
All               63466        113394        219289           81955        151034      301654
Note: Authors' calculations as described in the text. Results for Universal 401(k)
Participation are the same as those in Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1998a).




                                           Pafle 45
1. See U.S. Department of Labor [1997]. The form 5500 reports tabulate contributions to private
sector 40 1(k) plans. They do not include contributions to section 457 (public sector) or 403(b)
(non-profit) plans, or public employees' contributions to 40 1(k) plans.

2. We projected participation for all ages of the C(15) cohort by adding a constant term to the
participation probit equation so that the C(25) projections for the 5111 and 6" income deciles would
increase by 20 percentage points. The same constant term was added to the probit equations for
all income deciles. The highest deciles don't increase by 20 points because of the upper limit of
100 percent. The lower deciles are increased less than 20 points, because of the properties of the
probit functional form.

3. These data were obtained from the CPS Utilities, provided to us by Unicon Inc. We actually
construct a "synthetic HRS" sample of persons age 41 to 51 in each of the 10 earnings deciles in
1982. This sample is "aged" through 1992, assigning families to participate and contribute to a
401(k) at rates determined by the estimates from the SIPP and the CPS and recognizing the
possibility ofjob terminations.
4. This is a significant assumption, since in fact relative household income does vary from year to
year. Whether such variation matters substantially for 40 1(k) accumulations over a lifetime is an
issue we hope to consider in the future.

5. The actual survey dates and the number of "years" after the 1984 wave 4, which was
interviewed between September and December 1994, are as follows: 1985 Wave 7 and 1986
Wave 4, January-April 1987 (2 years); 1990 Wave 4, February-May 1991 (6 years); 1991 Wave 7
and 1992 Wave 4, February- May 1993 (8 years); and 1993 Wave 9, October 1995-January 1996
(11 years).




                                              Page 46
                                           C
                                           a)



                                           01
                                           01

0
0 ()                                       C
                                           01
C) (0
     (0
                                           01
     (0
     (0                                          CD

                                                 >
                                           C

m (0 -
     Co


                                           01
                                           (I)
     Co
0    (0
                                           Q
 U



1,
                                           0-I
                                           N)
          01           (1)    N)
          P    C       P        Q      Q
                   Eligible Proportion
               F2. 401(k) Eligibility by Cohort
                   With Illustrative Projections
     I
               "C15" Projected

    0.8


0.6

0
0
    0.2


      0
          25      30       35    40   45    50   55   60   65
                                      Age
                                                   C

                                                   01
                                                   0)

0    a)                                            0
                                                   0)
     (0
0
C)   -
     (0

     (0
     (0
                                                   01
                                                        CD

—U   —..                                                (0
                                                   01



m                                                  Q

-0 - CO
     (0
                                                   01
                                                   c)

   - Co
     (0
                                                   (J
11
                                                   01
                                                   1)
           0)   01                             Q
           P    P      Q      Q     Q      Q
                     Eligible Proportion
                  F4. 401(k) Participation by Cohort
                         1984 1987, 1991, 1993, 1996
      0.35

       0.3

ci)
      0.25
a)
-U     0.2
0
0  0.15
a-
0
       0.1

      0.05

         0
             25     30     35   40   45         50   55   60   65   70
                                          Age
               F5. 401(k) Eligibility by Cohort
                   With Illustrative Projections
     I
               "C15"

    0.8



                                                      "C27" Projected
0.6
0
0
    0.2


      0
          25     30    35   40   45         50   55   60    65          70
                                      Age
