                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              POLITICAL ECONOMY, SECTORAL
                            SHOCKS, AND BORDER ENFORCEMENT

                                          Gordon H. Hanson
                                          Antonio Spilimbergo

                                           Working Paper 7315
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7315


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




We thank seminar participants at the CEPR/NBER 1999 International Seminar on International Trade for
helpful comments. Hanson acknowledges financial support from the Russell Sage Foundation. Katherine
Guthrie provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Gordon H. Hanson and Antonio Spilimbergo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Political Economy, Sectoral Shocks, and Border Enforcement
Gordon H. Hanson and Antonio Spilimbergo
NBER Working Paper No. 7315
August 1999
JEL No. F2
                                           ABSTRACT

        In this paper, we examine the correlation between sectoral shocks and border enforcement in the
United States. Enforcement of national borders is the main policy instrument the U.S. government uses to
combat illegal immigration. The motivation for the exercise is to see whether border enforcement falls
following positive shocks to sectors that are intensive in the use of undocumented labor, as would be
consistent with political economy models of how enforcement policy against illegal immigration is
determined. The main finding is that border enforcement is negatively correlated with lagged relative price
changes in the apparel, fruits and vegetables, and slaughtered livestock industries and with housing starts
in the western United States. This suggests that authorities relax border enforcement when the demand for
undocumented workers is high.


Gordon H. Hanson                                         Antonio Spilimbergo
Department of Economics                                  Research Department
University of Michigan                  International Monetary Fund
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                 700 19th Street, NW
and NBER                                                 Washington, DC 20431
gohanson@umich.edu                         aspilimbergo@imf.org
I. Introduction

        The official position of the United States and other industrialized countries is that controlling

national borders against illegal entry is a central goal of immigration policy. Recent economic instability

in emerging economies, from which many illegal immigrants originate, has heightened the concern over

secure borders. Over the last two decades, the U.S. government has increased expenditures to combat

illegal immigration, raising the enforcement budget of the U.S. Border Patrol from $290 million in 1980

to $1.7 billion in 1998 (in 1998 dollars). In spite of the public commitment to border enforcement,

approximately 300,000 new illegal immigrants enter the United States each year; in 1996 there were

approximately five million illegal immigrants in the country (Warren, 1995; INS, 1997). Undocumented

workers are an important part of the U.S. agriculture, apparel, construction, food processing, lodging,

restaurant, and domestic help industries (Chiswick, 1984; U.S. Department of Labor, 1991). Whether

by accident or design, U.S. borders are porous.          One common explanation for why the U.S.

Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), which oversees the Border Patrol, fails to prevent illegal

entry is that it operates under conflicting mandates: while groups opposed to immigration demand strict

enforcement, industries intensive in manual labor demand that enforcement not undermine their

economic viability.

        In this paper, we examine whether sectoral shocks influence U.S. enforcement of national

borders against illegal immigration. The aim is to see whether border enforcement is correlated with the

fortunes of industries that use illegal immigrants most intensively. Political lobbying is one mechanism

which could create such a correlation. Open lobbying in favor of illegal immigration is unlikely, which

by necessity makes the analysis indirect. Our approach is to look for factors which affect the economic

return to lobbying on border enforcement.

        To give a simple version of our story, suppose the apparel industry, among other activities, is a



                                                    1
major employer of illegal immigrants. To guarantee a supply of undocumented workers, apparel firms

privately lobby the government to maintain lax border enforcement. Labor unions and other groups

pressure the government to keep illegal immigrants from entering the country. Out of this situation

emerges an equilibrium level of enforcement. Now suppose there is an exogenous increase in the

demand for apparel. The positive demand shock raises the apparel industry's demand for illegal labor,

as well as the return to lobbying for lower enforcement. The result is likely to be a lower equilibrium

level of border enforcement.

       We estimate the sensitivity of border enforcement to relative price changes in industries that use

undocumented workers intensively. To measure border enforcement, we use the number of hours U.S.

Border Patrol officers spend in different lines of activity. Naturally, labor-market conditions in the

United States and Mexico may influence illegal immigration and thus the intensity of border enforcement.

We control for these and other issues in the estimation.

       Our work contributes to a small but growing literature on illegal immigration. Ethier (1986)

models the determination of border enforcement and illegal immigration for a small open economy.

Bond and Chen (1987), Djajic (1987, 1997), and Bucci and Tenorio (1996) extend this framework. In

terms of empirical work, Moehring (1988) examines the evolution of INS budgetary appropriations

over time, Bratsberg (1995) examines the correlation between sending-country characteristics and the

stock of illegal immigrants in the United States, and Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999) find that attempted

illegal immigration, as proxied by apprehensions of those attempting to cross the U.S.-Mexico border

illegally, is very sensitive to changes in Mexican and U.S. wages. On border enforcement, Hanson,

Robertson, and Spilimbergo (1999) find that changes in enforcement are not followed by changes in

wages in U.S. border regions, suggesting that enforcement-induced changes in illegal immigration have

little impact on U.S. wages. To our knowledge, there is little systematic analysis of the factors that



                                                   2
influence the intensity of enforcement efforts. This gap in the literature is unfortunate, given the

importance of border enforcement in U.S. attempts to control illegal immigration.

        A further motivation for examining border enforcement is the likely attempt to include

international labor standards in the next round of World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations.

Labor unions and other political interest groups may demand the adoption of labor standards as a

precondition for their support of any future WTO agreement.              If labor standards were to be

incorporated into the WTO, there are at least two ways countries could circumvent them: by expanding

guest-worker programs, which permit laborers from foreign countries to work temporarily in a host

country often in conditions far inferior to those for native host-country workers; or by allowing greater

illegal immigration, which could be achieved by reducing border enforcement. In the United States,

guest-worker programs and lax border enforcement have been alternative policies, each used with

varying intensity over time, for increasing the supply of low-wage foreign workers in the economy

(Hanson and Spilimbergo, 1998). As noted, undocumented labor is common in many U.S. industries.

The employment of foreign guest workers is increasingly common in Germany, the Netherlands, and

other European countries (Groenendijk and Hampsink, 1994). To the extent employers can hire foreign

workers on terms that violate international labor standards, such standards might have only a small effect

on employment conditions in industrialized countries.        Understanding the determinants of border

enforcement is important for predicting the impact of labor standards on U.S. labor-market outcomes.

        In the second section of the paper we discuss political lobbying activities in the United States

related to border enforcement and illegal immigration. In the third section we discuss theoretical

literature which is relevant for our analysis and present the empirical specification. In the fourth section

we describe the data and discuss estimation issues. In the fifth section we present the empirical results.

And in a final section we offer concluding remarks.



                                                      3
II. Politics, Border Enforcement, and Illegal Immigration in the United States

        There are a host of government policies that affect the flow of illegal immigrants into the United

States. These include policies that impact the level of immigration directly, such as quotas for the

admission of legal immigrants and for the admission of individuals to work in the United States on a

temporary basis, and policies that impact immigration indirectly, such enforcement of U.S. borders,

sanctions against employers that hire illegal immigrants, and the availability of government assistance to

immigrants. In this paper, we focus on border enforcement, since this policy is relatively easy for

authorities to change and can be measured at high frequencies and over long time periods. Because our

empirical work is indirect – we examine the correlation between border enforcement and factors which

theory suggests affect the return to lobbying on enforcement – we provide context for the analysis by

discussing instances of political activity related to illegal immigration. Our goal is not to explain the

complex political economy of U.S. immigration policy, but merely to cite examples which substantiate

the plausibility of our hypothesis that the intensity of border enforcement is subject to influence by

industry political interest groups.

        Border Enforcement. The level of border enforcement in the United States is the result of

several governmental decisions. First, the U.S. Congress appropriates funds for the U.S. Border

Patrol, as part of the overall appropriation to the INS. The appropriation specifies how the funds are to

be spent, including the portion of the budget that is to be dedicated to enforcement activities. Second,

given the overall enforcement budget, the INS decides how to divide resources between enforcement of

U.S. borders, which consists of policing land borders and ports of entry, or so-called "linewatch" duty,

and internal enforcement, which consists of traffic checkpoints, raids on worksites, and other interior

patrols. Figure 1 shows the monthly number of hours Border Patrol officers spent on linewatch duty



                                                    4
and on internal enforcement for the period 1970-1997. During this period 57.1% of total Border Patrol

officer hours were devoted to linewatch duty and 91.3% of linewatch officer hours occurred at the

U.S.-Mexico border. Figure 2 shows monthly apprehensions by Border Patrol officers on linewatch

duty and on internal enforcement duty for 1970-1997. During this period 93.4% of apprehensions

occurred in the U.S.-Mexico border region and 60.1% occurred as individuals were attempting to cross

the border itself.

        Among the main opponents of border enforcement are agricultural growers in California and

Texas, who tend to specialize in perishable crops that are intensive in the use of manual labor. These

growers frequently declare that without low-wage foreign labor they would be forced to cut back

production or shutdown their operations altogether. In defense of hiring undocumented labor, a

California grower replied, “The reality is that if the government was able to stop everybody at the

border, there would be no agriculture. You wouldn’t be eating asparagus.”1

        Indirect indications abound of growers’ political influence.2 Calavita (1992) documents that in

the 1940s and 1950s the district commissioner of the U.S. Border Patrol in El Paso would routinely

issue orders to stop apprehending illegal immigrants during the agricultural harvest season. During

periods when the Border Patrol did increase apprehensions, Texas farmers complained to their

congressional representatives, who then pressured the INS to reduce its enforcement intensity.

Following one such a period, a Texas grower protested to his U.S. senator,

        For a number of years citizens of Mexico entered the United States both legally and illegally,
        engaging in agricultural work. While from time to time they have been picked up by the Border
        Patrol, there has been a tendency on the part of the Border Patrol to concentrate their efforts on

1
  Denny Walsh, “Valley Grower Guilty: Admits Farm Used Illegal Workers,” The Sacramento Bee, April 30, 1999.
2
  This influence has infuriated politicians sympathetic to organized labor. In 1952, Senator Hubert Humphrey of
Minnesota lamented, “Because of the economic interests that are involved in the wetback problem, no real, sincere
effort has been made to solve it. As long as it is possible to hire the wetbacks at 10 cents an hour, they will be
coming across the border until kingdom come” (Calavita, 1992: 37).




                                                        5
        deporting only those who were bad citizens. This arrangement, although it did not have the
        stamp of legislative approval, has worked out very nicely for our farmers down here. But during
        the past few weeks the Border Patrol has picked up and deported hundreds of wetbacks...
        (Calavita, 1992: 35)


        Recent legislative reforms of U.S. immigration policy, including the Immigration Reform and

Control Act of 1986 and the Immigration Control and Financial Responsibility Act of 1996, have

mandated increases in government expenditure on border enforcement. Though they were ultimately

unsuccessful, agricultural interests lobbied against these provisions of the new immigration laws (Gimpel

and Edwards, 1999). As the INS has increased border enforcement, it has done so unevenly by raising

enforcement drastically in some locales, such as El Paso during "Operation Hold the Line" in 1993 and

San Diego during "Operation Gatekeeper" in 1995, but not in other locales. This has had the impact of

shifting attempted illegal immigration and apprehensions from one border site to another, without

necessarily reducing the overall level of illegal entry (Hanson, Robertson, and Spilimbergo, 1999). The

strategy of targeting regional enforcement may serve to appease groups opposed to illegal immigration,

which were particularly vocal in El Paso and San Diego,3 without reducing overall illegal immigration.

        Border versus Interior Enforcement. The division of Border Patrol activities between border

and interior policing is further evidence of how political factors shape enforcement. As noted, the INS

devotes most of its enforcement efforts to apprehending illegal immigrants when they first enter the

country and relatively little time to monitoring employers that are likely to hire illegal immigrants. In

1990, for instance, less than eight percent of INS enforcement manpower was devoted to worksite

inspections (Juffras, 1991). Of the 1.56 million apprehensions the Border Patrol made in 1996, only

3
  See Marcus Stern, "La Raza Blasts Move in State to Crack Down on Illegal Immigration," The San Diego Union-
Tribune, July 20, 1994, p. A8; Daniel B. Wood, "Can Crackdown Halt Border Crossings?" The Los Angeles Times,
May 8, 1996, p. 4; and statement of Raul Yzaguirre, National Council of La Raza, Subcommittee on Immigration, U.S.
House of Representatives, June 29, 1995.




                                                        6
12,100 occurred at U.S. farms or other worksites. The inefficiency of this enforcement strategy in

terms of deterring illegal immigration has long been recognized. It is relatively difficult to detain illegal

immigrants as they cross the 2,000 mile U.S.-Mexico border, but it is relatively easy to do so at their

places of work, especially during peak production periods, such as agricultural fields at harvest time or

apparel factories prior to the annual fall sales boom. One common interpretation of the enforcement

pattern is that the INS is pressured to avoid enforcement activities that directly injure specific parties,

such as agricultural growers or factory owners.

        Periodic attempts by the INS to increase interior enforcement are often met with stern political

opposition. Following INS raids of onion fields in the state of Georgia during the 1998 harvest, the

U.S. Attorney General, both Georgia senators, and three Georgia congressional representatives publicly

criticized the INS for injuring Georgia farmers.4 Similar raids of farms in California, Florida, or Texas,

which are home to the largest concentrations of undocumented workers in the United States (Warren,

1995), are virtually unheard of. This may be due to the political strength of agriculture in these states.

Similarly, the INS recently investigated the meat-packing industry in Nebraska and Iowa, which is

reputed to use undocumented labor intensively, but made no raids on any plants. In defense of the

inaction an INS official stated, “We don’t want to have a negative impact on the production capabilities

of these companies.”5

        A further constraint on interior enforcement efforts by the INS has been that until recently

employers faced few penalties for hiring illegal immigrants. Prior to IRCA in 1986 it was not explicitly

illegal to hire undocumented workers. Though it was illegal to "harbor" illegal immigrants, under the so-

called Texas Proviso of 1951 employment was not interpreted as harboring. Agricultural political

4
  See Mark Krikorian, "Lured by Jobs, Illegal Immigrants Risk Death at Border Crossings,” Santa Barbara
News-Press, April 25, 1999.




                                                     7
interests appear to have been instrumental in getting the Texas Proviso adopted (Calavita, 1992). While

IRCA finally instituted penalties for employers that hire undocumented workers, these sanctions seem to

have relatively little bite. In 1989, for instance, the average fine the INS levied against employers for

hiring illegal immigrants was less than $10,000. Fewer than 400 fines were levied in that year (Juffras,

1991).

           The Bracero Program and Guest Farm Workers. A final example of how political factors

influence illegal immigration are guest-farm-worker programs, which allow foreign laborers, most of

whom are from Mexico, to work in U.S. agriculture on a temporary basis. The stated justification of

allowing guest farm workers into the United States has been to prevent labor shortages on U.S. farms.

The most well-know guest farm worker arrangement was the Bracero Program of 1942-1965, which at

its peak in the 1950s brought 200,000-400,000 Mexican laborers into the United States annually

(Calavita, 1992). The Bracero Program owed its existence to lobbying by agricultural interests in

California and Texas. The INS was one agency responsible for determining how many Mexican

workers could be admitted as "braceros." Agency reports from the 1950s indicate that U.S. agricultural

labor demand was a major factor in deciding how many braceros to admit annually.6 When the Border

Patrol increased border enforcement and apprehensions as part of Operation Wetback in the early

1950s, growers were allowed to more than double the number of bracero workers they brought into the

country, largely nullifying the impact of increased enforcement on the supply of manual labor to

agriculture (Calavita, 1992).

           IRCA revived the guest farm worker program by permitting undocumented agricultural workers

in the United States to qualify as special agricultural workers (SAWs), which gave them legal resident

5
     Barbara Hagenbaugh, “US, Meatpackers Make Deal on Immigration Crackdown,” Reuters, May 7, 1999.
6
    One such report stated, “Braceros continue to arrive in sufficient numbers to keep the labor supply slightly ahead




                                                           8
status, and by allowing farmers to bring in additional undocumented laborers as replenishment

agricultural workers (RAWs), subject to government approval. The addition of provisions for SAWs

and RAWs appeared to be necessary to convince agricultural interests to support passage of IRCA.

They were initially opposed to the legislation due to its provisions for raising sanctions on employers that

hired undocumented workers (Martin, 1990).                 There have been recent attempts led by U.S.

congressional representatives from agricultural states to pass legislation that would expand the guest

farm worker program, but these have so far been unable to surmount strong opposition from labor

unions such as the AFL-CIO.7



III. Theory and Empirical Specification

        To help understand patterns of border enforcement, we sketch a simple model of political

lobbying and illegal immigration in a labor-intensive industry. We refer to recent literature in political

economy as a guide for how the story we describe generalizes to a general-equilibrium setting. We then

use theory to motivate the empirical specification.



A. Theoretical Issues

        Consider an economy that takes world commodity prices as given. For illustrative purposes we

focus on a single industry in the economy. Suppose the industry produces apparel using two factors,

capital, which is specific to the apparel sector, and labor, the supply of which is influenced by illegal

immigration from a foreign country. Let output be given by the constant returns to scale production


of demand for those farmers eligible to use bracero labor” (Calavita, 1992: 82).
7
  See Sam Loewenberg, "Unions Block Guestworker Bill," Legal Times, October 26, 1998, p. 16; and William Branigin,
"Republicans Back Measure to Import More Farm Workers; Visa Expansion Proposed Despite Critical Hill Reports on
Use of Foreign Workers," The Washington Post, March 11, 1998, p. A4.




                                                       9
function, F(K,L), where K is sector-specific capital and L is labor. The price of apparel in the home

economy is p, which is set on the world market.

        Following Ethier (1986), the wage at which apparel firms hire labor depends on illegal

immigration from a foreign country, which in turn depends on border enforcement by the home

government. For simplicity we initially ignore legal immigration and other sectors of the home economy.

The government chooses an enforcement level E, which determines the probability g that a foreigner

attempting illegal immigration is apprehended and returned to the foreign country. We imagine that in

making the enforcement decision the government weighs expected welfare for different groups in society

and expected campaign contributions, or other benefits, from special interest groups.                The

apprehensions probability has the following properties: g(0)=0, g'(E)>0, g''(E)≤0, and g(E)<1 for all

values of E. Apprehension imposes costs on the migrant, associated with distress or lost labor time, of

k. If a foreign worker chooses to remain in his country he earns wage w*, which is exogenous to events

in the home economy. Illegal immigration will ensure that the following arbitrage condition holds:


 (1)    ( w* - k)g(E) + w(1 - g(E)) = w*

where w is the home-economy wage in the apparel sector. The expression on the left is the expected

wage if the foreign worker attempts illegal immigration; the expression on the right is the expected wage

in the foreign economy. Equation (1) can be rewritten as,


                     g(E)
 (2)    w = w* +            k = w(E)
                   1 - g(E)

It follows from the assumptions on g() that w is increasing in E. While the simple situation we consider

is static, it would straightforward to extend this logic to an intertemporal setting.




                                                       10
          Suppose the apparel industry has organized a political lobby, which, following Grossman and

Helpman (1994), makes campaign contributions of B in order to influence the government choice of

border enforcement. Since higher levels of enforcement raise the wage apparel firms must pay their

workers, apparel capitalists prefer lower levels of enforcement. The apparel industry promises the

government higher levels of campaign contributions in return for lower levels of enforcement. Other

groups in the economy may oppose illegal immigration. These groups, which are left in the background,

promise higher levels of contributions D in return for higher enforcement levels.8 Enforcement can then

be written as E(B,D), where EB<0 and ED>0. By (2), raising campaign contributions from the apparel

sector lowers the wage in the apparel sector. The function E() summarizes the political economy of

enforcement in the home country, which, following Grossman and Helpman (1994), involves different

groups lobbying the government non-cooperatively. We leave the details of the policy determination

process unspecified, but discuss their relation to fully-developed theories of political economy below.

          The restricted profit function for the representative apparel firm can be written as,


    (3)   pF(K, L) - w(E(B, D))L - B

where K is assumed fixed in the short run. The representative firm chooses L to maximize profits and

the apparel lobby chooses B to maximize profits on behalf of the representative firm. In doing so, the

lobby internalizes the impact of B on the apparel wage. Consider how changes in the external

environment, in the form of an increase in the world relative price of apparel, affect the intensity of

lobbying activity and border enforcement. Totally differentiating the first order conditions to the

maximization of profits in equation (3) with respect to L and B, we find that,


          dB          - */ dp
    (4)      = wb FL dw
8         dp     pFLL w BB L + w B
  We suppose that D is determined by long-run factors which influence the political standing of domestic workers in
the economy (and so is driven primarily by factors other than sectoral shocks).




                                                         11
where f x indicates the partial derivative of the function f() with respect to x.9 By equation (2) and our

assumptions on g(E) and E(B,D), wB is negative and wBB is positive. Thus, if dw*/dp is not large and

positive, then dB/dp is positive and an increase in the apparel price raises the equilibrium level of apparel

campaign contributions and lowers the equilibrium level of border enforcement. The logic of this result

is that a higher apparel price raises the value of hiring an additional apparel worker, which translates into

a higher economic return on lobbying against border enforcement. For dw*/dp to be small requires that

any direct impact of the price change on foreign wages (or, more generally, on wages in other sectors of

the home economy) be small. In other words, for dB/dp to be positive Stolper-Samuelson (1948)

wage effects from the change in relative apparel prices cannot be too important.10

        In general equilibrium, the impact of the apparel price rise will be more complicated. There may

be feedback effects between border enforcement, illegal immigration, and economic conditions in the

home and foreign countries. An increase in demand for labor from the apparel sector may put upward

pressure on wages at home. Higher wages in the home economy may induce more illegal immigration,

which may lead to greater political pressure from anti-immigrant groups to raise border enforcement.

Given the possibility of rising political pressures both for and against border enforcement, how

enforcement responds to external shocks is an empirical question. 11 Our goal here is merely to suggest


9
   Using the same framework, it is possible to obtain an expression for the impact of an apparel price change on
apprehensions of those attempting illegal immigration (which corresponds to one of the dependent variables in the
empirical analysis). A change in the apparel price has two opposing effects on the number of apprehensions, which
leaves the total effect ambiguous. On one hand, a higher apparel price increases the demand for immigrant labor,
which leads to more attempted illegal immigration and more apprehensions; on the other hand, higher demand for
immigrant labor leads to an increase in lobbying activity to decrease border enforcement, which results in fewer
apprehensions.
10
   In unreported empirical results, we find that the impact of relative commodity prices on wages in labor-intensive
sectors is small, which is consistent with this requirement.
11
   In Sapir (1983), capitalists in the labor-intensive sector use increased immigration as a way of restoring rents
following increased competition from low-wage countries. The difference in Sapir's predictions from ours comes not
from the setup of the model -- in his model also a relative price increase for labor-intensive goods would raise the
return to lobbying for less border enforcement -- but from differing assumptions about how the political process
operates. This reinforces the notion that the relationship between sectoral shocks and border enforcement is an




                                                        12
that it is plausible that favorable relative price shocks in labor-intensive sectors can create pressures for

lower levels of border enforcement.

         The setup we describe is similar to the Grossman and Helpman (1994) model of endogenous

tariffs. Instead of the government choosing tariffs to trade off the welfare of import-competing sectors

versus the welfare of consumers, as in Grossman and Helpman, we imagine that the government

chooses border enforcement to trade off the welfare of shareholders in labor-intensive sectors versus

the welfare of laborers and other anti-immigrant groups. Using the Grossman-Helpman framework,

Krishna and Mitra (1999) show that changes in relative prices can change the incentive of different

groups to become politically organized. In their model, sectors choose endogenously whether to incur

the fixed costs of forming a lobby. Beginning from an equilibrium with a lobby in the import-competing

sector (which in our case would be anti-immigrant groups) but no lobby in the export-competing sector

(which in our case would be the apparel sector), they consider the impact of an increase in the relative

price of the export good. The relative price change raises the economic value to the export (apparel)

sector of lobbying against tariffs (enforcement) and may induce firms in the sector to form a lobby, in

which case the economy moves towards free trade (more immigration). The logic behind this result,

which they work out in a general-equilibrium context, closely parallels the result we outline for the

impact of an apparel price increase on border enforcement.



B. Empirical Specification

         In the simple model outlined above, shocks to sectors that are intensive in the use of

undocumented workers influence the level of border enforcement. The policy-making process, in

particular lobbying by special interest groups, is the mechanism through which sector-specific shocks


empirical question.



                                                     13
are transmitted to enforcement. The level of enforcement and the demand for undocumented workers

are also likely to impact illegal attempts to enter the home country, which in our case is the United

States. Changes in attempted illegal immigration may in turn prompt authorities to alter border

enforcement. To address feedback effects between border enforcement attempted illegal immigration,

and sectoral shocks, we model the joint dynamic behavior of these variables using a vector

autoregression (VAR) approach. Since we do not observe attempted illegal immigration directly, we

instead use data on apprehensions of those attempting illegal entry.

        One issue for our empirical strategy is to identify factors which influence the demand for less-

skilled immigrant workers and hence the demand for border enforcement. Equation (3) suggests that

increases in the relative price of final goods in nonskill-intensive industries will increase the demand for

undocumented workers and decrease demand for border enforcement. We use relative commodity

prices for non-skill intensive goods to measure shocks to the demand for undocumented workers. The

industries we select are agriculture (fruits and vegetables), meatpacking (slaughter livestock), apparel,

and construction. For durable goods, like those that construction produces, relative final good prices

may be a poor indicator of labor demand, as final good prices also depend on the stock of durable

goods in the economy. We instead use new housing starts as an indicator of labor demand in the

construction industry. Unfortunately, high-frequency indicators of labor demand are unavailable for

several nontraded sectors that are also relatively intensive in undocumented labor – domestic help,

restaurant, and lodging services. In our story, a positive shock to a labor-intensive sector increases the

demand for undocumented workers which then leads to greater lobbying against border enforcement.

The transmission from price shock to lobbying to changes in enforcement is unlikely to be instantaneous.

 We allow for an delayed lag structure, in which price shocks today do not begin to influence

enforcement until several periods in the future.



                                                     14
        Other variables are also likely to influence enforcement and apprehensions. Attempted illegal

immigration will depend in part on labor-market conditions in the United States and source countries for

illegal immigration, which is mainly Mexico. We include real wages in the United States and Mexico

and the U.S. unemployment rate as additional regressors (Hanson and Spilimbergo, 1999). These

variables may influence enforcement indirectly, through their impact on attempts at illegal entry, and

directly, through how they influence INS expectations as to how many Border Patrol officers will be

needed to control illegal immigration.

        There remains an issue of whether relative price changes for nonskill-intensive industries capture

demand shocks, as we suppose, or domestic supply shocks. Since fruits, vegetables, livestock, and

apparel are all traded goods, international market conditions will influence price movements in these

industries, in which case domestic supply shocks may have little scope to affect prices. Since we

estimate the correlation between enforcement and relative prices holding wages in the United States and

Mexico constant, we effectively control for supply shocks related to wage changes. As a check on

whether industry relative prices are reasonable measures of industry labor demand, in some

specifications we replace relative prices with capacity utilization. The advantage of using capacity

utilization is that it is likely to be highly correlated with industry labor demand; the disadvantages are that

data are unavailable for some industries and that simultaneity problems are likely to be more severe for

capacity utilization than for relative prices.

        Formally, the specification we estimate is,
         h t = α1 + β1 (L)h t −1 + γ1 (L)a t −1 + δ1 (L)p t −s + θ1 (L) x t + ρ1t + ε1t
(5)
         a t = α2 + β2 (L)h t −1 + γ2 (L)a t −1 + δ 2 (L)p t −s + θ 2 ( L)x t + ρ 2 t + ε 2t

where ht is log U.S. border enforcement (person hours the U.S. Border Patrol spends policing the




                                                             15
border); at is log apprehensions by the U.S. Border Patrol, which we use to proxy for attempted illegal

immigration; pt is a row vector of log housing starts and log relative prices (or, in some specifications,

capacity utilization rates) in the fruit and vegetables, slaughtered livestock, and apparel industries; xt is a

row vector consisting of log real wages in the United States and Mexico and the U.S. unemployment

rate; L is the lag operator; αi, βi, γi, δi, θi, and ρi (i=1,2) are vectors or matrices of parameters to be

estimated; and ε1t and ε2t are i.i.d. error terms. If border enforcement falls following positive shocks to

nonskill-intensive industries, then it would appear that the U.S. government sets border enforcement in

response to economic conditions in these industries.



IV. Data and Estimation Issues

A. Data

        For data on apprehensions and enforcement, we use INS records of linewatch activity by the

U.S. Border Patrol. These data show the number of hours Border Patrol officers spend policing U.S.

borders and the number of apprehensions officers make at U.S. borders. As mentioned, the vast

majority of linewatch activity occurs at the U.S.-Mexico border. Measures of linewatch activity, which

are shown in Figures 1 and 2, are preferable to broader measures of enforcement, since they identify the

precise time (and place) where individuals attempt to enter the United States illegally (Hanson and

Spilimbergo, 1999).

        For relative commodity prices, we use the ratio of U.S. commodity price indices for fruits and

vegetables, slaughtered livestock, and apparel to the price index for all U.S. commodities. The price

series, which are from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), are shown in Figure 3. For housing

starts, we use housing starts on all residential buildings in the western United States. These data come

from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. In some specifications, we use capacity utilization rates in



                                                      16
the food processing and apparel industries, which are shown in Figure 4. The selected industries are

those which the literature has found to employ large numbers of undocumented workers (Chiswick,

1984; Martin, 1990; U.S. Department of Labor, 1991; Warren, 1995). Table 1 shows the fraction of

workers that were foreign born in U.S. industries in each of four education groups. These figures

confirm that agriculture, apparel, construction, and food processing are important sources of

employment for immigrant labor.

        For U.S. wages, we use average hourly compensation for production workers in labor-intensive

manufacturing industries (food processing, apparel, textiles, furniture, and wood processing), deflated by

the U.S. CPI. Data for this series come from the BLS. This wage captures what prospective illegal

immigrants might expect to earn upon successfully entering the United States. For Mexican wages, we

use average hourly wages for production workers in Mexican manufacturing, deflated by the CPI in

Mexico; both series are from the IMF International Financial Statistics. To our knowledge, no other

monthly wage series is available for Mexico covering the entire sample period. Hanson and Spilimbergo

(1999) discuss these wage data in more detail.



B. Estimation Issues

        There are three estimation issues which need to be addressed: the presence of unit roots in the

data, the exogeneity of the additional regressors in the estimation, and the lag structure on the

regressors. Before proceeding with the empirical analysis, it is important to check whether the variables

used in the estimation are stationary. In unreported results, we performed augmented Dickey-Fuller

tests on each variable used in the analysis; in all cases we allow a time trend and up to 12 lags on

changes in the variable to control for serial correlation. We reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at the

10% significance level in all cases except apprehensions; for apprehensions we reject the null of a unit



                                                      17
root at the 15% level. We interpret these results as evidence of stationarity in the underlying time series

and proceed with OLS estimation of (5).12

         The specification in equation (5) is a bivariate VAR, which imposes the assumption that relative

commodity prices and labor-market conditions in the U.S. and Mexico are not influenced (in a Granger

causality sense) by border enforcement and apprehensions. To verify that this assumption is warranted,

we perform block exogeneity tests on the two equations that compose the VAR. For each specification

used in the next section, we reject the null hypothesis that enforcement and apprehensions jointly

Granger-cause relative commodity prices or the labor-market variables used in the analysis. These

results, which are consistent with Hanson, Robertson, and Spilimbergo (1999), justify use of a bivariate

VAR.

         Finally, from the preceding discussion on how political economy mechanisms are likely to create

delays in the impact of shocks to nonskill-intensive sectors, we expect that relative-price shocks will

take several periods before translating into changes in border enforcement. The first lags of relative

prices have no effect on enforcement or apprehensions. Relative prices become statistically significant in

the enforcement and apprehensions regressions as a six to 10 month delay is introduced. We choose

the lag structure which optimizes the Schwarz criterion. This structure has three lags on the relative-

price and housing start series beginning with a delay of 10 months for fruits and vegetables, six months

for slaughtered livestock, eight months for housing starts, and seven months for apparel. An alternative

approach would be to include lags for the past 12 months, inclusive. We have not chosen this

alternative because a long lag structure absorbs too many degrees of freedom and introduces

multicollinearity into the estimation.


12
  Moreover, in the OLS estimation of equation (5), which we report in the next section, we find no evidence of serial
correlation in the error terms.




                                                          18
V. Empirical Results

        In this section, we present results for bivariate VARs of border enforcement and border

apprehensions. We estimate two specifications of the system. In the first, relative commodity prices

and housing starts are used as indicators of sectoral demand; in the second, relative commodity prices

are replaced by capacity utilization rates. By analyzing both price and quantity effects, we examine the

robustness of the results to alternative methods of identifying sectoral demand shocks. All sectoral

variables are entered with a delay of six to 10 months, which is meant to capture the fact that it takes

time for shocks to be transmitted through the political process to changes in policy. Delayed sectoral

shocks have the additional advantage of not being influenced by future innovations in illegal immigration,

border enforcement, or labor-market conditions in the United States or Mexico. The dependent

variables are border enforcement and border apprehensions. The additional regressors are the U.S.

real wage, the U.S. unemployment rate, the Mexican real wage, a time trend, and monthly dummy

variables.13

        The first set of OLS regressions, reported in Tables 2a and 2b, examine the impact of relative

commodity prices on border enforcement and border apprehensions. We find strong evidence that

delayed relative price increases in nonskill-intensive sectors are followed by decreases in enforcement

but no evidence that they impact apprehensions.

        For each regressor, the tables show a Granger causality test and the estimated long-run

elasticity of the dependent variable with respect to the regressor. Consider first the results for border


13
    We do not show impulse responses for the estimation results. Given the block exogeneity of the system we
estimate, the standard errors for the impulse responses are undefined and must be estimated using bootstrap
methods. We experimented with this approach, but were unable to generate plausible standard-error bounds for the
impulse responses.




                                                       19
enforcement in Table 2a. We find that livestock prices, apparel prices and housing starts all Granger

cause border enforcement. Fruit and vegetable prices are statistically insignificant. The long-run

elasticities for all four sectoral variables are negative, which indicates that border enforcement falls

following a rise in relative commodity prices or housing starts. The long –run elasticities, which are

statistically significant at the 5% level for livestock and housing and at the 10% level for fruit and

vegetables, range from -0.210 for apparel to -0.657 for livestock, meaning that a permanent one-

percent increase in the relative price of livestock is followed by a 0.657 percent long-run decrease in

border enforcement. The impact of sectoral shocks on border enforcement thus appears to be

economically significant, as well as statistically significant.

        Turning to the other control variables, both U.S. wages and the U.S. unemployment rate

Granger cause border enforcement. Border enforcement rises following an increase in U.S. wages or a

decrease in U.S. unemployment, which suggests that the INS raises border enforcement when overall

U.S. labor-market conditions tighten. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the INS raises border

enforcement when it expects attempted illegal immigration to be higher.         Border enforcement is

unaffected by Mexican wages.

        Table 2b presents OLS results for border apprehensions. In contrast to border enforcement,

no sectoral variable Granger causes apprehensions. This is not surprising, given that relative-price

changes in labor-intensive sectors may have offsetting effects on apprehensions (see note 9). On the

one hand, higher relative prices in labor-intensive sectors mean higher labor demand in these sectors,

which may increase attempted illegal immigration; on the other hand, higher relative prices may mean

lower border enforcement, which could reduce apprehensions. We do find that apprehensions are

responsive to changes in labor-market conditions in the United States and Mexico, as consistent with

Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999).



                                                        20
         Tables 3a and 3b show results for the second specification, which uses capacity utilization rates

in place of relative commodity prices. While there is only weak evidence that capacity utilization in

apparel and food products Granger cause border enforcement, the long-run elasticities are negative and

precisely estimated. One explanation for the weaker results on capacity utilization is that relative prices

are a better measure of sectoral shocks. Firms could, for instance, increase capacity when forecasting

higher demand in the future so that a lower rate of capacity utilization today could indicate a future

increase in labor demand. The labor-market variables have the same sign and significance as in

previous regressions. Table 3b confirms the results in Table 2b that labor-market conditions, but not

sectoral shocks, influence apprehensions.

         In unreported regressions, we examine the sensitivity of our results to changes in the

specification, the set of included industries, measures of sectoral shocks, and the sample period.

Extending the lag structure on the regressors produces results very similar to those in Tables 2a-3b, but

with a loss of precision in the coefficient estimates. Varying the delay on the lag structure for the

sectoral variables tends to reduce the magnitude of the long-run elasticities and increase standard errors

– the maximum effect of these variables is that which includes three lags beginning with a six to 10 month

delay. We also experimented with using commodity price indices for more disaggregated agricultural

goods (fruits, melons, vegetables) and apparel products (apparel by fabric type) and for other labor-

intensive industries (textiles, footwear, slaughtered poultry). These results are very similar to those we

report, except for footwear, which although it is a labor-intensive industry does not appear to use large

quantities of immigrant labor (as shown in Table 1).14             Finally, we estimated VARs for different

subperiods within the sample. The impact of sectoral shocks to apparel on border enforcement is


14
  Also, the U.S. footwear industry is now quite small (after several decades of continual decline), which may mean
that shocks to the sector are unimportant for policy outcomes affecting border enforcement.




                                                         21
greater in later subperiods (after 1980), which may reflect the progressive relocation of the industry to

California and its apparent increasing reliance on undocumented workers. The impact of housing starts

is weaker in later subperiods. Results for other sectors are unaffected by changes in the time period.



VI.     Concluding Remarks

        In this paper, we examine the correlation between sectoral shocks and border enforcement in

the United States. Enforcement of national borders is the main policy instrument the U.S. government

uses to combat illegal immigration.         The motivation for the exercise is to see whether border

enforcement falls following positive shocks to sectors that are intensive in the use of undocumented

labor, as would be consistent with a political economy explanation of how enforcement policy against

illegal immigration is determined. The main finding is that border enforcement is negatively correlated

with relative price changes in the apparel, fruits and vegetables, and slaughtered livestock industries and

with housing starts in the western United States. This suggests that authorities relax border enforcement

when the demand for undocumented workers is high. We also find that border enforcement rises when

overall labor-market conditions in the United States tighten, which suggests that the U.S. government

raises enforcement when attempted illegal immigration is expected to be high. Taken together with the

results on sectoral shocks, it appears that enforcement softens when the specific sectors that use

undocumented workers intensively expand but not when the overall demand for labor is high. This is

consistent with free-rider problems in special interest group activity (Olson, 1965), in which sectors that

benefit greatly from lower border enforcement, such as apparel and agriculture, lobby heavily on the

issue while remaining sectors that benefit modestly or not at all are politically inactive.

        Our results are relevant not only for the political economy of border enforcement but for the

empirical importance of political economy in general. In recent years, several papers have tested



                                                      22
models of the political economy of trade policy (e.g., Trefler, 1993; Goldberg and Maggi, 1997).

While this work is important for understanding the determination of trade policy, it does not necessarily

represent the best strategy for testing political economy theories in general, as trade policy is often

constrained by international treaties and cannot be changed frequently or easily. Political decisions

regarding border enforcement do not have these features. The INS can reallocate resources between

different types of enforcement and the U.S. Congress can change appropriations to the INS on an

annual basis, if not more often. This makes border enforcement a valuable laboratory for examining the

impact of political factors on policy outcomes.




                                                   23
References

Bond, Eric W. and Tain Jy Chen. 1987. "The Welfare Effects of Illegal Immigration." Journal of
International Economics 23(3/4): 315-328.

Borjas, G.J., Freeman, R.B. and Lang, K. 1991. "Undocumented Mexican-Born Workers in the
United States: How Many, How Permanent?" in J.M. Abowd and R.B. Freeman, eds., Immigration,
Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 77-100.

Bratsberg, Bernt. 1996. "Legal versus Illegal U.S. Immigration and Source Country Characteristics."
Southern Economic Journal 61(3): 715-727.

Bucci, Gabriella and Rafael Tenorio. 1996. "On Financing the Internal Enforcement of Illegal
Immigration Policies." Journal of Population Economics 9(1): 65-81.

Chiswick, Barry R. 1984. "Illegal Aliens in the United States Labor Market: Analysis of Occupational
Attainment and Earnings." International Migration Review 18(3): 714-732.

Djajic, Slobodan. 1987. "Illegal Aliens, Unemployment, and Immigration Policy."         Journal of
Development Economics. 25(1): 235-249.

Djajic, Slobodan. 1997. "Illegal Immigration and Resource Allocation." International Economic
Review. 38(1): 97-117.

Ethier, Wilfred J. "Illegal Immigration: The Host-Country Problem." American Economic Review,
May 1986, 76(2), pp. 56-71.

General Accounting Office (GAO). 1997. "H-2A Agricultural Guestworker Program: Changes Could
Improve Services to Employers and Better Protect Workers." Washington, D.C.

Gimpel, James G. and James R. Edwards, Jr. 1999. The Congressional Politics of Immigration
Reform. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Godfrey, L.G. 1994. "Testing for Serial Correlation by Variable Addition in Dynamic Models
Estimated by Instrumental Variables." The Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 550-559.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Giovanni Maggi. 1997. “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation.”
NBER Working Paper No. 5942.

Groenendijk, Kees and Rene Hampsink. 1994. Temporary Employment of Migrants in Europe.
Amsterdam: Reeks, Recht, and Samenleving.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale." American Economic Review 84: 833-50
Hamilton, J.D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                 24
Hanson, G.H., R. Robertson, and A. Spilimbergo. 1999. "Does Border Enforcement Protect U.S.
Workers from Illegal Immigration?" NBER Working Paper No. 7054.

Hanson, G.H. and A. Spilimbergo. 1998. "Mexican Migration and U.S. Policy Options." In Peter
Hakim and Nora Lustig, eds., Immigration in U.S.-Mexican Relations, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution and Inter-American Dialogue.

Hanson, G.H. and A. Spilimbergo. 1999. "Illegal Immigration, Border Enforcement, and Relative
Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico Border," American Economic Review.

Juffras, Jason. 1991. "Impact of Immigration Reform and Control Act on the Immigration and
Naturalization Service." The RAND Corporation Report JR-09.

Krishna, Pravin and Devashish Mitra. 1999. “A Theory of Unilateralism and Reciprocity in Trade
Policy.” Mimeo, Brown University.

Martin, Philip L. 1990. "Harvest of Confusion: Immigration Reform and California Agriculture."
International Migration Review 24(1): 69-95.

Moehring, H.B. 1988. "Symbol versus Substance in Legislative Activity: The Case of Illegal
Immigration." Public Choice 57(3): 287-294.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Sapir, Andre. 1983. "Foreign Competition, Immigration, and Structural Adjustment." Journal of
International Economics 14(3/4): 381-394.

Smith, James P. and Barry Edmonston, eds. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, Demographic,
and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Trefler, Daniel. 1993. “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection.” Journal of
Political Economy 101: 138-160.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1991. "Employer Sanctions and U.S. Labor Markets." Washington, DC.

U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of Justice. 1996 Statistical Yearbook of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1998.

Warren, Robert. "Estimates of the Undocumented Immigrant Population Residing in the United States,
by Country of Origin and State of Residence: October 1992." Washington, D.C.: U.S. Immigration
and Naturalization Service, Department of Justice, 1995.




                                                 25
</ref_section>
    Table 1: Foreign-Born Share of Employment By Industry and Education Group, 1990

                    Industry HS Dropout        HS Graduate        Some College College Grad.
                 Agriculture          0.315             0.041              0.029             0.029
       Agriculture Services           0.295             0.092              0.064             0.041
                      Mining          0.058             0.007              0.032             0.081
                Construction          0.189             0.047              0.046             0.098
              Food Products           0.336             0.091              0.086             0.078
                   Tobacco            0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000
                    Textiles          0.133             0.019              0.022             0.064
                    Apparel           0.419             0.097              0.183             0.251
                    Lumber            0.098             0.015              0.017             0.040
                   Furniture          0.244             0.076              0.051             0.051
                       Paper          0.164             0.033              0.074             0.055
                     Printing         0.157             0.050              0.056             0.055
                  Chemicals           0.224             0.040              0.057             0.089
         Petroleum Refining           0.000             0.032              0.000             0.000
                     Rubber           0.282             0.052              0.094             0.066
                    Leather           0.160             0.132              0.106             0.075
          Stone, Clay, Glass          0.110             0.043              0.056             0.084
             Primary Metals           0.241             0.032              0.030             0.041
             Metal Products           0.267             0.079              0.049             0.104
                  Machinery           0.195             0.040              0.063             0.142
            Elec. Machinery           0.245             0.086              0.097             0.139
           Transport Equip.           0.182             0.060              0.049             0.069
      Misc. Manufacturing.            0.405             0.097              0.129             0.119
          Transport/Utilities         0.117             0.040              0.062             0.083
           Wholesale Trade            0.197             0.070              0.060             0.093
                Retail Trade          0.153             0.070              0.065             0.116
      Finance, Insur., Real           0.150             0.057              0.063             0.086
                      Estate
        Investment Finance            0.302             0.103              0.120             0.069
           Lodging Services           0.278             0.122              0.135             0.205
          Personal Services           0.214             0.092              0.061             0.200
          Business Services           0.225             0.072              0.064             0.110
       Automobile Services            0.156             0.073              0.128             0.123
            Repair Services           0.194             0.019              0.069             0.139
              Entertainment           0.121             0.056              0.077             0.054
            Health Services           0.127             0.061              0.061             0.130
             Legal Services           0.233             0.049              0.070             0.037
         Education Services           0.104             0.047              0.062             0.061
             Social Services          0.092             0.053              0.055             0.065
        Household Services            0.323             0.155              0.145             0.268
                Government            0.097             0.027              0.044             0.051
Each cell shows the fraction of workers that were foreign born in a particular education group (high-
school dropout, high-school graduate, some college, college graduate) and in a particular industry.
Source: Public Use MicroSample of the U.S. Census of Population and Housing, 1990.




                                                    26
                   Table 2a: OLS Estimation Results for Border Enforcement
                                       (p values are in parentheses)

                         Granger Causality Test           Long-Run Elasticity

Border                                         --                       0.885      Breusch-          1.030
Enforcement                                                            (0.00)      Godfrey          (0.38)

Border                                      0.967                      -0.052      Adj.              0.986
Apprehensions                              (0.81)                      (0.71)      R-Sqd.

Fruit and Veg.                              3.902                      -0.491      Schwarz          -5.610
Relative Price                             (0.27)                      (0.07)      Criterion

Livestock                                 14.248                       -0.657
Relative Price                             (0.00)                      (0.02)

Apparel                                     8.753                      -0.210
Relative Price                             (0.03)                      (0.61)

Housing Starts                              8.753                      -0.283
Western U.S.                               (0.03)                      (0.02)

U.S.                                      11.947                        4.879
Real Wage                                  (0.01)                      (0.01)

U.S.                                        7.813                      -0.389
Unemp. Rate                                (0.05)                      (0.14)

Mexico                                      2.844                       0.155
Real Wage                                  (0.42)                      (0.46)

Observations are monthly for January, 1970 to December, 1996. All variables are in logs. Border
Enforcement (Apprehensions) is officer hours (apprehensions) by the U.S. Border Patrol on linewatch
duty. Prices are commodity PPI/all commodity PPI. The U.S. wage is a weighted average of wages in
labor-intensive industries. The Mexican wage is for production workers in manufacturing. Three lags on
the independent variables are included. Additional regressors are a time trend and monthly dummy
variables. Under the null hypothesis that coefficients on lagged values of a variable are zero, the Granger
causality test statistic has a Κ2 distribution. The long-run elasticity is the sum of coefficients on lagged
values of an independent variable divided by one minus the sum of coefficients on the dependent variable
(for the dependent variable it is the sum of the coefficients on lagged values). The Breusch-Godfrey test
for serial correlation is an F test on the inclusion of lagged residuals in the regression with the
contemporaneous residual as the dependent variable (Godfrey, 1994).




                                                     27
                  Table 2b: OLS Estimation Results for Border Apprehensions
                                       (p values are in parentheses)

                         Granger Causality Test          Long-Run Elasticity

Border                                   0.605                         0.068       Breusch-         1.56
Enforcement                              (0.90)                        (0.84)      Godfrey        (0.20)

Border                                        --                       0.821       Adj.             0.98
Apprehensions                                                          (0.00)      R-Sqd.

Fruit and Veg.                           3.691                         0.166       Schwarz         -3.87
Relative Price                           (0.30)                        (0.66)      Criterion

Livestock                                0.147                         0.026
Relative Price                           (0.99)                        (0.95)

Apparel                                  4.926                         -0.946
Relative Price                           (0.18)                         (0.10)

Housing Starts                           0.186                         -0.056
Western U.S.                             (0.98)                         (0.75)

U.S.                                     12.896                        7.526
Real Wage                                (0.01)                        (0.00)

U.S.                                      2.757                        0.461
Unemp. Rate                              (0.43)                        (0.21)

Mexico                                    0.888                        -0.228
Real Wage                                (0.83)                         (0.44)


The specification and estimation procedure is identical to that in Table 2a, except for the change in
dependent variable.




                                                    28
                       Table 3a: Additional Results for Border Enforcement
                                       (p values are in parentheses)

                       Granger Causality Test          Long-Run Elasticity

Border                                       --                      0.888        Breusch-          0.63
Enforcement                                                         (0.00)        Godfrey         (0.59)

Border                                  3.224                       -0.215        Adj.            0.986
Apprehensions                           (0.36)                      (0.11)        R-Sqd.

Food Products                           4.619                       -3.815        Schwarz          -5.62
Capacity Util.                          (0.20)                       (0.08)       Criterion

Apparel                                 5.291                       -1.265
Capacity Util.                          (0.15)                       (0.04)

Housing Starts                          2.707                       -0.105
Western U.S.                            (0.44)                       (0.43)

U.S.                                   13.293                       6.318
Real Wage                               (0.00)                      (0.00)

U.S.                                    5.163                       -0.293
Unemp. Rate                             (0.16)                       (0.27)

Mexico                                  2.861                       0.053
Real Wage                               (0.41)                      (0.79)

The specification and estimation procedure is identical to that in Table 2a, except that the relative price
variables have been replaced by capacity utilization rates.




                                                     29
                      Table 3b: Additional Results for Border Apprehensions
                                       (p values are in parentheses)

                       Granger Causality Test          Long-Run Elasticity

Border                                   0.603                     -0.084         Breusch-          0.63
Enforcement                             (0.90)                      (0.82)        Godfrey         (0.59)

Border                                        --                     0.832        Adj.              0.98
Apprehensions                                                       (0.00)        R-Sqd.

Food Products                           0.479                      -0.442         Schwarz          -3.91
Capacity Util.                          (0.92)                      (0.89)        Criterion

Apparel                                 4.774                      -0.861
Capacity Util.                          (0.19)                      (0.33)

Housing Starts                          0.452                       0.000
Western U.S.                            (0.93)                      (1.00)

U.S.                                   15.113                       9.498
Real Wage                               (0.00)                      (0.00)

U.S.                                    2.885                       0.702
Unemp. Rate                             (0.41)                      (0.07)

Mexico                                  0.306                      -0.229
Real Wage                               (0.96)                      (0.44)

The specification and estimation procedure is identical to that in Table 2b, except that the relative price
variables have been replaced by capacity utilization rates.




                                                     30
                                       Linewatch Enforcement             Interior Enforcement

Log Monthly Enforcement Hours    13




                                12.5




                                 12




                                11.5




                                 11

                                       71   73   75   77   79   81   83   85   87   89   91   93   95   97
                                                                     Year
                                        Figure 1: Border Patrol Enforcement
                                   Linewatch Apprehensions           Interior Apprehensions



                            11.5
Log Monthly Apprehensions




                             11


                            10.5


                             10


                             9.5


                              9


                             8.5


                              8

                                   71   73   75   77   79   81   83   85   87   89   91   93   95   97
                                                                 Year
                                   Figure 2: Border Patrol Apprehensions
                                            Fruits and Vegetables              Slaughtered Livestock
                                            Apparel
Log Commodity PPI/All Commodity PPI


                                      .6



                                      .4



                                      .2



                                       0



                                      -.2



                                      -.4


                                            71   73   75   77   79   81   83 85    87   89   91   93   95   97
                                                                            Year
                                             Figure 3: Relative Commodity Prices
                           Food Processing                       Apparel

% Capacity Utilized   90




                      80




                      70




                      60

                           71   73   75   77   79   81   83    85    87   89   91   93   95   97   99
                                                              Year
                                 Figure 4: Capacity Utilization
