                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      ORDER FLOW AND
                                  EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS

                                          Martin D. D. Evans
                                          Richard K. Lyons

                                          Working Paper 7317
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7317


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




We thank the following for valuable comments: Menzie Chinn, Peter DeMarzo, Petra Geraats, Richard
Meese, Michael Melvin, Andrew Rose, Mark Taranto, Ingrid Werner, and seminar participants at UC
Berkeley and the 1999 NBER Summer Institute (IFM). Lyons thanks the National Science Foundation for
financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 7317
August 1999
JEL No. F31, G15
                                               ABSTRACT

        Macroeconomic models of nominal exchange rates perform poorly. In sample, R2 statistics as high
as 10 percent are rare. Out of sample, these models are typically out-forecast by a naïve random walk. This
paper presents a model of a new kind. Instead of relying exclusively on macroeconomic determinants, the
model includes a determinant from the field of microstructure-order flow. Order flow is the proximate
determinant of price in all microstructure models. This is a radically different approach to exchange rate
determination. It is also strikingly successful in accounting for realized rates. Our model of daily exchange-
rate changes produces R2 statistics above 50 percent. Out of sample, our model produces significantly
better short-horizon forecasts than a random walk. For the DM/$ spot market as a whole, we find that $1
billion of net dollar purchases increases the DM price of a dollar by about 1 pfennig.


Martin D. D. Evans                              Richard K. Lyons
Department of Economics                         Haas School of Business
Georgetown University                     UC Berkeley
Washington, DC 20057                            Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER                                        and NBER
evansm1@gunet.georgetown.edu                    lyons@haas.berkeley.edu
         Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics




      Omitted variables is another possible explanation for the lack of explanatory power in
      asset market models. However, empirical researchers have shown considerable imagina-
      tion in their specification searches, so it is not easy to think of variables that have es-
      caped consideration in an exchange rate equation.

                                                                          Richard Meese (1990)




1. Motivation: Microstructure Meets Exchange Rate Economics

        Since the landmark papers of Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b), exchange
rate economics has been in crisis. It is in crisis in the sense that current macroeco-
nomic approaches to exchange rates are empirical failures: the proportion of
monthly exchange rate changes that current models can explain is essentially zero.
In their survey, Frankel and Rose (1995) write “the Meese and Rogoff analysis at
short horizons has never been convincingly overturned or explained. It continues to
exert a pessimistic effect on the field of empirical exchange rate modeling in par-
ticular and international finance in general.” 1
        Which direction to turn is not obvious. Flood and Rose (1995), for example,
are “driven to the conclusion that the most critical determinants of exchange rate
volatility are not macroeconomic.” If determinants are not macro fundamentals like
interest rates, money supplies, and trade balances, then what are they? Two
alternatives have attracted attention. The first is that exchange rate determinants
include extraneous variables. These extraneous variables are typically modeled as
rational speculative bubbles (Blanchard 1979, Dornbusch 1982, Meese 1986, and
Evans 1986, among others). Though the jury is still out, Flood and Hodrick (1990)
conclude that the bubble alternative remains unconvincing. A second alternative to
macro fundamentals is irrationality. For example, exchange rates may be deter-
mined in part from avoidable expectational errors (Dominguez 1986, Frankel and

1The relevant literature is vast. Recent surveys include Frankel and Rose (1995), Isard (1995), and
Taylor (1995).


                                                  1
Froot 1987, and Hau 1998, among others). On a priori grounds, many economists
find this second alternative unappealing. Even if one is sympathetic to the presence
of irrationality, there is a wide gulf between its presence and accounting for ex-
change rate variability. This, too, remains an unconvincing alternative.
        Our paper moves in a new direction: the microeconomics of asset pricing. This
direction makes available a rich set of models from the field of microstructure
finance. These models are largely new to exchange rate economics, and in this sense
they provide a fresh approach. For example, microstructure models direct attention
to new variables, variables that have “escaped the consideration” of macroeconom-
ists (borrowing from the opening quote). The most important of these variables is
order flow.2 Order flow is the proximate determinant of price in all microstructure
models. (That order flow determines price is therefore robust to differences in
market structure, which makes this property more general than it might seem.) Our
analysis draws heavily on this causal link from order flow to price. One level deeper,
microstructure models also provide discipline for thinking about how order flow itself
is determined. Information is key here—in particular, information that currency
markets need to aggregate. This can include traditional macro fundamentals, but is
not limited to them. In sum, our microeconomic approach provides a new type of
alternative to the traditional macro approach, one that does not rely on extraneous
information or irrationality.
        Turning to the data, we find that order flow does indeed matter for exchange-
rate determination. By “matter” we mean that order flow explains most of the
variation in nominal exchange rates over periods as long as four months. The graphs
below provide a convenient summary of this explanatory power. The solid lines are
the spot rates of the DM and Yen against the Dollar over our four-month sample
(May 1 to August 31, 1996). The dashed lines are marketwide order-flow for the
respective currencies. Order flow, denoted by x, is the sum over time of signed trades
between foreign exchange dealers worldwide.3

2 Order flow is a measure of buying/selling pressure. It is the net of buyer-initiated orders and seller-
initiated orders. In a dealer market, it is the dealers who absorb this order flow, and they are
compensated for doing so. (In an auction market, limit orders absorb the flow of market orders.)
3 For example, if a dealer initiates a trade against another dealer's DM/$ quote, and that trade is a $

purchase (sale), then order flow is +1 (–1). These are cumulated across dealers over each 24-hour
trading day (weekend trading—which is minimal—is included in Monday). In spot foreign exchange,
roughly 75% of total volume is between dealers (25% is between dealers and non-dealer customers).


                                                   2
                                                                   Figure 1
                   Four Months of Exchange Rates (solid) and Order Flow (dashed)
                                                          May 1-August 31, 1996


                                 DM/$                                                                          ¥/$



        1.56                                                   600                     112                                                   3500

        1.54                                                   400                                                                           3000
                                                                                       110
                                                               200                                                                           2500
        1.52
                                                               0                       108
                                                                                                                                             2000
         1.5




                                                                               YEN/$
                                                               -200
 DM/$




                                                                                       106                                                   1500

                                                                       x




                                                                                                                                                    x
        1.48                                                   -400
                                                                                                                                             1000
                                                               -600                    104
        1.46
                                                               -800                                                                          500
        1.44                                                                           102
                                                               -1000                                                                         0
        1.42                                                   -1200                   100                                                   -500
                       17
                            25
                                 33
                                      41
                                           49
                                                57
                                                     65
                                                          73




                                                                                                     17
                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                               33
                                                                                                                    41
                                                                                                                         49
                                                                                                                              57
                                                                                                                                   65
                                                                                                                                        73
               1
                   9




                                                                                             1
                                                                                                 9




Order flow and nominal exchange rates are strongly positively correlated. Macro-
economic exchange rate models, in contrast, produce virtually no correlation over
periods as short as four months.
               To address this more formally, we develop and estimate a model that in-
cludes both macroeconomic determinants (e.g., interest rates) and a microstructure
determinant (order flow). Our estimates verify the significance of the above correla-
tion. The model accounts for about 60 percent of daily changes in the DM/$ ex-
change rate. For comparison, macro models rarely account for even 10 percent of
monthly changes. Our daily frequency is noteworthy: though our model draws from
microstructure, it is not estimated at the transaction frequency. Daily analysis is in
the missing middle between past microstructure work (tick-by-tick data) and past
macro work (monthly data). Bridging the two helps clarify how lower-frequency
exchange rates emerge from the heart of the market.
               To complement these in-sample results, we also examine the model’s out-of-
sample forecasting ability. Work by Meese and Rogoff (1983a) examines short-


                                                                           3
horizon forecasts (1 to 12 months). They find that a random walk model out-
forecasts the leading macro models, even when macro-model “forecasts” are based
on realized future fundamentals. Subsequent work lengthens the horizon beyond 12
months and finds that macro models begin to dominate the random walk (Meese and
Rogoff 1983b, Chinn 1991, Chinn and Meese 1994, and Mark 1995). But the shorter-
horizon results remain a puzzle. Here we examine horizons of less than one month.
(Transaction data sets that are currently available are too short to generate
statistical power at monthly horizons.) We find that over horizons from one-day to
two-weeks, our model produces better forecasts than the random-walk model (over
30 percent lower root mean squared error).
        The relation we find between exchange rates and order flow is not inconsis-
tent with the macro approach, but it does raise several concerns. Under the macro
approach, order flow should not matter for exchange rate determination: macroeco-
nomic information is publicly available—it is impounded in exchange rates without
the need for order flow. More precisely, the macro approach typically assumes that:
(1) all information relevant for exchange rate determination is common knowledge;
and (2) the mapping from that information to equilibrium prices is also common
knowledge. If either of these two assumptions is relaxed, however, then order flow
will convey information about market-clearing prices. Relaxing the second assump-
tion should not be controversial, given the failure of current exchange-rate models.
Direct evidence, too, corroborates that order flow conveys relevant information
(Lyons 1995, Yao 1997, Covrig and Melvin 1998, Ito, Lyons and Melvin 1998,
Cheung and Wong 1998, Bjonnes and Rime 1998, Evans 1999, and Payne 1999.)4
        Note that order flow being a proximate determinant of exchange rates does
not preclude macro fundamentals from being the underlying determinant. Macro
fundamentals in exchange rate equations may be so imprecisely measured that


4 The standard example of order flow that conveys non-public information is orders from central bank

intervention. Probably more important on an ongoing basis is order flow that conveys information
about “portfolio shifts” that are not common knowledge. A recent event provides a sharp example.
Major banks attribute the yen/dollar rate’s drop from 145 to 115 in Fall 1998 to “the unwinding of
positions by hedge funds that had borrowed in cheap yen to finance purchases of higher-yielding
dollar assets” (The Economist, 10/10/98). This unwinding—and the selling of dollars that came with
it—was forced by the scaling back of speculative leverage in the months following the Long Term
Capital Management crisis. These trades were not common knowledge as they were occurring. (See
also section 6 below, and Cai et al. 1999.)




                                                 4
order-flow provides a better “proxy” of their variation. This interpretation of order
flow as a proxy for macro fundamentals is particularly plausible with respect to
expectations: standard empirical measures of expected future fundamentals are
obviously imprecise.5 Orders, on the other hand, reflect a willingness to back one's
beliefs with real money (unlike survey-based measures of expectations). Measuring
order flow under this interpretation is akin to counting the backed-by-money
expectational votes.
        This paper has six remaining sections. Section 2 contrasts the micro and
macro approaches to exchange rates. Section 3 develops a model that includes both
micro and macro determinants. Section 4 describes our data. Section 5 presents our
results. Section 6 provides perspective on our results. Section 7 concludes.



2. Models: Spanning the Micro-Macro Divide

        A core distinction between a microstructure approach to exchange rates and
the traditional macro approach is the role of trades in price determination. In macro
models, trades have no distinct role in determining price. In microstructure models,
trades have a leading role—they are the proximate cause of price adjustment. It is
instructive to frame this distinction by contrasting the structural models that
emerge from these two approaches.


Structural Models: Macro Approach
        Exchange-rate models within the macro approach are typically estimated at
the monthly frequency. When estimated in changes they take the form:


(1)                               ∆pt = f(∆i, ∆m, …) + εt.


where ∆pt is the change in the log nominal exchange rate over the month (DM/$).
The driving variables in the function f(∆i,∆m,…) include changes in home and
foreign nominal interest rates i, money supply m, and other macro determinants,


5 One might argue that expectations measurement cannot be driving the negative results of Meese
and Rogoff because they use the driving variables’ realized values. However, if the underlying macro
model is incomplete, then realized values still produce an incorrect expectations measure.


                                                 5
denoted here by the ellipsis.6 Changes in these public-information variables drive
price—there is no role for order flow. Any incidental price effects from order flow
that might arise are subsumed in the residual εt. These models are logically coherent
and intuitively appealing. Unfortunately, they account for almost none of the
monthly variation in floating exchange rates.


Structural Models: Microstructure Approach
        Equations of exchange-rate determination within the microstructure ap-
proach are derived from the optimization problem faced by price setters in the
market—the dealers.7 These models are all variations on the following specification:


(2)                                ∆pt = g(∆x, ∆I, …) + νt


Now ∆pt is the DM/$ rate change over two transactions, rather than over a month as
in the macro models. The driving variables in the function g(∆x,∆I,…) include order
flow ∆x, the change in net dealer positions (or inventory) ∆I, and other micro
determinants, denoted by the ellipsis. Order flow can take both positive and
negative values because the counterparty either purchases (+) at the dealer’s offer or
sells at the dealer’s bid (–). Here we use the convention that a positive ∆x is net
dollar purchases, making the theoretical relation positive: net dollar purchases drive
up the DM price of dollars. It is interesting to note that the residual in this case is
the mirror image of the residual in equation 1: it subsumes any price changes due to
determinants in the macro model f(∆i,∆m,…), whereas the residual in equation 1
subsumes price changes due to determinants in the micro model g(∆x,∆I,…).
        Microstructure models predict a positive relation between ∆p and ∆x because
order flow communicates non-public information, and once communicated, it is


6  The precise list of determinants depends on the model. Meese and Rogoff (1983a) focus on three
models in particular: the flexible-price monetary model, the sticky-price monetary model, and the
sticky-price asset model. Here our interest is simply a broad-brush contrast between the macro and
microstructure approaches. For specific models see Frenkel (1976), Dornbusch (1976), and Mussa
(1976), among many others.
7 Empirical work using structural micro models includes Glosten and Harris (1988), Madhavan and

Smidt (1991), and Foster and Viswanathan (1993), all of which address the NYSE. Structural models
in a multiple-dealer setting include Snell and Tonks (1995) for stocks, Lyons (1995) for currencies,
and Vitale (1998) for bonds.




                                                 6
reflected in price. For example, if there is an agent who has superior information
about the value of an asset, and that information advantage induces the agent to
trade, then a dealer can learn from those trades (purchases indicate good news
about the asset’s value, and vice versa). Empirically, estimates of a relation between
∆p and ∆x at the transaction frequency are uniformly positive and significant. This
is true for many different markets, including stocks, bonds, and foreign exchange.
        The relation in microstructure models between ∆p and ∆I is not our focus in
this paper, but let us clarify nonetheless. This relation is referred to as the inven-
tory-control effect on price. The inventory-control effect arises when a dealer adjusts
his price to control fluctuation in his inventory. For example, if a dealer has a larger
long position than is desired, he may shade his bid and offer downward to induce a
customer purchase, thereby reducing his position. This affects realized transaction
prices, which accounts for the relation. (These idiosyncratic inventory effects on
individual dealer prices do not arise in the model developed in the next section.)


Spanning the Micro-Macro Divide
        To span the divide between the micro and macro approaches, we develop a
model with components from both:8


(3)                          ∆pt = f(∆i,…) + g(∆x,…) + ηt.


The challenge is the frequency mismatch: transaction frequency for the micro
models versus monthly frequency for the macro models. In the next section we
develop a model in the spirit of equation (3). We estimate the model at the daily
frequency by using micro determinants that are time-aggregated. We focus in
particular on order flow ∆x. Our time-aggregated measure spans a much longer
period than is addressed elsewhere within empirical microstructure.




8Goldberg and Tenorio (1997) develop a model for the Russian ruble market that includes both macro
and microstructure components. Osler’s (1998) trading model includes macroeconomic “current
account traders” who affect the exchange rate in flow equilibrium.


                                                7
3. Portfolio Shifts Model


Overview
        One source of exchange rate variation in the model is portfolio shifts on the
part of the public. These portfolio shifts have two important features. First, they are
not common knowledge as they occur. Second, they are large enough that clearing
the market requires adjustment of the spot exchange rate.
        The first feature—that portfolio shifts are not common knowledge—provides
a role for order flow. At the beginning of each day, public portfolio shifts are mani-
fested in orders in the foreign exchange market. These orders are not publicly
observable. Dealers take the other side of these orders, and then trade among
themselves during the day to share the resulting inventory risk. The market learns
about the initial portfolio shifts by observing this interdealer trading activity. By the
end of the day, the dealers’ inventory risk is shared with the public.
        The second important feature is that the initial portfolio shifts, once absorbed
by the public at the end of the day, are large enough to move price. This requires
that the public’s demand for foreign-currency assets is less than perfectly elastic.9 If
the public’s demand is less than perfectly elastic, different-currency assets are
imperfect substitutes, and price adjustment is required to clear the market. In this
sense, our model is in the spirit of the portfolio balance approach to exchange rates.
In another sense, however, our model is very different from that earlier approach.
Portfolio balance models are driven by changes in asset supply. Asset supply is
constant in our model. Rather, our model identifies two distinct components on the
demand side. The first is driven by innovations in public information (standard
macro fundamentals). The second is driven by non-public information. This non-
public information takes the form of portfolio shifts. The model does not take a stand
on the underlying determinants of these portfolio shifts (though we do address this
issue in section 6).




9Evidence that asset demand curves slope down is provided by Scholes (1972) and Shleifer (1986),
among many others.




                                               8
Specifics
              Consider a pure exchange economy with T periods and two assets, one risk-
less, and one with a stochastic payoff representing foreign exchange. The time-T
payoff on foreign exchange, denoted F, is composed of a series of increments, so that

      ∑
          T
F=            r . The increments rt are i.i.d. Normal(0,Σr) and are observed before trading
          t =1 t

in each period. These realized increments represent the flow of publicly available
macroeconomic information over time (e.g., changes in interest rates).
              The foreign exchange market is organized as a decentralized dealership mar-
ket with N dealers, indexed by i, and a continuum of non-dealer customers (the
public), indexed by z∈[0,1]. Within each period (day) there are three rounds of
trading. In the first round dealers trade with the public. In the second round dealers
trade among themselves to share the resulting inventory risk. In the third round
dealers trade again with the public to share inventory risk more broadly. The timing
within each period is:


                                       Daily Timing


              Round 1                           Round 2                      Round 3




 rt            Dealers   Public       Dealers       Interdealer   Order     Dealers   Public
               Quote     Trades       Quote            Trade      Flow       Quote    Trades




The dealers and customers all have identical negative exponential utility defined
over time-T wealth.


Trading Round 1
              At the beginning of each period t, all market participants observe rt, the
period’s increment to the payoff F. On the basis of this increment and other avail-


                                                9
able information, each dealer simultaneously and independently quotes a scalar
price to his customers at which he agrees to buy and sell any amount.10 We denote
this round-one price of dealer i as Pi1. (To ease the notational burden, we suppress
the period subscript t when clarity permits.) Each dealer then receives a net
customer-order realization ci1 that is executed at his quoted price Pi1, where ci1<0
denotes a net customer sale (dealer i purchase). Each of these N customer-order
realizations is distributed Normal(0,Σc1), and they are independent across dealers.
(Think of these initial customer trades as assigned—or preferenced—to a single
dealer, resulting from bilateral customer relationships for example.) Customer
orders are also distributed independently of the public-information increment rt.11
These orders represent portfolio shifts on the part of the non-dealer public. Their
realizations are not publicly observable.


Trading Round 2
        Round 2 is the interdealer trading round. Each dealer simultaneously and
independently quotes a scalar price to other dealers at which he agrees to buy and
sell any amount. These interdealer quotes are observable and available to all
dealers in the market. Each dealer then simultaneously and independently trades
on other dealers’ quotes. Orders at a given price are split evenly across any dealers
quoting that price. Let Ti2 denote the (net) interdealer trade initiated by dealer i in
round two. At the close of round 2, all dealers observe the net interdealer order flow
from that period:


                                                      N
(4)                                          ∆x = ∑ Ti 2
                                                     i =1




Note that interdealer order flow is observed without noise, which maximizes the
difference in transparency across trade types: customer-dealer trades are not

10 The sizes tradable at quoted prices in major FX markets are very large relative to other markets.
At the time of our sample, the standard quote in DM/$ was good for up to $10 million, with a tiny bid-
offer spread, typically less than four basis points. Introducing a bid-offer spread (or price schedule) in
round one to endogenize the number of dealers is a straightforward—but distracting—extension of
our model.
11 A natural extension of this specification is that customer orders reflect changing expectations of

future rt.


                                                   10
publicly observed but interdealer trades are observed. In reality, FX trades between
customers and dealers are not publicly observed. Though signals of interdealer order
flow are publicly observed, it is not the case that these trades are observed without
noise. Adding noise to Eq. (4), however, has no qualitative impact on our estimating
equation, so we stick to this simpler specification.


Trading Round 3
       In round 3, dealers share overnight risk with the non-dealer public. Unlike
round 1, the public’s motive for trading in round 3 is non-stochastic and purely
speculative. Initially, each dealer simultaneously and independently quotes a scalar
price Pi3 at which he agrees to buy and sell any amount. These quotes are observ-
able and available to the public at large.
       The mass of customers on the interval [0,1] is large (in a convergence sense)
relative to the N dealers. This implies that the dealers’ capacity for bearing over-
night risk is small relative to the public’s capacity. Dealers therefore set prices so
that the public willingly absorbs dealer inventory imbalances, and each dealer ends
the day with no net position. These round-3 prices are conditioned on the round-2
interdealer order flow. The interdealer order flow informs dealers of the size of the
total inventory that the public needs to absorb to achieve stock equilibrium.
       Knowing the size of the total inventory the public needs to absorb is not suffi-
cient for determining round-3 prices. Dealers also need to know the risk-bearing
capacity of the public. We assume it is less than infinite. Specifically, given negative
exponential utility, the public’s total demand for the risky asset in round-3, denoted
c3, is a linear function of the its expected return conditional on public information:


                                c3 = γ(E[P3,t+1|Ω3]-P3,t)


where the positive coefficient γ captures the aggregate risk-bearing capacity of the
public, and Ω3 is the public information available at the time of trading in round 3.


Equilibrium
       The dealer’s problem is defined over four choice variables, the three scalar



                                             11
quotes Pi1, Pi2, and Pi3, and the dealer’s interdealer trade Ti2 (the latter being a
component of ∆x, the interdealer order flow). The appendix provides details of the
model’s solution. Here we provide some intuition. Consider the three scalar quotes.
No arbitrage ensures that, within a given round, all dealers quote a common price.
Given that all dealers quote a common price, this price is necessarily conditioned on
common information only. Though rt is common information at the beginning of
round 1, order flow ∆xt is not observed until the end of round 2. The price for round-3
trading, P3, therefore reflects the information in both rt and ∆xt.
       Whether ∆x does influence price depends on whether it communicates any
price-relevant information. The answer is yes. Understanding why requires a few
steps. First, the appendix shows that it is optimal for each dealer to trade in round 2
according to the trading rule:


                                       Ti2 = α ci1


with a constant coefficient α. Thus, each dealer’s trade in round 2 is proportional to
the customer order he receives in round 1. This implies that when dealers observe
the interdealer order flow ∆x=ΣiTi2 at the end of round 2, they can infer the aggre-
gate portfolio shift on the part of the public in round 1 (the sum of the N realizations
of ci1). Dealers also know that the public needs to be induced to re-absorb this
portfolio shift in round 3. This inducement requires a price adjustment. Hence the
relation between the interdealer order flow and the subsequent price adjustment.


The Pricing Relation
       The appendix establishes that the change in price from the end of period t-1
to the end of period t is:


(5)                                 ∆Pt = rt + λ∆xt


where λ is a positive constant. That this price change includes the innovation in
payoffs rt one-for-one is unsurprising. The λ∆xt term is the portfolio shift term. This
term reflects the price adjustment required to induce re-absorption of the public's



                                           12
portfolio shift from round 1. For intuition, note that λ∆x=λΣiTi2=λαΣici1. The sum
Σici1 is this total portfolio shift from round 1. The public's total demand in round 3,
c3, is not perfectly elastic, and λ insures that at the round-3 price c3+Σici1 =0.


Empirical Implementation
        Getting from equation (5) to an estimable model requires that we specialize
the macro component of the model—the public-information increment rt. We choose
to specialize this component to capture changes in the nominal interest differential.
That is, we define rt ≡ ∆(it–it*), where it is the nominal dollar interest rate and it* is
the nominal non-dollar interest rate (DM or Yen). This yields the following regres-
sion model:


(6)                              ∆Pt = β1∆(it–it*) + β2∆xt + ηt


        Our choice of specialization has some advantages. First, this specification is
consistent with monetary macro models in the sense that these models call for
estimating ∆P using the change in the interest differential as an independent
variable, rather than the differential’s level. Second, in asset-approach macro
models like the Dornbusch (1976) overshooting model, innovations in the interest
differential are the main engine of exchange rate variation.12 Third, from a purely
practical perspective, data on the interest differential are readily available at the
daily frequency, which is certainly not the case for the other standard macro
fundamentals (e.g., real output, nominal money supplies, etc.).
        Naturally, this specification of our macro component of the model has some
drawbacks. It is certainly true that, as a measure of variation in macro fundamen-
tals, the interest differential is obviously incomplete. One can view it as an attempt
to control for this key macro determinant in order to examine the importance of
micro determinants. One should not view it as establishing a fair horse race between
the micro and macro approaches.



12Cheung and Chinn (1998) corroborate this empirically. Their surveys of foreign exchange traders
show that the importance of individual macroeconomic variables shifts over time, but “interest rates
always appear to be important.”


                                                13
4. Data


          Our data set contains time-stamped, tick-by-tick data on actual transactions
for the two largest spot markets—DM/$ and ¥/$—over a four-month period, May 1
to August 31, 1996. These data were collected from the Reuters Dealing 2000-1
system via an electronic feed customized for the purpose. Dealing 2000-1 is the most
widely used electronic dealing system. According to Reuters, over 90 percent of the
world's direct interdealer transactions take place through the system.13 All trades on
this system take the form of bilateral electronic conversations. The conversation is
initiated when a dealer uses the system to call another dealer to request a quote.
Users are expected to provide a fast two-way quote with a tight spread, which is in
turn dealt or declined quickly (i.e., within seconds). To settle disputes, Reuters keeps
a temporary record of all bilateral conversations. This record is the source of our
data. (Reuters was unable to provide the identity of the trading partners for
confidentiality reasons.)
          For every trade executed on D2000-1, our data set includes a time-stamped
record of the transaction price and a bought/sold indicator. The bought/sold indicator
allows us to sign trades for measuring order flow. This is a major advantage: we do
not have to use the noisy algorithms used elsewhere in the literature for signing
trades. A drawback is that it is not possible to identify the size of individual transac-
tions.14 For model estimation, order flow ∆x is therefore measured as the difference
between the number of buyer-initiated trades and the number of seller-initiated
trades.
          Three features of the data are especially noteworthy. First, they provide
transaction information for the whole interbank market over the full 24-hour
trading day. This contrasts with earlier transaction data sets covering single dealers
over some fraction of the trading day (Lyons 1995, Yao 1998, and Bjonnes and Rime
1998). Our comprehensive data set makes it possible, for the first time, to analyze

13  As noted in footnote 3, interdealer transactions account for about 75 percent of total trading in
major spot markets. This 75 percent from interdealer trading breaks into two transaction types,
direct and brokered. Direct trading accounts for about 60 percent of interdealer trade and brokered
trading accounts for about 40 percent. For more detail on the Reuters Dealing 2000-1 System see
Lyons (1995) and Evans (1997).
14 This drawback may not be acute. There is evidence that the size of trades has no information

content beyond that contained in the number of transactions. See Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994).


                                                 14
order flow's role in price determination at the level of “the market.” Though other
data sets exist that cover multiple dealers, they include only brokered interdealer
transactions (see Goodhart, Ito and Payne 1996, and Payne 1999). More important,
these other data sets come from a particular brokered-trading system, one that
accounts for a much smaller fraction of daily trading volume than the D2000-1
system covered by our data set. (There is also evidence that dealers attach more
informational importance to direct interdealer order flow than to brokered inter-
dealer order flow. See Bjonnes and Rime 1998.)
       Second, our market-wide transactions data are not observed by individual FX
dealers as they trade. Though dealers have access to their own transaction records,
they cannot observe others' transactions on the system. Our data therefore repre-
sent activity that, at the time, participants could only infer indirectly. This is one of
those rare situations where the researcher has more information than market
participants themselves (at least in this dimension).
       Third, our data cover a relatively long time span (four months) in comparison
with other micro data sets. This is important because the longer time span allows us
to address exchange-rate determination from more of an asset-pricing perspective
than was possible with previous micro data spanning only days or weeks.
       The three variables in our Portfolio Shifts model are measured as follows.
The change in the spot rate (DM/$ or ¥/$), ∆pt, is the log change in the purchase
transaction price between 4 pm (GMT) on day t and 4 pm on day t-1. When a
purchase transaction does not occur precisely at 4 pm, we use the subsequent
purchase transaction (with roughly 1 million trades per day, the subsequent
transaction is generally within a few seconds of 4 pm). When day t is a Monday, the
day t-1 price is the previous Friday’s price. (Our dependent variable therefore spans
the full four months of our sample, with no overnight or weekend breaks.) The daily
order flow, ∆xt, is the difference between the number of buyer-initiated trades and
the number of seller-initiated trades (in thousands), also measured from 4 pm
(GMT) on day t-1 to 4 pm on day t (negative sign denotes net dollar sales). The
change in interest differential, ∆(it–it*), is calculated from the daily overnight
interest rates for the dollar, the deutschemark, and the yen (annual basis); the
source is Datastream (typically measured at approximately 4 pm GMT).



                                           15
 5. Empirical Results


      Our empirical results are grouped in four sets. The first set addresses the in-
sample fit of the portfolio shifts model. The second set addresses robustness issues.
The third set addresses the direction of causality. The fourth set of results addresses
the model’s out-of-sample forecasting ability (in the spirit of Meese and Rogoff
1983a).


5.1 In-Sample Fit
         Table 1 presents our estimates of the portfolio shifts model (equation 6) using
daily data for the DM/$ and ¥/$ exchange rates. Specifically, we estimate the
following regression:


(7)                               ∆pt = β1∆(it–it*) + β2∆xt + ηt


where ∆pt is the change in the log spot rate (DM/$ or ¥/$) from the end of day t-1 to
the end of day t, ∆(it–it*) is the change in the overnight interest differential from day
t-1 to day t (* denotes DM or ¥), and ∆xt is the order flow from the end of day t-1 to
the end of day t (negative denotes net dollar sales).15
         The coefficient β2 on our portfolio shift variable ∆xt is correctly signed and
significant, with t-statistics above 5 in both equations. To see that the sign is
correct, recall from the model that net purchases of dollars—a positive ∆xt—should
lead to a higher DM price of dollars. The traditional macro-fundamental—the
interest differential—is correctly signed, but is only significant in the yen equation.
(The sign should be positive because, in the sticky-price monetary model for exam-
ple, an increase in the dollar interest rate it requires an immediate dollar apprecia-
tion—increase in DM/$—to make room for the expected dollar depreciation required
by uncovered interest parity.) The overall fit of the model is striking relative to


15Though the dependent variable in standard macro models is the change in the log spot rate, the
dependent variable in the Portfolio Shifts model in equation (6) is the change in the spot rate without
taking logs. These two measures for the dependent variable produce nearly identical results in all our
tables (R2s, coefficient significance, lack of autocorrelation, etc.). Here we present the log change
results—equation 7—to make them directly comparable to previous macro specifications.




                                                  16
traditional macro models, with R2 statistics of 64 percent and 45 percent for the DM
and yen equations, respectively. In terms of diagnostics, the DM equation shows
some evidence of heteroskedasticity, so we correct the standard errors in that
equation using a heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix (White correc-
tion).16


                                              Table 1

                             In-sample fit of portfolio shifts model

                                     ∆pt = β1∆(it–it*) + β2∆xt + ηt



                                                                           Diagnostics

                        ∆ (it–it*)              ∆ xt                R2          Serial       Hetero


 DM                       0.52                  2.10              0.64           0.78           0.08
                         (0.35)                (0.20)                            0.41           0.02


 Yen                      2.48                  2.90              0.45           0.50           0.96
                         (0.92)                (0.46)                            0.37           0.71


The dependent variable ∆pt is the change in the log spot exchange rate from 4 pm GMT on day t-1 to
4 pm GMT on day t (DM/$ or ¥/$). The regressor ∆(it–it*) is the change in the one-day interest
differential from day t-1 to day t (* denotes DM or ¥, annual basis). The regressor ∆xt is interdealer
order flow between 4 pm GMT on day t-1 and 4 pm GMT on day t (negative for net dollar sales, in
thousands). Estimated using OLS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses (corrected for
heteroskedasticity in the case of the DM). The sample spans four months (May 1 to August 31, 1996),
which is 89 trading days. The Serial column presents the p-value of a chi-squared test for residual
serial correlation, first-order in the top row and fifth-order (one week) in the bottom row. The Hetero
column presents the p-value of a chi-squared test for ARCH in the residuals, first-order in the top
row and fifth-order in the bottom row.


16 To check robustness, we examine several obvious variations on the model. For example, we include
a constant in the regression, even though the model does not call for one. The constant is insignificant
for both currencies. We also include the level of the interest differential in lieu of its change. This is
also insignificant in both cases. Estimating the whole model in levels rather than changes produces a
pattern similar to that in Table 1: order flow is highly significant, the interest differential is
insignificant, and R2 is 0.75 for the DM equation and 0.61 for the Yen equation. With this levels
regressions, however, beyond the usual concerns about non-stationarity, there is also strong evidence
of serial correlation and heteroskedasticity (both tests are significant at the 1 percent level for both
currencies). Finally, recall that our price series is measured from purchase transactions. Results
using 4 pm sale prices are identical. We address additional robustness issues in the next subsection.


                                                   17
        The size of our order flow coefficient is consistent with past estimates based
on single-dealer data. The coefficient of 2.1 in the DM equation implies that a day
with 1000 more dollar purchases than sales induces an increase in the DM price by
2.1 percent. Given the average trade size in our sample of $3.9 million, $1 billion of
net dollar purchases increases the DM price of a dollar by 0.54% (= 2.1/3.9). At a
spot rate of 1.5 DM/$, this implies that $1 billion of net dollar purchases increases
the DM price of a dollar by 0.8 pfennig. At the single-dealer level, Lyons (1995) finds
that information asymmetry induces the dealer he tracks to increase price by 1/100th
of a pfennig (0.0001 DM) for every incoming buy order of $10 million. That trans-
lates to 1 pfennig per $1 billion. Though linearly extrapolating this estimate is
certainly not an accurate description of single-dealer behavior, with multiple dealers
it may be a good description of the market’s aggregate elasticity.
        The striking explanatory power of these regressions is almost wholly due to
order flow ∆xt. Regressing ∆pt on ∆(it–it*) alone, plus a constant, produces an R2
statistic less than 1 percent in both equations, and coefficients on ∆(it–it*) that are
insignificant at the 5 percent level.17 That the interest differential regains signifi-
cance once order flow is included, at least in the Yen equation, is consistent with
omitted variable bias in the interest-rates-only specification. (The correlation
between the two regressors ∆xt and ∆(it–it*) is 0.02 for the DM and –0.27 for the Yen,
though both are insignificant at the 5 percent level.)
        Order flow’s ability to account for the full four months of exchange rate varia-
tion is surprising, not only from the perspective of macro exchange rate economics,
but also from the perspective of microstructure finance. Recall from section 2 that
structural models within microstructure finance are typically estimated at the
transaction frequency—they make no attempt to account for prices over the full 24-
hour day. Our regression is at the daily frequency. One might have conjectured that
the net impact of order flow over the day would be zero (each day accounts for about
one million transactions). This conjecture would be consistent with a belief that


17 There is a vast empirical literature that attempts to increase the explanatory power of interest
rates in exchange rate equations by introducing interest rates as separate regressors, introducing
non-linear specifications, etc. This literature has not been successful, so we do not pursue this line
here. Note that the lack of explanatory power from traditional fundamentals is not unique to
exchange rate economics: Roll (1988) produces R2s of only 20% using traditional equity fundamentals
to account for daily stock returns, a result he describes as a “significant challenge to our science.”


                                                 18
cumulative order flow mean-reverts rapidly (e.g., within a day). But rapid mean
reversion is clearly not the behavior displayed by cumulative order flow in Figure 1.
This lack of mean reversion provides some room for the lower frequency relation we
find here.
        The lack of strong mean reversion in our measured order flow deserves fur-
ther attention, particularly considering that half-lives of individual dealer positions
can be as short as 10 minutes (Lyons 1998). The key lies in recognizing that our
measure of order flow reflects interdealer trading, not customer-dealer trading.
Consider a scenario that illustrates why our measure in Figure 1 can be so persis-
tent. (Recall that Figure 1 displays cumulative order flow, defined as the sum of
interdealer order flow, ∆xt, from 0 to t.) Starting the scenario from xt=0, an initial
customer sale does not move xt from zero because xt measures interdealer order flow
only. After the customer sale, then when dealer i unloads the position by selling to
another dealer j, xt drops to –1. A subsequent sale by dealer j to another dealer,
dealer k, reduces xt further to –2.18 If a customer happens to buy dealer k’s position
from him, then xt remains at –2. In this simple scenario, order flow measured only
from trades between customers and dealers would have reverted to zero—the
concluding customer trade offsets the initiating customer trade. The interdealer
order flow, however, does not revert to zero. Note, too, that this difference in the
persistence of the two order-flow measures—customer-dealer versus interdealer—is
also a property of the Portfolio Shifts model. In the Portfolio Shifts model, customer
order flow in round 3 always offsets the customer order flow in round 1. But the
interdealer order flow, which only arises in round 2, does not net to zero. This non-
zero ∆xt serves as a carrier of value in our estimating equation.


5.2 Robustness


        In this section we address three robustness issues beyond those examined in
the previous section. They correspond to the following three questions: (1) Might the
order-flow/price relation be non-linear? (2) Does the relation depend on the gross
level of activity? and (3) Does the relation depend on day of the week?

18This repeated passing of dealer positions in the foreign exchange market is referred to as the “hot
potato” phenomenon. See Burnham (1991) and Lyons (1997).


                                                 19
Might the order-flow/price relation be non-linear?
        The linearity of our Portfolio Shifts specification depends crucially on several
simplifying assumptions, some of which are rather strong on empirical grounds. It is
therefore natural to investigate whether non-linearities or asymmetries might be
present.19 A simple first test is to add a squared order-flow term to the baseline
specification. The squared order-flow term is insignificant in both equations. We also
test whether the coefficient on order flow is piece-wise linear, with a kink at ∆xt=0. If
true, this means that buying pressure and selling pressure are not symmetric. A
Wald test that the two slope coefficients are equal cannot be rejected for the DM
equation. There is some evidence of different slopes in the Yen equation however:
the test is rejected at the 4 percent marginal significance level. In that case, the
point estimates show a greater sensitivity of price to order flow in the downward
direction, though both estimates remain positive and significant.


Does the order-flow/price relation depend on the gross level of activity?
        Another natural concern is whether the order-flow/price relation in Table 1 is
state contingent in some way, perhaps depending on the market’s overall activity
level. Our data set provides a convenient measure of overall activity, namely the
total number of transactions. As a simple test, we partition our sample of trading
days into quartiles, from days with the fewest transactions to days with the most
transactions. We then estimate separate order-flow coefficients for each of these four
sample partitions. In both the DM and Yen equations, all four of the order-flow
coefficients are positive. In the DM equation, the coefficients are slightly U-shaped
(from fewest transactions to most, the point estimates for β2 are 2.7, 2.0, 1.9, and
3.3). In the Yen equation, the coefficients are monotonically increasing (from fewest
transactions to most, the point estimates for β2 are 1.0, 1.1, 3.5, and 4.1).
        In terms of theory, this result for the Yen is consistent with the “event-
uncertainty” model of Easley and O’Hara (1992), but the DM result is not. The
event-uncertainty model predicts that trades are more informative when trading
intensity is higher. Key to understanding their result is that in their model, new

19We pursue these (simple) non-linear specifications with the comfort that outliers are not driving
our results—a fact that is manifest from Figure 1.




                                                20
information may not exist. If there is trading at time t, then a rational dealer raises
her conditional probability that an information event has occurred, and lowers the
probability of the “no-information” event. The upshot is that trades occurring when
trading intensity is high induce a larger update in beliefs, and therefore a larger
adjustment in price.


Does the order-flow/price relation depend on day of the week?
        Another state-contingency that warrants attention is day-of-the-week
effects.20 To test whether day-of-the-week matters, we partition our sample into five
sub-samples, one for each weekday (recall that weekends are subsumed in our
Friday-to-Monday observations). In both the DM and Yen equations, all five of the
resulting order-flow coefficients are positive. In the DM equation, the Tuesday
coefficient is the largest, and the Wednesday coefficient is the smallest. The Yen
equation also shows that Tuesday’s coefficient is the largest, but in this case the
Monday coefficient is smallest. More important, a Wald test that the coefficients are
equal across the five days cannot be rejected at the 5 percent level in either equation
(though in the case of the Yen, it can be rejected at the 10 percent level).


5.3 Causality


        Under our model’s null hypothesis, causality runs strictly from order flow to
price. Accordingly, under the null, our estimation is not subject to simultaneity bias.
(Put differently, we are not simply "regressing price on quantity," as in the classic
supply-demand identification problem.) Within microstructure theory more broadly,
this direction of causality is well established: it is a feature of all the canonical
models (Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Kyle 1985, Stoll 1978, Amihud and Mendelson
1980). Nevertheless, there are certainly alternative hypotheses under which
causality is reversed.21 Let us consider the issue from a broader perspective.


20 In terms of theory, the model of Foster and Viswanathan (1990) is a workhorse for specifying day-
of-the-week effects. In their model, there is periodic variation in the information advantage of the
informed trader. This advantage is assumed to grow over periods of market closure, in particular,
over weekends, making order flow on Monday particularly potent.
21 There is also the possibility that a common process simultaneously drives both order flow and

price. But because our relation involves order flow rather than simply volume, this alternative is
difficult to motivate on theoretical grounds.


                                                21
Theoretical Overview
        The timing of the order-flow/price relation admits three possibilities, de-
pending on whether order flow precedes, is concurrent with, or lags price adjust-
ment. We shall refer to these three timing hypotheses as the Anticipation hypothe-
sis, the Pressure hypothesis, and the Feedback hypothesis, respectively.
        Within each of the three hypotheses—Anticipation, Pressure, and Feed-
back—there are also variations. Under the Anticipation hypothesis, for example,
order flow can precede price because price adjusts only after the news anticipated by
order flow is commonly observed (Foster and Viswanathan 1990). Order flow might
also precede price because price adjusts only after order flow itself is commonly
observed (Lyons 1996). Under the Pressure hypothesis the two main variations
correspond to microstructure theory’s canonical model types—information models
and inventory models. In information models, observing order flow provides infor-
mation about payoffs (Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Kyle 1985). In inventory models,
order flow alters equilibrium risk premia (Stoll 1978, Ho and Stoll 1981).22 Under
the Feedback hypothesis, order flow lags price because of feedback trading. (Posi-
tive-feedback trading involves systematic buying in response to price increases, and
selling in response to price decreases. Negative-feedback trading is the reverse.)
Variations are distinguished by whether this feedback trading is rational (an
optimal response to return autocorrelation) or behavioral, meaning that it arises
from systematic decision bias (DeLong et al. 1990, Jegadeesh and Titman 1993,
Grinblatt et al. 1995).
        Under the Pressure hypothesis, causality runs from order flow to price, de-
spite their concurrent realization.23 Causality is less clear under the Anticipation
hypothesis. The variation of the Anticipation hypothesis where price adjusts only
after the news anticipated by order flow is observed is probably not relevant to
foreign exchange (in contrast to equity markets, where insider order flow can
anticipate a firm’s earnings announcement). The other variation of the Anticipation

22 Within this inventory-model category, there is an additional distinction between price effects that
arise at the marketmaker level (canonical inventory models) and price effects that arise at the
marketwide level, due to imperfect substitutability (e.g., our Portfolio Shifts model).
23 This does not imply that price cannot influence order flow. Price does influence order flow in

microstructure models (both for the usual downward sloping demand reason, and because agents
learn from price). It is still the case that—in equilibrium—price innovations are functions of order
flow innovations, not vice versa. Our Portfolio Shifts model is a case in point.



                                                 22
hypothesis, however, probably is relevant to the foreign exchange market. As noted
in the Data section, order flow in this market is not common knowledge when
realized. Consequently, there may be a lag in price adjustment (a lag which would
not violate market efficiency). In this case, causality still runs from order flow to
price, but the effects are delayed. In fact, we can test this variation of the Anticipa-
tion hypothesis by introducing lagged order flow to our Portfolio Shifts model. Rows
1 and 3 of Table 2 present the results of this regression: lagged order flow is
insignificant. At the daily frequency, lagged order flow is already embedded in
price.24
           Under the Feedback hypothesis, causality can clearly go in reverse, that is,
from price to order flow.25 This is the source of concern about simultaneity bias. If
positive-feedback trading were present and significant, then one would expect order
flow in period t to be positively related to the price change in period t-1. In daily
data, this corresponds to ∆xt being explained, at least in part, by ∆pt-1. If our order-
flow coefficient in Table 1 is picking up this daily-frequency positive feedback, then
including lagged price change ∆pt-1 in the Portfolio-Shifts regression should weaken,
if not eliminate, the significance of order flow. Rows 2 and 4 of Table 2 present the
results of this regression. Past price change does not reduce the significance of order
flow, and is itself insignificant.


Empirical Reality
           The theoretical overview above cannot resolve the fact that, in daily data, all
three hypotheses—Anticipation, Pressure, and Feedback—may produce a relation-
ship that appears contemporaneous. A concern therefore remains that the positive
coefficient on order flow in Table 1 might be the result of positive-feedback trading
that occurs intraday. We offer two additional lines of defense against this alterna-
tive interpretation of our results. The first is a set of three arguments why intraday



24 As another check along these lines, we also decompose contemporaneous order flow into expected
and unexpected components (by projecting it on past order flow). In our model, all order flow ∆x is
unexpected, but this need not be the case in the data. We find, as the model predicts, that order flow’s
explanatory power comes from its unexpected component.
25 Note that the Feedback hypothesis does not imply that all causality runs in reverse. For example,

the Feedback hypothesis does not rule out that feedback trading can affect prices.




                                                  23
positive feedback is an unappealing hypothesis in this context. The second is an
explicit analysis of bias, designed to calibrate how extreme the positive feedback
would have to be to account for the key moments of our data. (These moments
include, but are not limited to, the moments that produce our order-flow coefficient
in Table 1.)




                                             Table 2

                      Portfolio shifts model: Alternative specifications

                             ∆pt = β1∆(it–it*) + β2∆xt + β3∆xt-1 + ηt

                             ∆pt = β1∆(it–it*) + β2∆xt + β3∆pt-1 + ηt


                                                                                Diagnostics

                ∆ (it–it*)        ∆ xt          ∆ xt-1        ∆ pt-1      R2     Serial     Hetero


 DM               0.40            2.16          0.29                     0.65      0.76       0.39
                 (0.36)          (0.18)        (0.19)                              0.48       0.03

                  0.42            2.17                        0.11       0.66      0.60       0.38
                 (0.35)          (0.18)                       0.07                 0.44       0.01


 Yen              2.48            2.90         -0.20                     0.47      0.07       0.55
                 (0.91)          (0.36)        (0.35)                              0.41       0.84

                  2.64            2.98                       -0.13       0.48      0.21       0.52
                 (0.91)          (0.36)                      (0.09)                0.63       0.81


The dependent variable ∆pt is the change in the log spot exchange rate from 4 pm GMT on day t-1 to
4 pm GMT on day t (DM/$ or ¥/$). The regressor ∆(it–it*) is the change in the one-day interest
differential from day t-1 to day t (* denotes DM or ¥, annual basis). The regressor ∆xt is interdealer
order flow between 4 pm GMT on day t-1 and 4 pm GMT on day t (negative for net dollar sales, in
thousands). Estimated using OLS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses (corrected for
heteroskedasticity in the case of the DM). The sample spans four months (May 1 to August 31, 1996),
which is 89 trading days. The Serial column presents the p-value of a chi-squared test for residual
serial correlation, first-order in the top row and fifth-order (one week) in the bottom row. The Hetero
column presents the p-value of a chi-squared test for ARCH in the residuals, first-order in the top
row and fifth-order in the bottom row.




                                                  24
       There are three reasons, a priori, why the hypothesis of intraday positive-
feedback trading is unappealing in the context of our analysis. First, direct empirical
evidence does not support it: the current literature provides no evidence of positive-
feedback trading in the foreign exchange market. Second, even if systematic
positive-feedback trading were present, it would be difficult to rationalize: intraday
transaction studies find no evidence of the positive autocorrelation in price that
would make positive-feedback an optimal response (Goodhart, Ito, and Payne 1996).
Third, we view the fallback possibility of irrational positive-feedback trading as
unlikely in the context of our analysis. Recall that the order flow we measure in this
paper is interdealer order flow. Though systematic feedback trading of a behavioral
nature (i.e., not fully rational) might be a good description of some market partici-
pants, dealers are among the most sophisticated participants in this market.


Bias Analysis
       To close this section on causality, let us consider what it would take for
positive-feedback trading to account for our results. Specifically, suppose intraday
positive-feedback trading is present—Under what conditions could it account for the
key moments of our data? These moments include, but are not limited to, the
moments that produce our positive order-flow coefficient in Table 1. We show below
that these conditions are rather extreme. In fact, through a broad range of underly-
ing parameter values, feedback trading would have to be negative to account for the
key moments of our data.
       We start by decomposing measured order flow ∆xt into two components:


(8)                               ∆xt = ∆xt1 + ∆xt2


where ∆xt1 denotes exogenous order flow from portfolio shifts (a la our model), with
variance equal to Σx1, and ∆xt2 denotes order flow due to feedback trading, where


(9)                                  ∆xt2 = γ∆pt


Suppose the true structural model can be written as:



                                          25
(10)                              ∆pt = α∆xt1 + εt
where εt represents common-knowledge (CK) news, and εt is iid with variance Σε. By
CK news we mean that both the information and its implication for equilibrium
price is common knowledge. If both conditions are not met, then order flow will
convey information about market-clearing prices (recall the discussion in the
introduction). If feedback trading is present (γ≠0), then α will be a reduced form
coefficient that depends on γ. Note that under these circumstances, equation (10) is a
valid reduced-from equation that could be estimated by OLS if one had data on ∆xt1.
       With data on ∆xt and ∆pt only, suppose we estimate


(11)                              ∆pt = β∆xt + εt


If γ≠0, our estimates of β will suffer from simultaneity bias. To evaluate the size of
this bias, consider the implications of equations (8) through (10) for the moments:


                             β = Cov(∆pt,∆xt) / Var(∆xt)
                             δ = Var(∆pt) / Var(∆xt)


From equations (8) through (10) we know that:


                              ∆xt = (1+γα)(∆xt1) + γεt


Solving for expressions for Cov(∆pt,∆xt), Var(∆pt), and Var(∆xt), we can write:


              β = Cov(∆pt,∆xt) / Var(∆xt) = (α(1+γα)Σx1 + γΣε) / ((1+γα)2Σx1 + γ2Σε)

              δ = Var(∆pt) / Var(∆xt) = (α2Σx1 + Σε) / ((1+γα)2Σx1 + γ2Σε)


Now, define an additional parameter:


                                      φ = Σε/Σx1



                                          26
This parameter represents the ratio of CK news to order-flow news. With this
parameter φ we can rewrite the key coefficients as:


                                 β = (α(1+γα) + γφ) / ((1+γα)2 + γ2φ)

                                 δ = (α2 + φ) / ((1+γα)2 + γ2φ)


Using the sample moments for Cov(∆pt,∆xt), Var(∆pt), and Var(∆xt), we can solve for
the implied values of the α and γ for given values of φ. The following table presents
these implied values of α and γ.



                                            Table 3
                                           Bias Analysis

                                            ∆xt2 = γ∆pt
                                         ∆pt = α∆xt1 + εt


                             Σ ε /Σ x1
                          φ =Σ                       α                        γ


          DM                  0                      2.4                    –0.05
                             0.1                     1.2                    –0.51
                              1                      1.9                    –0.12
                              2                      2.1                    –0.03
                             10                      2.0                     0.16
                             100                     0.0                     0.36

          Yen                 0                      2.4                    –0.18
                             0.1                     1.3                    –0.58
                              1                      2.2                    –0.23
                              2                      2.4                    –0.15
                             10                      2.8                    –0.02
                             100                     0.0                     0.21


The table shows the values for the parameters α (order-flow-causes-price) and γ (price-causes-order-
flow) implied by the sample moments and given values for the parameter φ. The parameter φ is the
ratio of common-knowledge news to order-flow news.




                                                27
Note that even for values of φ above 2, the feedback trading needed to generate our
results is still negative. Note too that the parameter α—the order-flow-causes-price
parameter—is not driven to zero until φ reaches values well above 10. To invalidate
our causality interpretation, then, CK news would have to be one to two orders of
magnitude more important that order-flow news. In our judgment this far too
extreme to be compelling.26


5.4 Out-of-Sample Forecasts

        To control for the myriad specification searches conducted by empiricists, a
tradition within exchange rate economics has been to augment in-sample model
estimates with estimates of models’ out-of-sample forecasting ability. Accordingly,
we present results along these lines as well. The original work by Meese and Rogoff
(1983a) examines forecasts from 1 to 12 months. Our four-month sample does not
provide sufficient power to forecast at these horizons. Our horizons range instead
from one day to two weeks. The Meese-Rogoff puzzle is why short-horizon forecasts
do so poorly, and our focus is definitely on the short end (though not so short as to
render the horizon irrelevant from a macro perspective).
        Table 4 shows that the portfolio shifts model produces better forecasts than
the random-walk (RW) model. The forecasts from our model are derived from
recursive estimates that begin with the first 39 days of the sample. Like the Meese-
Rogoff forecasts, our forecasts are based on realized values of the future forcing
variables—in our case, realized values of order flow and changes in the interest
differential. The resulting root mean squared error (RMSE) is 30 to 40 percent lower
than that for the random walk.
        Note that our 89-day sample has very low power at the one- and two-week
horizons. Even though our model’s RMSE estimates are roughly 35 percent lower at
these horizons, their out-performance is not statistically significant. With a sample
this size, the one-week forecast would need to cut the RW model’s RMSE by about
50 percent to reach the 5 percent significance level. (To see this, note that for the


26 In the end, even those readers who cling to the reverse-causality interpretation of our order-
flow/price relation should find our results of interest—evidence of such strong positive feedback in
this market would itself be a rather remarkable new finding.




                                                28
DM a two-standard-error difference at the one-week horizon is about 0.49, which is
roughly half of the RW model’s RMSE of 0.98). The two-week forecast would have to
cut the RW model’s forecast error by some 54 percent. More powerful tests at these
longer horizons will have to wait for longer spans of transaction data.




                                           Table 4
                              Out-of-sample forecasts errors
                             Root mean squared errors (×100)


                                     RW             Portfolio Shifts          Difference


                 Horizon
 DM              1 day              0.44                  0.29                    0.15
                                                                                 (0.033)
                  1 week            0.98                  0.63                    0.35
                                                                                 (0.245)
                  2 weeks           1.56                  0.96                    0.60
                                                                                 (0.419)

 Yen              1 day             0.40                  0.32                    0.08
                                                                                 (0.040)
                  1 week            0.98                  0.64                    0.33
                                                                                 (0.239)
                  2 weeks           1.34                  0.90                    0.45
                                                                                 (0.389)


The RW column reports the RMSE for the random walk model (approximately in percentage terms).
The Portfolio Shifts column reports the RMSE for the model in equation (6). The Portfolio Shifts
forecasts are based on realized values of the forcing variables. The forecasts are derived from
recursive model estimates starting with the first 39 days of the sample. The Difference column
reports the difference in the two RMSE estimates, and, in parentheses, the standard errors for the
difference, calculated as in Meese and Rogoff (1988).




                                               29
6. Discussion

        The relation in our model between exchange rates and order flow is not easy
to reconcile with the traditional macro approach. Under the traditional approach,
information is common knowledge and is therefore impounded in exchange rates
without the need for order flow. This apparent contradiction can be resolved if
either: (1) some information relevant for exchange rate determination is not common
knowledge; or (2) some aspect of the mapping from information to equilibrium prices
is not common knowledge. If either is relaxed then order flow conveys information
about market-clearing prices.
        Our portfolio shifts model resolves the contradiction by introducing informa-
tion that is not common knowledge—information about shifts in public demand for
foreign-currency assets. At a microeconomic level, dealers learn about these shifts in
real time by observing order flow. As the dealers learn, they quote prices that reflect
this information. At a macroeconomic level, these shifts are difficult to observe
empirically. Indeed, the concept of order flow is not recognized within the interna-
tional macro literature. (Transactions, if they occur at all, are strictly symmetric,
and therefore cannot be signed to reflect net buying/selling pressure.)
        If order flow drives exchange rates, then what drives order flow? The portfolio
shifts in our model are exogenous and unrelated to macro fundamentals like interest
rates. This is a straightforward way to introduce these shifts, but it is certainly not
the only way. There are alternatives under which these shifts are driven by under-
lying determinants. The specific underlying determinants may be within the
traditional set of macroeconomic variables (e.g., the “proxy-for-expectations” idea
introduced in the introduction). Or they may be outside the traditional set, necessi-
tating a broader definition of what we mean by “fundamentals.” Exploring these
links to deeper determinants is a natural topic for future research. This will surely
require a retreat back into intraday data.27




27 The role of macro announcements in determining order flow clearly warrants exploring. This, too,
requires the use of intraday data. A second possible use of macro announcements is to introduce them
directly into our Portfolio Shifts specification, even at the daily frequency. This tack is not likely to be
fruitful: there is a long literature showing that macro announcements are unable to account for
exchange rate first moments (as opposed to second moments; see Andersen and Bollerslev 1998).


                                                    30
The Practitioner View versus the Academic View
       Another perspective on order flow emerges from the difference between aca-
demic and practitioner views on price determination. Practitioners often explain
price increases with the familiar reasoning that “there were more buyers than
sellers.” To most economists, this reasoning is tantamount to “price had to rise to
balance demand and supply.” But these phrases may not be equivalent. For
economists, the phrase “price had to rise to balance demand and supply” calls to
mind the Walrasian auctioneer. The Walrasian auctioneer collects “preliminary”
orders and uses them to find the market-clearing price. Importantly, the auction-
eer’s price adjustment is immediate—no trading occurs in the transition. (In a
rational-expectations model of trading, for example, this is manifested in all orders
being conditioned on the market-clearing price.)
       Many practitioners have a different model in mind. In the practitioner model
there is a dealer instead of an abstract auctioneer. The dealer acts as a buffer
between buyers and sellers. The orders the dealer collects are actual orders, rather
than preliminary orders, so trading does occur in the transition to the new price. The
dealer determines new prices from the new information about demand and supply
that becomes available.
       Can the practitioner model be rationalized? At first blush, it appears that
trades are taking place out of equilibrium, implying irrational behavior. But this
misses an important piece of the puzzle. Whether these trades are out-of-equilibrium
depends on the information available to the dealer. If the dealer knows at the outset
that there are more buyers than sellers (eventually pushing price up), then it may
not be optimal to sell at a low interim price. If the buyer/seller imbalance is not
known, however, then rational trades can occur through the transition. In this case,
the dealer cannot set price conditional on all the information available to the
Walrasian auctioneer. This is precisely the story developed in canonical microstruc-
ture models (Glosten and Milgrom 1985). Trading that would be irrational if the
dealer could condition on the auctioneer's information can be rationalized in models
with more limited (and realistic) conditioning information.




                                         31
Relation Between Our Model and the Flow Approach to Exchange Rates
       Consider the relation between our model, with its emphasis on order flow,
and the traditional “flow approach” to exchange rates. Is our approach just a return
to the earlier flow approach? Despite their apparent similarity, these two ap-
proaches are distinct and, in fact, fundamentally different. A key feature of our
model is that order flow plays two roles. First, holding beliefs constant, order flow
affects price through the traditional process of market clearing. Second, order flow
also alters beliefs because it conveys information that is not yet common knowledge.
That is:


                             Price = P(∆x, B(∆x,…), …)


Price P thus depends both directly and indirectly on order flow, ∆x, where the
indirect effect is via beliefs B. Early attempts to analyze equilibrium with differen-
tially informed individuals ignored the information role—the effect of order flow on
beliefs. Since the advent of rational expectations, models that ignore this informa-
tion effect from order flow are viewed as less compelling.
       This is the essential difference between the flow approach to exchange rates
and the microstructure approach. Under the flow approach, order flow communi-
cates no information back to individuals regarding others' views/information. All
information is common knowledge, so there is no information that needs aggregat-
ing. Under the microstructure approach, order flow does communicate information
that is not common knowledge. This information needs to be aggregated by the
market, and microstructure theory describes how that aggregation is achieved,
depending on the underlying information type.




                                          32
7. Conclusion


        This paper presents a model of exchange rate determination of a new kind.
Instead of relying exclusively on macroeconomic determinants, we draw on determi-
nants from the field of microstructure. In particular, we focus on order flow, the
variable within microstructure that is—both theoretically and empirically—the
driver of price.28 This is a radical departure from traditional approaches to exchange
rate determination.
        Our Portfolio Shifts model is strikingly successful in accounting for realized
rates. It accounts for more than 50 percent of daily changes in the DM/$ rate, and
more than 30 percent of daily changes in the Yen/$ rate. Out of sample, our model
produces better short-horizon forecasts than a random walk. Our estimates of the
sensitivity of the spot rate to order flow are sensible as well, and square with past
estimates at the individual-dealer level. We find that for the DM/$ market as a
whole, $1 billion of net dollar purchases increases the DM price of a dollar by about
1 pfennig. This relation should be of particular interest to those working in the area
of central bank intervention (though care should be exercised in mapping central
bank orders to subsequent interdealer trades).
        So where do the results of this paper lead us? In our judgment they point to-
ward a research agenda that borrows from both the macro and microstructure
approaches. It is not necessary to decouple exchange rates from macroeconomic
fundamentals, as is common within microstructure finance. In this way, the
approach is more firmly anchored in the broader context of asset pricing. Nor is it
necessary to treat exchange rates as driven wholly by public information, as is
common within the macro approach. The information aggregation that arises when
one reduces reliance on public information is well suited to microstructure: there are
ample tools within the microstructure approach for addressing this aggregation. In
the end, this two-pronged approach may help locate the missing middle in exchange



28 This primacy of order flow within microstructure should mitigate standard concerns about data
snooping. (In the words of Richard Meese 1990, "At this point exchange rate modelers can be justly
accused of in-sample data mining.") The variable we introduce—order flow—is the obvious a priori
driving variable from microstructure theory.




                                               33
rate economics—that disturbing space between our successful modeling of very short
and very long horizons.
       Two issues raised by our measure of order flow deserve some final remarks.
First, though our measure captures a substantial share of wholesale trading, it
remains incomplete. As data sets covering customer-dealer trading and brokered
interdealer trading become available, the order-flow picture can be completed (see,
e.g., Payne 1999). A second interesting issue raised by our order-flow measure is
whether its relation to price would change if order flow were observable to dealers in
real time (i.e., if the market were more transparent). From a policy perspective, the
effects of increasing order-flow transparency may be important: unlike most other
financial markets, the FX market is unregulated in this respect. The welfare
consequences are not yet well understood.




                                         34
                                                   Appendix: Model Solution


       Each dealer determines quotes and speculative demand by maximizing a
negative exponential utility function defined over terminal wealth. Because returns
are independent across periods, with an unchanging stochastic structure, the
dealers’ problem collapses to a series of independent trading problems, one for each
period. Within a given period t, let Wiτ denote the end-of-round τ wealth of dealer i,
where we use the convention that Wi0 denotes wealth at the end of period t-1. (To
ease the notational burden, we suppress the period subscript t when clarity per-
mits.) With this notation, and normalizing the gross return on the riskless asset to
one, we can write the dealers’ problem as:

                         Max                 E[− exp( −θWi 3 | Ω i )]
(A1)
                       , , ,
                   { Pi 1 Pi 2 Pi 3 Ti 2 }



                  s.t.

                   Wi3 = Wi0 + ci1 (Pi1 − Pi′2 ) + (Di 2 + E[Ti′2 | Ωi 2 ])(Pi3 − Pi′2 ) − Ti′2 (Pi 3 − Pi 2 )

Piτ is dealer i's round-τ quote and a ′ denotes an interdealer quote or trade received
by dealer i. The dealers’ problem is defined over four choice variables: the three
scalar quotes Pi1, Pi2, and Pi3, and the dealer’s outgoing interdealer trade in round 2,
Ti2. This outgoing interdealer trade in round 2 has three components:

(A2)                                          Ti 2 = ci1 + Di 2 + E[Ti′2 | Ω Ti 2 ]

where Di2 is dealer i’s speculative demand in round 2, and E[T′i2|ΩTi2] is the dealer’s
attempt to hedge against incoming orders from other dealers (this term is zero in
equilibrium). The last three terms in Wi3 capture capital gains/losses from round-1
customer orders ci1, round-2 speculative demand Di2, and the round-2 position
disturbance from incoming interdealer orders T′i2. The conditioning information Ωi at
each decision node (3 quotes and 1 outgoing order) is summarized below.

       ΩPi1 ≡ { k =1t {rk } , kt −=11 {∆x k }     }
       ΩPi2 ≡ { ΩPi1, ci1 }
       ΩTi2 ≡ { ΩPi2 }
       ΩPi3 ≡ { ΩPi2, ∆xt }


Conditional Variances
       This appendix repeatedly uses several conditional return variances. These
variances do not depend on conditioning variables' realizations (e.g., they do not
depend on dealer i's realization of ci1. These conditional variances are therefore
common to all dealers and known in period one. (It is a convenient property of the
normal distribution that realizations of conditioning variables affect the conditional


                                                               35
mean but not the precision of the condition mean.) This predetermination of
conditional variances is key to the derivation of optimal quoting and trading rules.

Equilibrium
       The equilibrium concept we use is Bayesian-Nash Equilibrium, or BNE.
Under BNE, Bayes rule is used to update beliefs and strategies are sequentially
rational given those beliefs.
       Solving for the symmetric BNE, first we consider properties of optimal quot-
ing strategies.

PROPOSITION 1: A quoting strategy is consistent with symmetric BNE only if the
round-one and round-two quotes are common across dealers and equal to:

                                 P1,t = P2,t = P3,t-1 + rt

where P3,t-1 is the round-three quote from the previous period, and rt is the public-
information innovation at the beginning of period t.


PROPOSITION 2: A quoting strategy is consistent with symmetric BNE only if the
common round-three quote is:

                                  P3,t = P2,t + λ∆xt

The constant λ is strictly positive.

Proof of Propositions 1 and 2
       No arbitrage requires that all dealers post a common quote in all periods.
(Recall from section 3 that all quotes are scalar prices at which the dealer agrees to
buy/sell any amount, and trading with multiple partners is feasible.) Common prices
require that quotes be conditioned on commonly observed information only. In
rounds one and two, this includes the previous period’s round-three price, plus the
public-information innovation at the beginning of period t, rt. (Dealer i’s round-two
quote therefore cannot be conditioned on his realization of ci1.)
       The equations that pin down the levels of these three prices embed the dealer
and customer trading rules. When conditioned on public information, these trading
rules must be consistent with equilibrium price. This implies the following key
relations:

(A3)                       E[ci1|ΩPi1] + E[Di2(P1,t)|ΩPi1] = 0

(A4)                       E[ci1|ΩPi1] + E[Di2(P2,t)|ΩPi1] = 0

(A5)                      E[Σici1|ΩPi3] + E[c3(P3,t)|ΩPi3] = 0

The first two equations simply state that, in expectation, dealers must be willing to
absorb the demand from customers. The third equation states that, in expectation,
the public must be willing at the round-3 price to absorb the period’s aggregate



                                            36
portfolio shift. These equations pin down equilibrium price because any price except
that which satisfies each would generate net excess demand in round-2 interdealer
trading, which cannot be reconciled since dealers trade among themselves.
        That P1,t=P2,t=P3,t-1+rt follows directly from the fact that expected value of ci1
conditional on public information ΩPi1 is zero, and expected speculative dealer
demand Di2 is also zero at this public-information-unbiased price. To be more
precise, this statement postulates that the dealer’s demand Di2 has this property; we
show below in the derivation of the optimal trading rule that this is the case.
        That P3,t=P2,t+λ∆xt follows from the fact that ∆xt is a sufficient statistic for
the period’s aggregate portfolio shift Σici1. Given the aggregate portfolio shift must
be absorbed by the public in round 3, P3,t must adjust to induce the necessary public
demand. Specifically, the round-3 price must satisfy:

                                        c3(P3,t) = –Σici1

Given the optimal rule for determining Ti2 (which we establish below), we can write
Σici1 in terms of interdealer order flow ∆xt as:

                                        Σici1 = (1/α)∆xt

and since the specification of c3 in the text is:

                                 c3 = γ(E[P3,t+1|Ω3] –P3,t)

this implies a market-clearing round-3 price of:


                              P3,t = E[P3,t+1|Ω3] + (αγ)-1∆xt


                                        ∑ (r         + λ∆x i )
                                          t
                                    =     i =1   i




with λ=(αγ)-1, which is unambiguously positive. This sum is the expected payoff on
the risky asset (the ri terms), adjusted for a risk premium, which is determined by
cumulative portfolio shifts (the ∆xi terms). This yields equation (5) in the text:


(5)                                  ∆Pt = rt + λ∆xt


where ∆Pt denotes the change in price from the end of round 3 in period t-1 to the
end of round 3 in period t.

Equilibrium Trading Strategies
       An implication of common interdealer quotes P2,t is that in round 2 each
dealer receives a share 1/(N-1) of every other dealer’s interdealer trade. This order
corresponds to the position disturbance T′i2 in the dealer's problem in equation (A1).


                                                     37
       Given the quoting strategy described in propositions 1 and 2, the following
trading strategy is optimal and corresponds to symmetric linear equilibrium:

PROPOSITION 3: The trading strategy profile:

                                         Ti2 = α ci1


∀i ∈ {1,...,N}, with α>0, conforms to a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium.

Proof of Proposition 3: Optimal Trading Strategies

        As noted above, because returns are independent across periods, with an un-
changing stochastic structure, the dealers’ problem collapses to a series of independ-
ent trading problems, one for each period. Because there are only N dealers,
however, each dealer acts strategically in the sense that his speculative demand
depends on the impact his trade will have on subsequent prices.
        It is well known that if a random variable W is distributed N(µ,σ2) and the
utility function U(W)= –exp(–θW), then:

(A6)                           E[U(W)] = –exp[–θ(µ – θσ2/2)]

Maximizing E[U(W)] is therefore equivalent to maximizing (µ – θσ2/2). This result
allows us to write the dealers speculative-demand problem as:

(A7)                   Max       D i2 (E[P3|ΩTi2]–P2) – D i22 (θ/2)σ2
                         Di2


where the information set ΩTi2 is defined above, and σ2 denotes the conditional
variance of E[P3|ΩTi2]–P2. Now, from Proposition 2, we can write:

(A8)                           E[P3|ΩTi2] – P2 = E[λ∆x|ΩTi2]

And from the definitions of ΩTi2 and ∆x we know that:

(A9)                                E[λ∆x|ΩTi2] = λTi2

The expected value of the other dealers' trades in ∆x is 0 under our specification
because (i) customer trades are mean-zero and independent across dealers and (ii)
there is no information in the model other than customer trades to motivate
speculative demand. This fact also implies that dealer i's trade in round 2, Ti2 from
equation (A2), is equal to:
                                    Ti2 = Di2 + ci1

Therefore, we can write the dealer's problem as:

(A10)                  Max       D i2 λ(Di2 + ci1) – D i22 (θ/2)σ2
                         Di2




                                              38
The first-order condition of this problem is:

(A11)                          2λDi2 + ci1 – θσ2Di2 = 0


which implies a speculative demand of:

                                            1    
(A12)                            Di 2 =  2       ci1
                                         θσ − 2λ 

This demand function and the fact that Ti2=Di2+ci1 imply:


                                       1      
(A13)                       Ti 2 =  2      + 1ci1 ≡ α ci1
                                    θσ − 2λ 

The second-order condition for a maximum, (2λ–θσ2)<0, insures that α>0.




                                           39
                                    References


Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1980, Dealership market: Marketmaking with
       inventory, Journal of Financial Economics, 8: 31-53.
Andersen, T., and T. Bollerslev, 1998, Deutsche mark-dollar volatility: Intraday
       activity patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependen-
       cies, Journal of Finance, 53: 219-266.
Bjonnes, G., and D. Rime, 1998, FX trading ... live: Impact of new trading environ-
       ments, typescript, Norwegian School of Management, December.
Blanchard, O., 1979, Speculative bubbles, crashes, and rational expectations,
       Economics Letters, 14: 387-389.
Burnham, J., 1991, Current structure and recent developments in foreign exchange
       markets, in S. Khoury (ed.), Recent Developments in International Banking
       and Finance (North Holland, Amsterdam), 123-153.
Cai, J., Y. Cheung, R. Lee, and M. Melvin, 1999, "Once-in-a-generation" yen
       volatility in 1998: Fundamentals, intervention, or order flow? typescript, Ari-
       zona State University, July.
Cheung, Y., and M. Chinn, 1998, Macroeconomic implications of the beliefs and
       behavior of foreign exchange traders, typescript, U.C. Santa Cruz, November.
Cheung, Y., and C. Wong, 1998, A survey of market practitioners’ views on exchange
       rate dynamics, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Chinn, M., 1991, Some linear and non-linear thoughts on exchange rates, Journal of
       International Money and Finance, 10: 214-230.
Chinn, M., and R. Meese, 1994, Banking on currency forecasts, Journal of Interna-
       tional Economics, 38: 161-178.
Covrig, V., and M. Melvin, 1998, Asymmetric information and price discovery in the
       FX market: Does Tokyo know more about the yen?, typescript, Arizona State
       University.
Degennaro, R., and R. Shrieves. 1997, Public information releases, private informa-
       tion arrival, and volatility in the foreign exchange market, Journal of Em-
       pirical Finance, 4: 295-315.
DeLong, B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. Waldmann, 1990, Positive feedback
       investment strategies, and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of Fi-
       nance, 45, 379-396.
Dominguez, K., 1986, Are foreign exchange forecasts rational? New evidence from
       survey data, Economic Letters, 21: 277-281.
Dornbusch, R., 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
       Economy, 84: 1161-1176.
Dornbusch, R., 1982, Equilibrium and disequilibrium exchange rates, Zeitschrift fur
       Wirtschafts und Sozialwissenschaften, 102: 573-799; reprinted in R. Dorn-
       busch, Dollars, Debts and Deficits, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 1992, Time and the process of security price adjustment,
       Journal of Finance, 47: 577-605.
Evans, G., 1986, A test for speculative bubbles in the sterling-dollar exchange rate,
       American Economic Review, 76: 621-636.
Evans, M., 1997, The microstructure of foreign exchange dynamics, Georgetown
       University typescript, November, presented at the NBER Market Microstruc-
       ture Conference, December 4, 1997.


                                         40
Evans, M., 1999, What are the origins of foreign exchange movements?, Georgetown
        University typescript, March.
Fair, R., 1970, Estimation of simultaneous equations models with lagged endoge-
        nous variables and first order serially correlated errors,” Econometrica, 38:
        507-516.
Flood, M., 1994, Market structure and inefficiency in the foreign exchange market,"
        Journal of International Money and Finance, 13: 131-158.
Flood. R., and R. Hodrick, On testing for speculative bubbles, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 4: 85-101.
Flood, R., and A. Rose, Fixing exchange rates: A virtual quest for fundamentals,
        Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 3-37.
Flood, R., and M. Taylor, 1996, Exchange rate economics: What’s wrong with the
        conventional macro approach?, in Frankel, J., G. Galli, and A. Giovannini,
        (eds.) The Microstructure of Foreign Exchange Markets (Chicago: The Univer-
        sity of Chicago Press), 261-294.
Foster, D., and S. Viswanathan, 1990, A theory of interday variations in volumes,
        variances, and trading costs in securities markets, Review of Financial Stud-
        ies, 3: 593-624.
Frankel, J., and K. Froot, 1987, Using survey data to test standard propositions
        regarding exchange rate expectations, American Economic Review, 77: 133-
        153.
Frankel, J., G. Galli, and A. Giovannini, 1996, Introduction, in The Microstructure of
        Foreign Exchange Markets (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press), 1-15.
Frankel, J., and A. Rose, 1995, Empirical research on nominal exchange rates, in G.
        Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, El-
        sevier Science: Amsterdam, 1689-1729.
Frenkel, J., 1976, A monetary approach to the exchange rate: Doctrinal aspects and
        empirical evidence, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78: 200-224.
Glosten, L., and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist
        market with heterogeneously informed agents, Journal of Financial Econom-
        ics, 14: 71-100.
Goldberg, L., and R. Tenorio, 1997, Strategic trading in a two-sided foreign ex-
        change auction, Journal of International Economics, 42: 299-326.
Goodhart, C., 1988, The foreign exchange market: A random walk with a dragging
        anchor, Economica, 55: 437-460.
Goodhart, C., T. Ito, and R. Payne, 1996, One day in June 1993: A study of the
      working of the Reuters 2000-2 electronic foreign exchange trading system. In
      The Microstructure of Foreign Exchange Markets, eds. J. Frankel, G. Galli and
      A. Giovannini, pp. 107-179. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Goodhart, C., and M. O’Hara, 1997, High frequency data in financial markets:
      Issues and applications, Journal of Empirical Finance, 4: 73-114.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies,
      portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, Ameri-
      can Economic Review, 85, 1088-1105.
Hansch, O., N. Naik, and S. Viswanathan 1998. “Do Inventories Matter in Dealer-
        ship Markets? Evidence from the London Stock Exchange,” Journal of Fi-
        nance, 53: 1623-1656.
Hau, H., 1998, Competitive entry and endogenous risk in the foreign exchange
      market, Review of Financial Studies, 11: 757-788.


                                         41
Ho, T., and H. Stoll, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return
      uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics, 9, 47-73.
Hsieh, D., and A. Kleidon, 1996, Bid-ask spreads in foreign exchange markets:
        Implications for models of asymmetric information, in Jeffrey Frankel et al.
        eds.: The Microstructure of Foreign Exchange Markets (University of Chicago
        Press, Chicago) 41-65.
Isard, P., 1995, Exchange Rate Economics, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
        UK.
Ito, T., R. Lyons, and M. Melvin, 1998, Is there private information in the FX
        market? The Tokyo experiment, Journal of Finance 53, 1111-1130.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
        Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance, 48, 65-92.
Jones, C., G. Kaul, and M. Lipson, 1994, Transactions, volume, and volatility,
        Review of Financial Studies, 7: 631-651.
Kouri, P., 1976, The exchange rate and the balance of payments in the short run
        and in the long run: A monetary approach, Scandinavian Journal of Econom-
        ics, 78, 280-304.
Kouri, P., and M. Porter, 1974, International capital flows and portfolio equilibrium,
        Journal of Political Economy, 82, 443-467.
Kyle, A., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-
        1335.
Lyons, R., 1995, Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange
        market, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 321-351.
Lyons, R., 1996, Optimal transparency in a dealer market with an application to
        foreign exchange, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 5, 225-254.
Lyons, R., 1997, A simultaneous trade model of the foreign exchange hot potato,
        Journal of International Economics 42, 275-298.
Lyons, R., 1998, Profits and position control: A week of FX dealing, Journal of
        International Money and Finance 17, 97-115.
Lyons, R., 1999, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press
        (chapters at www.haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons/NewBook.html), forthcoming.
Mark, N., 1995, Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon
        predictability, American Economic Review, 85: 201-218.
Meese, R., 1986, Testing for bubbles in exchange markets, Journal of Political
        Economy, 94: 345-373.
Meese, R., 1990, Currency fluctuations in the post-Bretton Woods era, Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, 4: 117-134.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff, 1983a, Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies,
        Journal of International Economics, 14: 3-24.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff, 1983b, The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange
        rate models, in J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rate and International Macroeco-
        nomics, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff, 1988, Was it real? The exchange rate-interest differential
        relation of the modern floating-rate period,” Journal of Finance, 43: 933-948.
Mussa, M., 1976, The exchange rate, the balance of payments, and monetary and
        fiscal policy under a regime of controlled floating, Scandinavian Journal of
        Economics, 78: 229-248.
Osler, C., 1998, Short-term speculators and the puzzling behavior of exchange rates,
      Journal of International Economics, 45: 37-57.


                                         42
Payne, R. 1999, Informed trade in spot foreign exchange markets: An empirical
      investigation, typescript, London School of Economics, January.
Peiers, B. 1997. Informed traders, intervention, and price leadership: A deeper view
      of the microstructure of the foreign exchange market. Journal of Finance 52,
      1589-1614.
Reiss, P., and I. Werner, 1998, Does risk sharing motivate interdealer trading?
        Journal of Finance, 53: 1657-1704.
Roll, R., 1988, R2, Journal of Finance, 43: 541-566.
Romer, D., 1993. Rational asset-price movements without news, American Economic
        Review, 83: 1112-1130.
Scholes, M., 1972, The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and
        the effect of information on share price, Journal of Business, 45: 179-211.
Shleifer, A., 1986, Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance, 41:
        579-590.
Stoll, H., 1978, The supply of dealer services in securities markets, Journal of
        Finance, 33, 1133-1151.
Taylor, M., 1995, The economics of exchange rates, Journal of Economic Literature
        33, 13-47.
Viswanathan, S., and J. Wang, 1998, Why is interdealer trade so pervasive in
        financial markets? Working paper, Duke University.
Vogler, K., 1997, Risk allocation and interdealer trading, European Economic
        Review 41, 417-441.
Wei, S., and J. Kim, 1997, The big players in the foreign exchange market: Do they
        trade on information or noise?, NBER Working Paper 6256, November.
Yao, J. 1998. Market making in the interbank foreign exchange market, New York
      University Salomon Center Working Paper #S-98-3.




                                        43
</ref_section>
