                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                PENSIONS AND RETIREE HEALTH
                               BENEFITS IN HOUSEHOLD WEALTH:
                                 CHANGES FROM 1969 TO 1992

                                            Alan L. Gustman
                                          Thomas L. Steinmeier

                                           Working Paper 7320
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7320


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




This research was supported by Contract Number J-9-P-5-0097 from the U.S. Department of Labor, Pension
and Welfare Benefits Administration and by The National Institute on Aging. It is part of the Labor Studies
and Aging Programs at the National Bureau of Economic Research. Opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the sponsoring agencies or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are
grateful to David McCarthy for his helpful comments.

© 1999 by Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Pensions and Retiree Health Benefits in
Household Wealth: Changes from 1969 to 1992
Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 7320
August 1999
JEL No. D31, E21, H55, I11, J14, J26, J32

                                               ABSTRACT

        By 1992, pensions and retiree health insurance represented one quarter of the wealth of families
on the verge of retirement. Our simulations suggest that between 1969 and 1992, abstracting from the
effects of changes in wages and years of covered work on pension benefit amounts, changing pension
coverage and changing pension plan provisions would have raised the total wealth of each household in the
Health and Retirement Study by $67,000 in 1992 dollars, raising wealth from employer provided pension
benefits per household by 150 percent in real terms. Changes in retiree health benefits, which have only
about 7 percent of the value of pensions, experienced similar real growth, increasing in value by $3,700
in 1992 dollars. Most of the increase in pension values and in the value of retiree health insurance plans was
due to improvements in real benefits among covered workers. All classes of wealth holders enjoyed
increased wealth from employer provided retirement plans, but those in the top half of the wealth
distribution enjoyed increases that were much larger in absolute terms and also were larger in relation to
their total wealth than were the increases experienced by those in the bottom half of the wealth distribution.


Alan L. Gustman                                           Thomas L. Steinmeier
Dartmouth College                                         Department of Economics
Economics Department                                      Texas Tech University
6106 Rockefeller Hall                                  Lubbock, Texas 79409
Hanover, NH 03755                                         wbtls@ttacs.ttu.edu
and NBER
alan.l.gustman@dartmouth.edu
I. Introduction

       There have been a number of studies documenting the importance of employer provided

benefits in the wealth distribution.1 Most recently, data from the Health and Retirement Study

(HRS) allow us to paint a picture of the importance of pensions and retiree health benefits as a

source of retirement wealth. In the present study, we analyze changes in wealth from pensions and

from retiree health insurance over the period 1969 to 1992.

       Pension benefits spread rapidly during the decades of the 1950s and 1960s (Ippolito,

1986). In this paper we will show that they also grew substantially in the period from 1969

through 1992.

       There are four reasons why employer provided retirement benefits were less valuable for

those retiring in the late 1960's and early 1970's than for those retiring in the 1990's. 1. Pensions,

and retiree health benefits were less common in earlier decades. 2. Employees from older cohorts

were covered by less generous plans. 3. They were covered for fewer years by their pension plans.

4. Benefits for employees from older cohorts were based upon lower earnings.

This paper measures the changes that have occurred in the values of pensions and retiree health

insurance from 1969 to 1992 due to the first two of the four factors mentioned above, additional

coverage and the enrichment of plan provisions over time. We hold constant in these calculations

the effects of differences among cohorts in years of covered work, and in wages.

       The base year for the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), 1992, is taken to be the base



1
 When calculating total wealth, McDermed, Clark and Allen (1989) includes pension wealth
estimated from employer provided plan descriptions. Wolff and Marley (1989) and Wolff (1987)
include pensions based on self reports. Hurd and Shoven (1982, 1983) also consider the value of
pensions in analyzing wealth and incomes of respondents to the Retirement History Study.

                                                   1
year for the present analysis.2 The value of pensions, given coverage, is measured in 1969 from

self-reported plan characteristics in the Retirement History Study (RHS). In 1980 pensions are

measured from the employer-provided pension descriptions from the Survey of Consumer

Finances (SCF).3 The value of health insurance, given coverage for both 1969 and 1980, is

measured from the 1980 Current Population Survey. Figures for the earlier period are

extrapolated backward using the Medical Care part of the Consumer Price Index. The value of

health insurance in 1991-92 is estimated from the March 1993 CPS.

       Section II describes the methodology of the study. Empirical findings are presented in

Section III. Section IV presents conclusions.

II. Analytical Approach

       Pension wealth is calculated by applying pension benefit formulas to the earnings stream

observed for HRS participants who are imputed to be covered in earlier years. The wealth

equivalent of retiree health insurance is calculated as the present value of retiree health benefits

accumulated from work to date.4 The value of health insurance is estimated for members of the


2
 The HRS is a panel study of a nationally representative sample of households with at least one
member who was born from 1931 to 1941. The first wave of the HRS is used in the present study.
That wave, fielded in 1992, includes 12,652 individuals. There are 7,607 households with usable
records for the present study.
3
 The Survey of Consumer Finances is actually from 1983, so the match to 1980 is only
approximate. The age ranges of the populations differ among these surveys. The RHS includes
households whose head was 58 to 63 year olds in 1969. The SCF includes a full age range of the
population of men and women, although we use only those 50 to 65. Also, the pensions reported
in the RHS are self reported plan description rather than firm reported plan descriptions, which
are available in the 1983 SCF and the HRS.
4
 The distributions of wealth and its components in the 1992 Health and Retirement Study are
explored in detail in Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick and Steinmeier (1999). Social security wealth is
estimated from self-reported but incomplete earnings histories provided by respondents. In the

                                                   2
Health and Retirement Study using information on pension and health insurance coverage from

the March 1993 Current Population Survey. Estimates for earlier years are based on the 1980

Current Population Survey, using pension plan characteristics from the 1983 Survey of Consumer

Finances, and self reported pension characteristics in the Retirement History Study, and using

health insurance values from the 1980 Current Population Survey. Health insurance and pension

coverage in earlier years are imputed for each HRS respondent on the basis of coverage statistics

from these surveys.

       The first step in measuring trends in pensions and health insurance is to establish the

pension values for the base year. The HRS collects data on wealth for 1992, and data on income

for the year preceding the survey, 1991. The pension values in the HRS are based on data from

employer provided pension plan descriptions.5 For defined benefit plans, the employer-provided

plan descriptions make it possible to calculate benefit amounts relatively accurately. The asset

value of the pension is simply the discounted value of these benefits at the early retirement age,




aggregate, our estimates of social security wealth overstate their share of total net wealth by
about 3 percentage points.
5
 HRS respondents who reported that they had a pension in their current job were asked the name
and address of their employer. The survey staff of the Institute for Social Research (ISR) then
contacted these employers to try to obtain pension plan Summary Plan Descriptions (which are
publicly available documents). In cases where that did not work, a backup plan was used whereby
the records at the Department of Labor were searched for the Summary Plan Descriptions. Of the
5,713 HRS respondents who indicated they were covered by a pension, this strategy resulted in
plan descriptions being gathered for 3,834 individuals, or about 67 percent of those who indicated
that they were covered. To avoid bias in estimating trends in pensions and health insurance, we do
not match the pension plan with the covered respondent, but sample the pensions in 1992 in the
same way that we are forced to sample them for earlier years. The reasons for this procedure are
described below.

                                                  3
prorated on the basis of work to date.6

       For defined contribution plans, we also use the employer-provided pension formula to

estimate the value of the pension. The total attributed to the defined contribution plan is the sum

of employer contributions plus mandatory contributions made by the individual. For plans with

mandatory contributions, the amounts of these contributions are used. When there are voluntary

contributions, as in Samwick and Skinner (1995), the amounts in the defined contribution plans

assume that individuals contribute up to a maximum of 5 percent whether or not there is

matching. That is on top of any mandatory contribution.7

       In computing pension wealth for those who are currently covered by a pension, we

benchmark the benefit based on the worker's current annual earnings. We assume that wages in

the future for each of these covered individuals increase with the overall growth of wages, but

given the respondent's age, we do not add any wage premium for increasing tenure. Job tenure is

reported in the HRS.

       For purposes of simulation we use a 4 percent cost of living increase, 5 percent nominal

wage growth, and 6.3 percent nominal interest rate, the steady state intermediate assumptions



6
 For example, if a person is 57, will qualify for early retirement at 62, and has been with the firm
for 15 years, three quarters of the pension wealth that will eventually be accumulated will have
been accumulated based on work to date.
7
 We count pensions from previous jobs only if the individual did not receive a cash settlement or
otherwise lose benefits upon separation. Only the most recent pension is included in the analysis.
Including prior pensions would raise the pension values by about 9 percent (Gustman and
Steinmeier, 1999) but would not result in changes in the trends, since for each year the values
would be increased by roughly the same proportional amount. This means that the figure for the
difference in the pension between 1969 and 1992 would be increased by approximately $6,000 if
we included the prior pension for those with current pensions.


                                                  4
adopted by the Social Security Administration (Board of Trustees, 1995). Thus real wage growth

is 1 percent, and the real interest rate is just below 2.3 percent, which also is the return assumed

on assets invested in DC plans. The life table used is a projected life table from the Social Security

actuaries used to analyze the funding status of social security under the intermediate funding

assumptions (see Mitchell, Olson and Steinmeier, 1996).

        For the purposes of this study, we build on work that the Census has already done in the

area of imputing the employers' share of health insurance costs. Beginning 1992, the Census has

included on the March Current Population Survey (CPS) a variable measuring the employers'

share of health insurance costs. This variable is based on the National Medical Care Expenditure

Survey (NMCES).8 To estimate the amount of the employers' contributions to health insurance

for individuals in the HRS, we match individuals in the 1993 CPS with individuals with health

insurance in the HRS.

        The employer's promise to contribute to the cost of health insurance after the individual

retires (retiree health insurance) has asset value.9

        When a retiree reaches 65, Medicare becomes the first payer for retirees. This means that

employer contributions to health insurance go down, since they no longer have to cover what

Medicare picks up. The GAO (1989) reports that employer contributions to retiree health


8
 The construction of this variable is described in the publication Measuring the Effect of Benefits
and Taxes on Income and Poverty: 1979 to 1991 (Census, 1993, p. B-3):
9
 We are looking at the discounted sum of future payments the employer will make to the
employee after the employee retires. For the pension, it is represented by the full value of the
future pension payments. For retiree health insurance, it is represented by the employer’s share of
the payments that will be made after the employee retirees. The employee will have to pay his/her
share of health insurance after retirement, and these payments will have to come from assets
already accumulated.

                                                   5
insurance are only 30 percent as large for retirees over 65 years old as they are for retirees under

65. Accordingly, contributions are reduced by 70 percent after the individual becomes eligible for

Medicare (GAO, 1989). Having calculated the employer contributions to retiree health insurance,

it is a relatively simple matter to take the present discounted value of the future contributions and

arrive at an asset value for the commitment of the firm to maintain its contributions to the health

insurance plan. Below the wealth equivalent includes the share of the present value of retiree

health benefits accrued on the basis of work to date.

       The next step in measuring trends in coverage is to impute for each individual in the HRS

the pension and retiree health insurance coverage that they would have had if the coverage rates

had been the same as in 1969. There are two steps to do this.

       First, the observations for workers in the Retirement History Study are divided up

according to work effort (full-time or part-time), sector (public or private), occupation (17

categories), and industry (13 categories). For each combination of these characteristics, the

percentage of the RHS respondents having pension coverage only, health coverage only, both

pension and health insurance, and neither is calculated. The top pie chart in Figure 1 displays an

example distribution for a particular combination (e.g., full-time private sector craftsmen in the

construction industry). The chart indicates that 25 percent of the RHS workers in this cell have

only health insurance, another 15 percent have only pensions, 30 percent have both, and 30

percent do not have either. A similar exercise is carried out for workers aged 50-65 in the 1993

Current Population Survey, which actually refers to work in 1992.10 The pie chart for the same


10
 The RHS respondents were 58-63 in 1969. However, the number of CPS respondents in this
narrow age range was small enough to create small numbers in many of the cells. On the other
hand, we did not want to include everyone in the CPS, since the coverage rates of younger

                                                  6
cell is drawn in the lower part of Figure 1. By 1992, the CPS indicates that 40 percent of this set

of workers has both pensions and health insurance, 25 percent have only health insurance, 15

percent have only pensions, and 20 percent do not have either.

       Now we impute the pension and health insurance coverage that an HRS respondent might

have had given the 1969 coverage rates. Suppose that the HRS respondent actually had both

health insurance and pension coverage in 1992, and that his or her work effort, sector, occupation

and industry are the ones illustrated in the figure. This respondent would then be assigned a

random point in the upper wedge (the one labeled "Pensions and HI") in the lower pie chart in the

figure. The lower pie chart would be laid over the upper pie chart, and the imputed health

insurance and pension coverage would be assigned according to where that individual's random

point was in the upper pie. This respondent, who was in the upper pie wedge in the lower pie,

would have a three-quarters chance of remaining in the upper wedge in the upper pie. That is, he

or she would have a three-quarters chance of having both health insurance and pension coverage

under the coverage rates prevailing in 1969, given that he or she had both types of coverage in

1992. Otherwise, he or she would be assigned to have either only health insurance coverage or

only pension coverage in 1969 rather than having both.11

       A similar procedure would be applied if the individual were in one of the other three

wedges of the lower pie chart in 1992. If the individual had only health insurance coverage or only


workers is different than those of older workers. The 50-65 age range in the CPS is a compromise
solution that includes more respondents than the narrow age range but does not mix younger
workers to a significant extent.
11
  The upper pie chart should be rotated slightly counter-clockwise relative to the way it is
pictured, so that when the lower chart is overlaid some of the remaining 10 percent in the upper
wedge of the bottom chart spills out on either side of the upper wedge of the top chart.

                                                 7
pension coverage in 1992, there is some probability that the individual would be imputed not to

have had either type of coverage in 1969. If the individual did not have either coverage in 1992,

the procedure would impute neither type of coverage in 1969 either, at least for the distributions

illustrated by the pie charts in Figure 1.12

          An analogous procedure is used for imputing pension and health insurance coverage for

HRS respondents on the assumption that coverage rates are similar to those prevailing in 1980,

except that the 1980 rates are taken from the 1980 Current Population Survey rather than from

the Retirement History Study. 13 Since we are comparing two Current Population Surveys, we use

coverage rates for all workers in order to minimize the fluctuations of percentages with and

without pension and health insurance coverage in the cells defined by work status, sector,

occupation, and industry. Finally, for 1992 we use the actual pension and health insurance

coverage of the HRS respondents.14


12
 Note that this procedure imputes pension and health insurance coverage jointly. This is
important if the ultimate aim is to analyze how changes in health insurance and pensions affect the
wealth distribution. For instance, if pension coverage rises by 10 percent and health insurance
coverage rises by 5 percent, it makes a difference in the distribution of wealth whether 5 percent
of the individuals gain both pension and health insurance coverage and 5 percent gain only
pension coverage, or whether 10 percent gain only pension coverage and 5 percent gain only
health insurance coverage.
13
     The 1980 coverage rates in the Current Population Survey actually refer to calendar year 1979.
14
 More specifically, in imputing pension coverage we did the following. From the March 1980
CPS, for each industry/occupation/full-time status/private-public sector combination, four
probabilities were calculated: Pr(no coverage), Pr(pension only), Pr(health insurance only), and
Pr(both). From the March 1993 CPS, for each combination, the same four probabilities were
calculated. (We could have used the RHS to calculate these probabilities, but we used the CPS for
two reasons. First, we wanted to keep the two probabilities as consistent as possible, since the
next step is to compare them. Secondly, the CPS has more observations, which reduced problems
of small sizes in the individual cells used to calculate the probabilities.) Next, we computed
Pr(pension/health insurance combination in 1980 | pension/health insurance combination in 1992)

                                                  8
       After imputing pension and health insurance coverage for the three years (1969, 1980, and

1992), the next step is to impute the value of pensions, retiree health insurance coverage, and the

value of retiree health insurance coverage for those who are imputed to have it in the given year.

       For 1969, the imputed values are based of pensions on the Retirement History Study,

since there are no employer descriptions of plans during that time period. This involves several

steps. First, we take all respondents of the RHS who reported eventually receiving a pension

during the survey. For each such respondent, we divide the pension amount by the product of the

years of service in the job that produced the pension and the final wage in that job. This yields the

"generosity factor" of that pension. Next, we note the early retirement age and the normal

retirement age for the pension, as reported by the respondent. If the collection of the pension

occurred before the normal retirement age, the generosity factor is adjusted to reflect the fact that

the pension amount was reduced for early retirement. Each pension is thus characterized by three

features: the generosity factor, the early retirement age, and the normal retirement age.

       Next, these pensions are grouped according to work effort, sector, occupation, and

industry, similar to the cells that were formed to impute coverage rates. Pensions are further

separated according to wage deciles to reflect the fact that pensions for upper income workers are

likely to be different from pensions for lower income workers. This gives, for each combination of


in the manner described in the text associated with Figure 1. These calculations assume that any
additional 1992 joint coverage probability came from jobs which had either pension or health
insurance coverage in 1980, rather than from jobs that did not have any coverage in 1980,
although in some cases where the joint pension/health insurance rate in 1993 is higher than the
percentage who had either pensions or health insurance in 1969, some individuals with both in
1993 might be imputed to have neither in 1969. Finally, for each individual in the HRS, we found
the coverage in 1992 and imputed the 1980 coverage from the conditional probabilities
PR(pension/health insurance combination in 1980 | pension/health insurance combination in 1992)
computed from the two CPS's.

                                                  9
work effort, sector, occupation, industry, and wage decile a pool of pensions that is reflective of

pensions available to older workers in 1969. Note that this strategy assumes that pensions follow

a simple formula of multiplying the generosity factor times years of service and the final wage and

reducing the amount if the individual retires before the normal retirement age. This assumption is

more appropriate for 1969, when most plans were defined benefit and reduction amounts were

close to actuarially fair, than for 1992.

        Finally, for each member of the HRS who is imputed to have had a pension if pension and

health insurance coverage rates were similar to those prevailing in 1969, a pension is drawn at

random from the pool available for that individual's level of work effort, sector, occupation,

industry, and wage decile. Using the wages and job tenure observed for the HRS individual in

1992, the amount of the annual pension benefit is calculated from the pension's generosity factor,

early retirement age, and normal retirement age. The wealth value of the pension is calculated by

taking the sum of the pension benefits from the date of collection forward, allowing for

discounting back to 1992.

        For 1980, a slightly different strategy is followed. There are no pensions available for 1980

per se, but in 1983 the Survey of Consumer Finances collected Summary Plan Descriptions from

the employers of the respondents. These SPDs were later coded in a format which makes them

amenable for computer evaluation. As with the previous evaluations for 1969, the SCF SPD's

were grouped according to work effort, sector, occupation, industry, and wage decile. This forms

a pool of pensions for each cell that reflects the pensions that were actually available for workers

in that cell at the time of the SCF.

        For each HRS respondent who is imputed to have had a pension in 1980 if the coverage


                                                 10
rates in that year had prevailed, a draw is made from the pool of respondents with SPD's for the

appropriate combination of work effort, sector, occupation, industry, and wage decile. Using that

SPD, the pension value and accrual are calculated using the HRS respondent's actual years of

service and wage in 1992.15

       For 1992, the HRS collected pension summary plan descriptions for about two-thirds of

the respondents with pension coverage, much like the SCF did in 1983. For these individuals, it

would have been possible to calculate the values of the actual matched pensions in 1992.

However, in order to maintain as much comparability with previous years (when no exact matches

were possible), and also to calculate values for respondents for whom no pension SPDs were

obtained in 1992, we followed the same procedure for 1992 that we did for 1980, except that we

used the HRS SPDs rather than the SCF SPDs. That is, we grouped the HRS SPDs according to

the respondent's work effort, sector, occupation, industry, and wage decile, and for each HRS

respondent who reported that he or she was covered by a pension, we drew one pension at

random from the appropriate cell and evaluated it.16

       The general strategy for measuring the change in the value of employer provided health




15
  Some of the coded pensions contain dollar amounts corresponding, for instance, to a formula
which pays a flat $25 per month for each year of service. The amounts are almost always
increased periodically to reflect the general advance in wage levels. Therefore, in calculating the
SCF pensions, we assumed that any nominal dollar amounts in the pensions were increased in
proportion to the increase in the general wage level between 1983 and 1992.
16
 The results produced with exact and random matches with HRS data are very close, as can be
seen by comparing the tables reported below with those reported in Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick
and Steinmeier (1999).

                                                 11
insurance is similar to that for pensions, although the details are considerably different.17 To

determine the health insurance values for 1980, we begin by grouping the 1980 CPS values for

employer contributions to health insurance according to work effort, sector, region, occupation,

industry, and wage decile. Note that in addition to the variables used for the pension matches, we

use geographic region here to reflect the possibility that health care costs vary substantially from

one region to the next. Then, for each HRS respondent who is imputed to have health insurance

coverage were the coverage rates assumed to be similar to those prevailing in 1980, a draw is

made from the pool of values for the appropriate work effort, sector, region, occupation, industry,

and wage decile cell. This value is indexed to 1992 using the overall CPI to express it in 1992

dollars, and the resulting measure is the value of employer contributions to health insurance in the

current job.

       Imputing the asset value of retiree health insurance involves matching retiree health

insurance with jobs in the CPS. For a HRS respondent who is imputed to have health insurance

coverage, given the 1980 coverage rates, we first ask whether that respondent was covered in

1992. If the respondent was covered in 1992, then we ask whether he or she was also covered by

retiree health insurance in 1992. If yes, we then adjust the coverage rate in 1992 by changes

observed for medium and large size firms in the retiree health insurance coverage rate conditional




17
  Since 1991, Census has placed on the March CPS tapes a variable for the employer
contributions to the health insurance of current workers, computed from the NMCES, as
described above. Census computed the same variable for earlier years, but those CPS datasets had
already been released. However, they have made the variable available at their Internet FTP site,
along with the necessary linking information, for all the years back to the March 1980 CPS.

                                                  12
on coverage by a pension.18

       To calculate the value of retiree health insurance coverage, we calculate the present value

of employer contributions from 1992 onward, discounted back to 1992 by the real discount rate.19

The annual contribution after age 65 is taken to be 30 percent of the contribution before age 65 to

reflect the integration with Medicare; the 30 percent figure is taken from a GAO report. Retiree

health insurance is assumed to be available from the age of early retirement in the respondent's

pension, or from age 55 for the relatively few cases where the individual reported retiree health

insurance with no pension.

       For the relatively few cases where the HRS respondent was imputed to have health

insurance coverage in 1980 but did not report health insurance coverage in 1992, the probability

of retiree health insurance coverage in 1980 was taken to be 48 percent. This is the overall

probability of retiree health insurance coverage in the HRS, given that the respondent had current

health insurance coverage. Again, we are assuming that any changes in the probability of retiree

health insurance coverage between 1980 and 1992 mirror changes in the probability of current

health insurance coverage, adjusted for changes in the conditional probability of retiree health



18
  Data from the BLS survey of intermediate and large size firms, which is available from 1981,
suggests that the changes in the probability of retiree health coverage for those with health
coverage from their employer were only modest over the period. Approximately 61 percent of full
time workers in medium and large firms with medical benefits had employer provided health
insurance in 1981, and after adjusting for changes in the scope of the survey, about 55 percent had
employer provided benefits in 1991 (Karoly and Rogowski, 1997). The major drop in coverage
was in the mid-1980s. We incorporate these changes into our estimates.
19
  Note that by using the real discount factor, we are assuming that health insurance contributions
will grow at the same rate as prices in general. There is obviously room for debate about this
assumption, but it is fairly clear that simply projecting health insurance contributions to grow at
the same rate as they have been growing in the previous decade is probably even more inaccurate.

                                                 13
coverage given coverage by employer provided health insurance.

         In the absence of other information, we assume that retiree health insurance becomes

vested at the age of early retirement eligibility.

         Since neither the CPS nor the RHS reports on employer contributions to health insurance

in 1969, the 1969 contributions are based on the 1980 CPS figures. However, the 1980 figures

are reduced to 1969 amounts using the health care component of the CPI before expressing them

in 1992 dollars using the overall CPI-U. Again, the CPS observations are grouped according to

work effort, sector, region, occupation, industry, and wage decile, and for HRS respondents

imputed to have health insurance under the coverage conditions prevailing in 1969, a random

draw is made from the appropriate cell to determine the employer contribution amount. Values

for both retiree health insurance are also calculated in exactly the same way as was done for the

1980 distribution.

         For 1992, the employer contributions to health insurance from the 1993 CPS are grouped

according to the same categories as for the earlier years. For an HRS respondent who reported

health insurance in 1992, a random draw is made from the appropriate cell to determine the

employer contribution. Then, for HRS respondents who report that they also have retiree health

insurance, the wealth value of this insurance is calculated in exactly the same way as for the earlier

years.

         One final note on the calculations of the value of pensions and health insurance. For

pensions, the plans in the HRS are matched with particular jobs. In the small number of cases

where a respondent is imputed to have a pension in a previous year but does not have pension

coverage in any HRS job, the current job is used as the potential pension job, and if there is no


                                                     14
current job, a previous job is used. In the health insurance section of the survey, the question

regarding the source of the coverage is ambiguous. For instance, one response as to the source of

the coverage is "current/past employer," without distinguishing whether the plan is from a current

employer or from a past employer. But in the job section, there are no questions about whether a

particular job provides health insurance. As a result, there are quite a few lines of programming

code devoted to matching plans with jobs. For instance, a plan which offers retiree health

coverage is matched with the current job if the current job offers a pension plan (on the premise

that retiree health coverage is almost always offered in conjunction with a pension plan), or with a

previous job with a pension if the current job does not offer a pension plan. In this way, plans that

offer either current or retiree health insurance are matched with either the current job or one of

the previous jobs listed in the employment section.

III. Empirical Findings

       According to our calculations, employer provided pensions and retiree health insurance

account for about a quarter of total wealth among all households sampled in the Health and

Retirement Study, and for about a fifth of the total wealth of the median ten percent of

households order by their wealth holdings. As seen in column 1, in the first panel of Table 1, on

average, pensions owned by the HRS population in 1992 were worth $112,921. Pension wealth

accounts for 22.8 percent of the total wealth accumulated by these households on the verge of

retirement, where the measure of total wealth includes the value of social security. 20 Retiree health


20
 Measuring pension wealth using self reported data, Smith (1993) found that pension wealth
accounted for 22 percent of total wealth in the HRS. Total net mean wealth held by the HRS
population in 1992, including pensions, retiree health insurance and social security, is $496,105,
while average net wealth for the median 10 percent of the population is $340,527. By way of
comparison, note that using the 1969 Retirement History Study (RHS), Hurd and Shoven (1982,

                                                 15
insurance was worth $7,609 for each HRS household, accounting for another 1.5 percent of total

wealth. When families are ordered by wealth, the average value of pensions for the median ten

percent of wealth holding families is $61,384, amounting to 18 percent of wealth owned by these

HRS households. Retiree health benefits are worth $7,742, amounting to 2.3 percent of their total

wealth.

          Turn now to consider changes in the value of wealth from pensions and retiree health

insurance. Because pensions are ten times as valuable as retiree health insurance, the calculation

of wealth from employer provided deferred benefits, and changes in wealth over time associated

with changes in these benefits, are going to be dominated by changes in pensions.

          Comparing the three panels in Table 1, one can observe the trends in pension wealth due

to changes in coverage and plan provisions, and in the wealth value of retiree health insurance due

to changes in coverage and in the relative cost of medical expenditures. Column 1 of Table 1

contains the mean values of pension wealth and wealth from retiree health insurance for all

households. Values for the households falling between the 45th and 55th percentiles of the total

wealth distribution are shown in column two.

          The value of pension wealth per household increased by 145 percent (112,921/46,104)




Table 3) found for this cohort of 58 to 63 year olds, that mean total wealth (including pensions
and social security but subtracting Medicare and Medicaid from their figures) is $62,000 in 1969
dollars. Inflating by the CPI, that amounts to $237,000 in 1992 dollars, or about half the total
wealth, including pensions, social security and health insurance, we find for the HRS cohort in
1992. Excluding pension and social security wealth and the capitalized value of transfers, total
wealth in the RHS is $33,000, which inflating by the CPI is about $126,000 in 1992 dollars. This
figure again is about half of the value of nonpension, nonsocial security wealth in the HRS
population, which is $242,000 in 1992 dollars.

                                                 16
between 1969 and 1992.21 As noted above, measured changes in pension wealth are estimated

using the same real earnings profile and experience assumed for the HRS cohort members. They

abstract from the effects of changes in tenure and earnings. Again abstracting from the effects of

changes in the overall price level, retiree health insurance almost doubled in value over the same

period. Almost all of the difference over time in wealth from changing coverage and plan

provisions of these employer provided deferred benefits are due to differences in pension wealth,

rather than to differences in the value of retiree health insurance. This can be seen in columns 3

and 4. Thus pension coverage increased from 55 to 64 percent between 1969 and 1992, with

almost all of the increase taking place by 1980. In contrast, average real pension wealth among

covered families more than doubled in value, with 54 percentage points of the increase taking

place by 1980.

       Figure 2 indicates the relation of total wealth to place in the wealth distribution.22 The

distribution of wealth in the baseline Health and Retirement Study is more unequal than the




21
  As a rough benchmark we found that total wealth approximately doubled between the periods,
suggesting that pension wealth grew faster than the other components of total wealth, even if one
standardizes for changes in covered earnings and the length of covered employment. Given the
differences in methodology between Hurd and Shoven (1982,1983) and our own study, we do not
wish to push these comparisons very far.
22
  When we calculate gini coefficients for the wealth distribution, we find a gini coefficient of
around .5, instead of higher number found in some other studies. The lower value reflects the
inclusion of pensions, health insurance and social security. For a related discussion, see Wolff
(1987). A gini coefficient of around .5 is also consistent with Feldstein (1976) as cited in Wolff.
Wolff and Marley (1987) report a gini coefficient for wealth augmented by social security and
pensions of around .57 for 1983. The 90-10 differential is 12.6 to 1 when pension values and
retiree health insurance values in 1992 are used.

                                                 17
distributions in the baseline Retirement History Study. 23

       For some in the very bottom bracket of the wealth distribution, wealth is negative. Wealth

may be negative because there is negative business wealth, or because the value of the mortgage

reported exceeds the value of the house, or for other reasons. Essentially, at least some of those

falling in the bottom five or ten percent of these distributions do not conform to stereotypes of

people with low permanent wealth, but are people with large positive components of wealth offset

by negative components. Accordingly, where possible we will concentrate on changes for those

outside of the bottom ten percent of the wealth distribution.

       Figure 3 shows that pension coverage increased from 1969 to 1992. The largest increase

clearly took place between 1969 and 1980. As the figure suggests, pension coverage is highest for

those between the fiftieth and ninety fifth percentiles of the wealth distribution, and increases in

pension coverage were largest for those in the top part of the wealth distribution.

       In Figure 4 we see that the increase in the value of pension wealth for those with a

pension, which is measured in real terms, was large over both parts of this period. Those with

pensions enjoyed a substantial enrichment in their pensions from changes in plan provisions.

       Taking the changes in coverage and plan value together in the distribution of pension

wealth among all families, Figure 5 shows that the changes in plan value dominate the changes in

coverage.



23
 The level of wealth at the ninetieth percentile is $978,000. The ratio of wealth at the ninetieth
percentile over mean wealth for the HRS sample is 1.97 to 1. Hurd and Shoven (1983, Table
13.12), including the value of Medicare and Medicaid, found the ratio to be 1.66 to 1 in the 1969
Retirement History Study. Similarly, while Hurd and Shoven (Table 13.9) found the ratio of the
average wealth for the top ten percent of wealth holders in the RHS to the mean for the sample to
be 3.35 to 1, we find the ratio to be 3.7 to 1.

                                                  18
        As seen in Figure 6, if we measure total wealth in each year using the level of nonpension

wealth from 1992, then the share of total wealth represented by pensions increased

disproportionately for those in the top part of the wealth distribution.24 For those in the top half of

the distribution, the share of total wealth represented by pensions doubled over the period, while

increasing much more modestly for those in the bottom half of the distribution.25

        Figures 7 through 10 show the parallel changes in the value of retiree health benefits. As

seen in Figure 7, from 1969 to 1992, coverage by retiree health insurance grew for those in the

bottom half, but not the bottom half, of the wealth distribution. As seen in Figure 8, among

covered households, the wealth value of retiree health insurance increased sharply whatever their

place in the wealth distribution. However, because of the lower coverage of those in the bottom

part of the wealth distribution, Figure 9 indicates that the increase in the value of retiree health

insurance among all households was much larger among the households in the top half of the

wealth distribution. As seen in Figure 10, for those in the top half of the wealth distribution, the

wealth value of retiree health insurance roughly doubled in relation to total wealth, increasing




24
  In calculating total wealth in each year, we hold nonpension, nonhealth insurance components of
wealth at their values in 1992. So any differences in the wealth distribution are due only to
differences in pension and retiree health insurance values in the different years. Essentially, then ,
we are asking how pension wealth and wealth from retiree health insurance changed given a
person’s position in the wealth distribution in 1992. Note that we are not tracing changes in the
distribution for the same people, that is, for people identified as falling in a particular bracket in a
specific year. Rather we are comparing the distributions that would obtain with the pensions and
retiree health insurance in one year with the distributions that would obtain with the pensions and
retiree health insurance in another year.
25
 Note that the large share of wealth from pensions and retiree health insurance for those in the
bottom 5 percent of the wealth distribution reflects the effects of negative wealth held by some
who had very high gross wealth, but even larger debts.

                                                  19
proportionately less for those in the bottom part of the wealth distribution.26

       There is some interest in the relative importance of public vs. private sector pensions, and

defined benefit vs. defined contribution pensions in governing these results. These are investigated

in Table 2.27 We do not have results by plan type in earlier years. In 1969, we assumed that all

jobs offered DB plans only. In addition, it can be shown that the HRS was more likely to match

DB plans, and plans from larger firms than it was to match DC plans and plans from smaller firms.

Therefore, the present sample overstates the importance of DB plans, but it causes at most a four

percentage point overstatement of the value of pensions.28


26
 Again, note the effects of the unusual composition of households in the bottom 5 percent of the
wealth distribution.
27
 Note that households may have one spouse in the private sector and another in the public sector,
or one spouse with a DB plan and another with a DC plan. In that case, the household is counted
twice, once in each relevant category, which is why the number in the all category does not
necessarily equal the simple sum of the relevant subcategories. For example, if the husband was a
private sector worker with a $50,000 pension and the wife was a public sector worker with a
$75,000 pension, the household would show up as having both a $50,000 private pension and a
$75,000 public pension, and a total pension of $125,000. But in the All column, the household
would be counted only once. The same kind of counting goes on if the wife has a DB plan and the
husband has a DC plan.
28
  Employees from large firms or with a defined benefit, rather than a defined contribution plan,
were more likely to have a matched employer provided pension plan. In the self reported
information on plan types, when asked what type of pension they had, of those who reported, 68
percent (weighted) of HRS respondents indicated they were covered by some type of DB plan,
with the rest covered exclusively by a 401(k) or other DC plan. For this group, at age 65, on
average DB plans are worth 15.5 percent of the cumulative earnings. On average, at age 65 DC
plans are worth 9.2 percent of the cumulative earnings. But 76 percent (weighted) of respondents
with a matched pension are treated as being covered by a DB plan. If respondents are reporting
the correct mix of plan types, so that the proper mix includes 68 percent DB and mixed plans and
32 percent DC only plans, and we have used a mix of 76 percent DB and mixed plans and 24
percent DC only, we would overstate the value of average pensions in retirement by about 3.7
percent (.76*.155+.24*.092)/(.68*.155+.32*.092). Since pensions were assigned to respondents
without an employer provided plan on a number of characteristics so as to reduce this bias, 3.7
percent is an upper limit estimate. Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick and Steinmeier (1999). Further

                                                 20
       The last columns of Table 2 show that private sector pensions are 8.6 times as important

as public sector pensions as a source of total wealth, so that the results discussed in this paper are

generated basically by private sector pensions. These tables also suggest that wealth from those

with DB and combination plans is 7 times as important as wealth from those with DC plans only.

IV. Implications and Conclusions

       We have examined the implications of changes in pensions and health insurance values for

changes in household wealth. Major findings of the study include the following:

       By 1992, pensions and retiree health insurance represented one quarter of the wealth of

families on the verge of retirement. Between 1969 and 1992, abstracting from the effects of

changes in wages and cohort differences in tenure on pension benefit amounts, changing pension

coverage and plan provisions increased pension wealth per family by almost 150 percent in real

terms. Retiree health benefits, which have only about 7 percent of the value of pensions, almost

doubled in value over the period. Most of the increase in pension values and in the value of retiree

health insurance plans, which together amount to about $70,000 per household, was due to

improvements in real benefits among covered workers, rather than to increases in coverage. Over

this period, coverage by employer provided pensions increased for those on the verge of

retirement from 55 percent to 64 percent. Coverage by retiree health insurance increased from 28

percent to 32 percent. All classes of wealth holders enjoyed increased wealth from employer

provided retirement plans, but those in the top half of the wealth distribution enjoyed increases

that were much larger in absolute terms and also were larger in relation to their total wealth than

were the increases experienced by those in the bottom half of the wealth distribution.


details are available in the appendix to that paper.

                                                  21
       The findings presented above have implications for studies of wealth, wealth changes, and

the distribution of wealth and its changes. It is clear from our analysis that studies of these topics

must take pensions into account. One will paint a misleading picture of wealth, its distribution and

related changes if pensions are ignored. In addition, the changes in pensions are large enough to

suggest that panel surveys aimed at examining wealth and its determination should probably

collect pension information periodically.

       Because the changes in pensions are large and would appear to be difficult to foresee, our

findings constitute evidence against a hypothesis that would attribute any relation between

pensions and wealth to self selection of those with an unmeasured taste for saving into pension

covered jobs. Self selection is an important problem for studies that would relate outcomes such

as total accumulated wealth, retirement, or mobility to pension variables.29

       It is also clear that retiree health insurance is dwarfed by pensions, suggesting that retiree

health insurance is probably not an important determinant of overall wealth or its changes. Retiree

health insurance has been accorded an important role in explaining retirement behavior (e.g., see,

National Institute of Health, May, 1998). For this to be so, it must play a strongly

disproportionate role in the few years between retirement and eligibility for Medicare, or people

must be extremely sensitive to risk when health insurance coverage is unavailable (Rust and

Phelan, 1997). Nevertheless, the value of retiree health insurance is so small as to raise doubts



29
  In Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) we find that pension wealth is not largely offset by
decumulation of other wealth, suggesting that pensions add to total wealth. One possible
explanation for this result is that those with pensions have a higher taste for saving. The findings
in this paper cast doubt on that hypothesis. Other evidence that is inconsistent with the idea that
people select themselves into pension covered jobs on the basis of unobserved tastes is presented
in Gustman and Steinmeier (1995).

                                                  22
about the strong effects of retiree health benefits found in some of these studies.30 And for similar

reasons, changes in retiree health benefits are likely to be of limited importance in shaping

retirement behavior.




30
     For further discussion, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1994).

                                                  23
References

Board of Trustees, Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance And Disability Trust Funds, 1995
Annual Report. U.S. Government Printing Office.

Feldstein, Martin. 1976. "Social Security and The Distribution of Wealth". Journal of the
American Statistical Association 71 (December): 800-807.

Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1999.
"Pension and Social Security Wealth In The Health And Retirement Study". In Wealth, Work and
Health, Innovations in Measurement in the Social Sciences, ed. James Smith and Robert Willis.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1989. "An Analysis of Pension Benefit Formulas, Pension
Wealth and Incentives from Pensions." In Research in Labor Economics 10: 33-106.

      . 1994. "Employer Provided Health Insurance and Retirement Behavior". In Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 47(3).

     . 1995. Pension Incentives and Job Mobility. Kalamazoo, Michigan: Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.


      . 1999. "Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis With Data From The Health and
Retirement Study". In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 50:271-326.

Hurd, Michael and John B. Shoven. 1982. "Real Income and Wealth of the Elderly. In American
Economic Review 72(2), May: 314-318.

      . 1983. "The Economic Status of The Elderly". In Financial Aspects of the United States
Pension System, eds. Z. Bodie and J. Shoven, 359-393. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ippolito, Richard A. 1986. Pensions, Economics and Public Policy. Homewood, Illinois: Dow
Jones-Irwin.

Karoly, Lynn A. and Jeannette A. Rogowski. 1997. “Retiree Health Benefits and Retirement
Behavior: Implications for Health Policy”. Rand.

McDermed, Ann A., Robert L. Clark and Steven G. Allen. 1989. "Pension Wealth, Age Wealth
Profiles, and the Distribution of Net Worth". In The Measurement of Saving and Wealth, eds.
Robert E. Lipsey and Helen S. Tice, 689-731. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mitchell, Olivia, Jan Olson and Thomas Steinmeier. 1996. "Construction Of The Earnings and


                                               24
Benefits File (EBF) For Use With The Health and Retirement Survey". In NBER Working Paper
5707.

Rust, John and Christopher Phelan. “How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retirement
Behavior in a World of Incomplete Markets”. In Econometrica 65(4): 781-831.

Samwick, Andrew A. and Jonathan Skinner. 1995. "How Will Defined Contribution Pension
Plans Affect Retirement Income?". Hanover, New Hampshire.

Smith, James P. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth Using the HRS”, In Journal of Human
Resources 30 (Supplement): S158-S183.

1989. U. S. General Accounting Office, Employee Benefits, Companies' Retiree Health
Liabilities Large, Advance Funding Costly, June.

Wolff, Edward N. 1987. In International Comparisons of The Distribution of Household Wealth.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Wolff, Edward N. and Marcia Marley. 1989. "Long-Term Trends In U.S. Wealth Inequality:
Methodological Issues and Results". In The Measurement of Saving and Wealth, eds. Robert E.
Lipsey and Helen S. Tice, 765-839. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


</ref_section>




                                             25
26
    Table 1: Pension Wealth And Wealth From Employer-Provided Retiree Health Insurance
                                         ($1992)

                                 Mean Value        Mean Value       Percent    Mean Value
  Source of Wealth               For All           For Median        With         For
                                 Households        Ten Percent      Wealth      Covered
                                                   Of Wealth         From      Households
                                                   Holding         Indicated
                                                   Households       Source
                                      ($)              ($)         (Percent)      ($)
                                             1992
  Pension                         112,921            61,384            64      177,221
  Retiree Health Insurance          7,609             7,642            32       23,870
                                             1980
  Pension                           84,070           48,572            63      133,865
  Retiree Health Insurance           5,214            5,784            35       14,852
                                             1969
  Pension                          46,104            31,627            55       83,472
  Retiree Health Insurance           3,916            4,651            28       13,931


Source: Authors' calculations. All data are weighted by HRS sample weights.




                                              27
 Table 2: Pension Wealth By Sector of Coverage and Plan Type For Entitled Population and All
                                        Households
                                          ($1992)

  Source of Wealth                     Percent Of       Average Value of     Average Value of
                                       Households        Pension Wealth       Pension Wealth
                                      With Wealth        Among Entitled         Among All
                                       Entitlement         Population          Households
                                     From Pensions             ($)                  ($)
                                      and Indicated
                                    Employment or
                                       Coverage
                                        (Percent)
                                          Total Sample
  All*                                         64               177,221            112,921
                          Private Sector Vs. Public Sector Employment
  Private Sector                               56               173,249             97,172
  Public Sector                                  8              206,185             15,684
                                             Plan Type
  Defined Benefit or                           52               190,615             98,117
  Combination Plan
  Defined Contribution Plan                   19                 79,123             14,804
  Only

Source: Authors’ calculations. All data are weighted by HRS sample weights.
* Components do not sum to totals in the table. Households may have one spouse in the private
sector and another in the public sector, or one spouse with a DB plan and another with a DC plan.
In that case, the household is counted twice, once in each relevant category. However, the All
category counts each household once.




                                               28
                        Figure 1
Example of Distributions of Pensions and Health Insurance



                     1969 Distribution




                None               HI Only
                30%                 25%




                              Pensions & HI
             Pensions Only
                                  30%
                 15%




                       1992 Distribution




                       None
                                    HI Only
                       20%
                                     25%


             Pensions Only
                 15%

                             Pensions & HI
                                 40%




                             29
                                 Figure 2: Distribution of Wealth
                                  HRS Households, 1992 Dollars

                 2500000


                 2000000
Average Wealth




                 1500000


                 1000000


                 500000


                      0
                           0-5   5-10    10-25    25-50   50-75      75-90   90-95 95-100
                                                 Wealth Percentile

                                                 30
                           Figure 3: Households With Pensions
                           Percent By Year, By Wealth Percentile

             100
             90
             80
             70
Percentage




             60                                                                      1969
             50                                                                      1980
             40                                                                      1992
             30
             20
             10
              0
                   0-5   5-10   10-25    25-50        50-75   75-90   90-95 95-100
                                        Wealth Percentile

                                                 31
                                                  Figure 4: Pension Wealth
                                           Average Among Households With Pensions

                            700000
Present Value of Pensions




                            600000

                            500000

                            400000                                                        1969
                                                                                          1980
                            300000                                                        1992
                            200000

                            100000

                                0
                                     0-5     5-10   10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90 90-95   95-
                                                                                    100
                                                        Wealth Percentile

                                                             32
                                               Figure 5: Pension Wealth
                                             Average Among All Households

                            500000
Present Value of Pensions




                            400000

                            300000                                                      1969
                                                                                        1980
                            200000                                                      1992


                            100000

                                0
                                     0-5   5-10   10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90 90-95   95-
                                                                                  100
                                                      Wealth Percentile

                                                           33
                          Figure 6: Percentage of Wealth From Pensions

             0.35

              0.3

             0.25
Percentage




              0.2                                                             1969
                                                                              1980
             0.15                                                             1992

              0.1

             0.05

               0
                    0-5      5-10   10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90    90-95 95-100
                                         Wealth Percentile

                                               34
                        Figure 7: Percent With Retiree Health Insurance

             60

             50

             40
Percentage




                                                                                      1969
             30                                                                       1980
                                                                                      1992
             20

             10

              0
                  0-5     5-10   10-25    25-50        50-75   75-90   90-95 95-100
                                         Wealth Percentile

                                                  35
                                              Figure 8: Retiree Health Benefits
                                             Average Among Covered Households

                               35000
Present Value Retiree Health




                               30000

                               25000
         Benefits




                               20000                                                       1969
                                                                                           1980
                               15000                                                       1992
                               10000

                               5000

                                  0
                                       0-5    5-10   10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90 90-95   95-
                                                                                     100
                                                         Wealth Percentile

                                                             36
                                             Figure 9: Retiree Health Benefits
                                              Average Among All Households

                               20000
Present Value Retiree Health




                               15000
         Benefits




                                                                                          1969
                               10000                                                      1980
                                                                                          1992

                               5000


                                  0
                                       0-5   5-10   10-25 25-50 50-75 75-90 90-95   95-
                                                                                    100
                                                        Wealth Percentile

                                                            37
                     Figure 10: Percent of Wealth From Retiree Health

             0.04



             0.03
Percentage




                                                                                    1969
             0.02                                                                   1980
                                                                                    1992

             0.01



             0.00
                    0-5   5-10   10-25     25-50   50-75     75-90   90-95 95-100
                                         Wealth Percentile
                                              38
