                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               COMPARING THE ECONOMIC AND
                                CONVENTIONAL APPROACHES
                                  TO FINANCIAL PLANNING

                                           Jagadeesh Gokhale
                                          Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                          Mark J. Warshawsky

                                           Working Paper 7321
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7321


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 1999




Laurence Kotlikoff is grateful to the TIAA-CREF Institute and the National Institute of Aging for research
support through the NBER and Boston University. Economic Security Planning, Inc. is grateful to the
National Institute of Aging for research support through a STTR grant. John Ameriks and Stuart Gillan
provided helpful comments. We thank Solange Berstein for excellent research assistance. The opinions
expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of TIAA-CREF or the NBER.

© 1999 by Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Mark J. Warshawsky. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comparing the Economic and Conventional Approaches to Financial Planning
Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Mark J. Warshawsky
NBER Working Paper No. 7321
August 1999
JEL No. D31
                                           ABSTRACT

         The conventional approach to retirement and life insurance planning, which is used throughout the
financial planning industry, differs markedly from the economic approach. The conventional approach asks
households to specify how much they want to spend before retirement, after retirement, and in the event
of an untimely death of the head or spouse. It then determines the amounts of saving and life insurance
needed to achieve these targets. The economic approach is based on the life-cycle model of saving. Its
goal is to smooth households’ living standards over their life cycles and to ensure comparable living
standards for potential survivors. In the economic approach, spending targets are endogenous. They are
derived by calculating the most the household can afford to consume in the present given that it wants to
preserve that living standard in the future.      Although spending targets under the conventional approach
can be adjusted in an iterative process to approximate those derived under the economic approach, there
are practical limits to doing so. This is particularly the case for households experiencing changing
demographics or facing borrowing constraints. This paper illustrates the different saving and insurance
recommendations provided by economic financial planning software and the practical application of
traditional financial planning software. The two software programs are Economic Security Planner
(ESPlanner), developed by Economic Security Planning, Inc., and Quicken Financial Planner (QFP),
developed by Intuit. Each program is run on 24 cases, 20 of which are stylized and 4 of which are actual
households.
         The two software programs recommend dramatically different levels of saving or life insurance in
each of the 24 cases. The different saving recommendations primarily reflect ESPlanner’s adjustment for
household demographics and borrowing constraints. The different life insurance recommendations reflect
these same factors as well as ESPlanner’s accounting for contingent household plans and for Social
Security’s survivor benefits. The less detailed tax and Social Security retirement benefit calculations used
in our implementation of QFP also explain some of the differences between the two programs.

Jagadeesh Gokhale                                             Laurence J. Kotlikoff
33375 Tandem Court                                            Department of Economics
Solon, Ohio 44139                                             Boston University
ajgokhale@stratos.net                                   270 Bay State Rd.
                                                              Boston, MA 02215
                                                              and NBER
                                                              kotlikof@bu.edu

Mark Warshawsky
TIAA CREF
730 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10017-3206
mwarshawsky@tiaa-cref.org
I.     Introduction

       The conventional approach to retirement and life insurance planning asks

households how much they want to spend after retirement and in the event of the

untimely death of the head of household or spouse. It then determines the amounts of

saving and life insurance needed to achieve these targets. This approach, which is used

throughout the financial planning industry, has received remarkably little attention from

economists. This is surprising not only because of the practical importance of traditional

financial planning, but also because of its apparent differences with the economic

approach.

       The economic approach is based on the life-cycle model of saving developed by

Ando and Modigliani (1963) and the canonical model of life insurance developed by

Yaari (1965). The goal of the economic approach is to smooth households’ living

standards over their life cycles and to ensure comparable living standards for potential

survivors. In the economic approach, spending targets are endogenous. The targets are

derived by calculating the most that each household can afford to consume in the present

given that it wants to preserve that living standard into the future. And as stressed by

Hubbard and Judd (1987) among others, a household’s ability to consume may in the

short term also be circumscribed by its ability to borrow.

       Although spending targets under the conventional approach can be adjusted to

approximate those derived under the economic approach, there are practical limits to such

“trial and error” re-targeting. Because of the complexity of the relevant factors, these

limits especially exist for households experiencing changing demographics, enjoying

economies to shared living, or facing borrowing constraints. This paper illustrates the

different saving and insurance recommendations provided by economic financial


                                            -3-
planning software and conventional financial planning software.                   The two software

programs are Economic Security Planner (ESPlanner) (the economic financial planning

software), developed by Economic Security Planning, Inc., and Quicken Financial

Planner (QFP) (the conventional financial planning software), developed by Intuit, Inc.

Each program is run on 24 cases, 20 of which are stylized and 4 of which are actual

households.

        We used both programs in a manner that did not require data or information

external to the program beyond that provided in direct interrogatives from the programs.

In particular, for QFP, we tried to emulate how a somewhat sophisticated household

might use the program. QFP begins by asking a household what it is currently spending

and whether it wants to continue spending that amount in the future. We expect that most

households would answer the latter question in the affirmative. Next QFP asks the

household to enter earnings, net worth, and a variety of other data.                    Finally, QFP

determines if the household’s specified time-path of expenditure is feasible. If its plan

puts the household into debt (or further into debt if the household started in debt) at any

point in the future, QFP tells the household that its plan has failed. A plan can also fail if

there are insufficient resources to finance consumption in retirement.1 By contrast, if a

household saves lots of money, it will almost certainly get a passing grade. We then

expect that the household would adjust its initial consumption spending to, as closely as

possible, “die broke”, that is, to end up with zero financial net worth at the end of its

planning horizon.       Thus, in running QFP on the 24 cases, we choose the level of


1
  By this we mean that the household’s present value of resources doesn’t suffice to pay for its present
value of its targeted consumption expenditure, including its post-retirement consumption expenditure. As
mentioned, the program will “fail” even if this restriction is satisfied, if the targeted trajectory of
expenditure puts the household into debt or further into debt prior to reaching retirement.


                                                 -4-
consumption expenditure by iterating until the household’s terminal net worth is close to

zero. This “trial and error” iteration process is time consuming, which reinforces our

view that even sophisticated households are unlikely to further fine tune their expenditure

plans to deal with demographic change, particularly the arrival and departure of children

from the household, or with borrowing constraints.

       The two software programs recommend dramatically different levels of saving

and life insurance in each of the 24 cases with the discrepancies between the two sets of

recommendations generally increasing with the complexity of the case.       In some cases

ESPlanner recommends substantially more saving in early years and substantially less

saving in later years than does QFP. In other cases, the opposite is true. The differences

in life insurance recommendations are more systematic, with ESPlanner generally

recommending significantly less life insurance than QFP.

       The different saving recommendations primarily reflect ESPlanner’s adjustments

for household demographics, economies in shared living, and borrowing constraints, as

well as its different, and more detailed, approach to the calculation of federal and state

income taxes and Social Security retirement benefits. The two programs’ different life

insurance recommendations reflect these factors, ESPlanner’s contingent planning, and

ESPlanner’s integration in its life insurance calculations of Social Security’s survivor

benefits.

       Our comparison of ESPlanner and QFP illustrates some, but certainly not all, of

the differences in the conventional and economic approaches. There are a plethora of

financial planning software programs adopting the conventional approach. Many of these

programs have specific features that differ from those of QFP. Hence in comparing




                                           -5-
ESPlanner with just QFP, we may be over- or understating typical differences between

the two approaches. In addition, although ESPlanner captures the essential items of what

economists would stress in financial planning, it does not incorporate labor earnings

uncertainty, rate of return uncertainty, and other non-life contingencies that can influence

life-cycle consumption choice.2 ESPlanner does not explicitly consider the premiums,

paid whether by the employer or by the household, for health and long-term care

insurance, nor the expenditures arising from uninsured health and long-term care

contingencies. Nor does ESPlanner optimize, subject to legal constraints, contributions

to tax-deferred retirement accounts. Furthermore, although ESPlanner considers life

contingencies for the purpose of determining the optimal amount of life insurance, it does

not evaluate the optimal amount of life annuities to hold in the retirement period of the

life cycle. Hence in comparing ESPlanner only with QFP, which also does not consider

these uncertainties and factors, we may be understating the differences between the two

approaches.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Sections II and III describe ESPlanner and QFP,

respectively.    Section IV summarizes the main conceptual and technical differences

between the two programs.            Sections V and VI compare ESPlanner’s and QFP’s

recommendations for the 20 stylized and 4 actual cases, respectively.                     Section VII

summarizes the paper and draws conclusions.




2
   See Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995) for a treatment of consumption choice in the presence of
lifespan and earnings uncertainty and Campbell et al. (1999) for a treatment of consumption choice in the
presence of rate of return uncertainty.


                                                  -6-
II.     Economic Security Planner

        The economists Douglas Bernheim, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence Kotlikoff

and software engineer Lowell Williams established Economic Security Planning, Inc. to

develop ESPlanner – a software package whose primary goal is to foster appropriate

saving and insurance decisions. 3 Their stimulus was the findings in Kotlikoff, Spivak,

and Summers (1982), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, 1991), Bernheim (1991, 1995), and

other studies that a significant fraction of households undersaves and underinsures.

Undersaving in these studies means that a household can’t sustain its current living

standard in the future, and underinsuring means it can’t sustain its current living standard

if the household head or spouse were to die.                  ESPlanner’s objective is to permit

households to achieve the highest living standard that they can afford to sustain both

through time and in the event of the early death of the head or spouse.

        Unlike many other financial planning programs, ESPlanner’s life insurance,

consumption, and saving recommendations are fully integrated.                          The program’s

consumption and saving recommendations take into account the need to pay life

insurance premiums, and its life insurance recommendations are set to ensure the same

living standard through time for survivors as the consumption time-path that the

otherwise intact household is able to afford.



What Factors Does ESPlanner Consider?




3
  The three economists are also using ESPlanner under two National Institute of Aging grants to study the
adequacy of saving and insurance. The National Institute of Aging also supported research on ESPlanner
through an STTR grant. Economic Security Planning, Inc. is willing to provide academic researchers with
copies of the program for free. To contact the company, go to www.ESPlanner.com.


                                                   -7-
         In determining the extent to which a household can smooth its living standard,

ESPlanner takes into account the maximum amount of money the household says it can

borrow apart from housing-related debt. It also considers the current and future labor,

pension, social security, inheritance, and other income the household will receive and the

federal and state income taxes and federal payroll taxes that it will pay. The Appendix

describes ESPlanner’s tax and Social Security benefit calculations in detail. ESPlanner

also takes account of 401k, 403b, and other tax-favored saving vehicles, housing plans,

special expenditures, estate plans, and preferences about how the household would, if not

borrowing constrained, like its living standard to change through time.4                                 Finally,

ESPlanner recognizes that a household’s expenditures do not directly translate into its

standard of living. Adjustments are made for household composition and household

“economies of scale” -- the fact that people can live more cheaply together than apart.5

To be precise, ESPlanner provides for children until they reach age 19, and takes into

account that children may cost more or less than adults and that the relative costs of

children can vary by age. It also adjusts for the number of adult equivalents based on a

user-specified degree of economies to scale in shared living.



ESPlanner’s Recommendations

         ESPlanner’s principal outputs are recommended time-paths of consumption

expenditure, taxable saving, and term-life insurance holdings (for each spouse in the case

4
  “Borrowing constrained” refers to a household’s inability to get credit on the security of its future
anticipated earnings, for example, through a credit card or an unsecured line of credit. “Liquidity
constrained” often refers to that as well as to the inability to sell assets (whether financial or real) to finance
consumption.
5
   From the perspective of economic theory, the household is viewed as maximizing a Leontief
intertemporal utility function with year-specific time preference and demographic weights subject to
borrowing constraints and non-negativity constraints on life insurance.


                                                       -8-
of married households). All outputs are displayed in current-year (i.e., real) dollars.

Consumption in this context is everything the household gets to spend after paying for its

“off-the-top” expenditures – its housing expenses, special expenditures, life insurance

premiums, taxes, and net contributions to tax-favored accounts.        As mentioned, the

amount of recommended consumption expenditures varies from year to year in response

to changes in the household’s composition. It also rises when the household moves from

a situation of being liquidity constrained to one of being unconstrained.          Finally,

recommended household consumption will change over time if users intentionally specify

that they want their living standard to change. For example, if users specify that they

desire a 10 percent higher living standard after a certain year in the future, the software

will incorporate that preference in making its recommendations, provided that it does not

violate a borrowing constraint.

       ESPlanner’s recommended taxable saving in a particular year equals the

household’s total income (non-asset plus asset income) in that year minus that year’s sum

of (a) recommended spending on consumption and insurance premiums, (b) specified

spending on housing and special expenditures, (c) taxes, and (d) net contributions to tax-

favored accounts (contributions less withdrawals).

       ESPlanner’s recommendations for annual term insurance are either positive or

zero.6 If recommended term insurance is positive for a particular potential decedent (the

household head or, if married, spouse) in a particular year and if the decedent dies at the

end of that year, the surviving household will have precisely the same living standard as

the household would have had absent the decedent’s premature death. If the potential




                                           -9-
decedent’s recommended insurance in a particular year is zero, the surviving household

will have the same or higher living standard if the decedent dies in that year. These

statements are, of course, conditional on the household actually buying the amounts of

life insurance being recommended and on the correctness of its assumptions and

information concerning future income, current asset holdings, rates of return, special

expenditures, and so forth.



Checking ESPlanner’s Recommendations

         ESPlanner’s algorithm is very complicated. But users of the software can check

ESPlanner’s reports to see that, given their data inputs, preferences, and borrowing

constraints, the program recommends the highest and smoothest possible living standard

over time. Take, as an example, Case 1 -- the first and simplest of our 20 stylized cases.

It involves a Massachusetts couple in which the husband, George, is initially age 29 and

the wife, Jane, is initially age 27. George works through age 65 earning $50,000 each

year in 1999 dollars. Jane doesn’t work. They have no children, no special expenses, no

housing expenses, no estate plans, no private defined benefit pension income, no self-

employment income, no special receipts, no tax-favored saving accounts, no employer-

funded defined contribution accounts, and no coverage under Social Security.

         Turn, now, to Table 1, which presents the non-tax-favored balance sheet for Case

1. All values reported in the table and all other ESPlanner reports are in 1999 dollars. 7


6
  Negative life insurance is formally identical to the purchase of an inverted life annuity, that is, the receipt
of annual payments for life purchased by, in a predetermined lump sum amount, the estate of the deceased.
7
  ESPlanner produces the following main reports: current recommendations, annual recommendations, non
tax-favored balance sheet, income, spending, non-asset income (for each spouse), housing, taxes, tax-
favored balance sheets (for each spouse), estate reports (for each spouse and for couples if both spouses die
in the same year), social security benefit reports (for the household and for each spouse). ESPlanner’s
survivor reports are essentially the same as its main reports.


                                                     - 10 -
Because Table 1 is a balance sheet, the changes from one year to the next in non tax-

favored net worth equal the latter year’s non tax-favored saving. Apart from this adding

up property, note that terminal non tax-favored net worth is zero, that is, the household’s

recommended time-path of spending precisely exhausts the household’s economic

resources assuming each spouse lives as long as possible.         In this particular case,

household spending simply includes consumption, life insurance premiums, and funeral

expenses of $5000 for each spouse.          In general, spending also includes special

expenditures and housing expenses.

       This balance sheet tracks the evolution of the household’s non-tax-favored net

worth assuming the household head and spouse both live to their maximum ages of life –

assumed to be age 95. As just suggested, ESPlanner’s planning horizon extends through

the maximum ages of life of the household head and, if married, his or her spouse. The

emphasis here on the maximum, rather than the expected, length of life is a part of

ESPlanner’s general philosophy, namely to plan conservatively.

       Consumption spending in this case is constant at $25,784 until George reaches

age 95. It then declines to $16,115 – the amount Jane gets to spend on herself after

George has passed away. The former value is 1.6 times the later value reflecting the

assumed degree of economies in shared living, namely that two can live as cheaply as

1.6. Hence, the household’s living standard remains the same until its last possible year –

when Jane reaches age 95. Table 1’s total spending amounts differ from $25,784 when

both George and Jane are alive by annual amounts equal to the life insurance premiums

on George’s recommended holdings of life insurance.




                                           - 11 -
       The fact that (a) the household just exhausts its resources when Jane dies at age

95 (i.e., does not die in debt) and that (b) the recommended consumption expenditure

path entails a uniform living standard for all household members in each year the

household exists means that ESPlanner has maximized the household’s sustainable living

standard given the household’s economic resources.       That is, raising consumption

spending in each year to produce a slightly higher uniform living standard would lower

saving in each year and leave the household in debt in its last period of existence.

Married users can also check ESPlanner’s survivor reports to verify that surviving

spouses who follow ESPlanner’s life insurance recommendations will, if the household’s

inputs assumptions prove correct, be able to maintain as high a living standard as the

household would have had if the spouse had not died early.

       The survivor reports for Jane (George) can be produced for any hypothetical ages

at which George (Jane) might die. As an example, Table 2 shows Jane’s survivor non

tax-favored balance sheet if George dies at age 51. Note that Jane’s spending as a

survivor, which, in this case, consists only of consumption, equals $16,115 – precisely

62.5 (1 divided by 1.6) percent of the amount Jane and George would jointly spend on

consumption were George not to die. Hence, Jane’s recommended consumption as a

widow entails the same living standard as she would have had when married.      Table 2

also shows that Jane can, as a survivor, afford to spend this amount each year on

consumption and not end up in debt even if she lives to her maximum age of life, 95.

Also note that the initial amount of non tax-favored wealth with which Jane begins

widowhood is $518,691. This amount equals (up to rounding error) the sum of George’s

and Jane’s $382,833 in non tax-favored assets at age 50, plus the $140,858 amount of




                                         - 12 -
term insurance recommended for George at age 50, less $5000 for George’s funeral.

Were ESPlanner to recommend even a dollar less in life insurance for George at age 50,

Jane would not be able to finance the same living standard as a survivor without ending

up in debt at age 95 if she were to live that long.



III.       Quicken Financial Planner

           There is an expanding universe of financial planning software programs and

Internet sites available to the general public that offer advice on saving for retirement and

other goals, and on asset allocation.        These programs include proprietary packages

offered by mutual fund and insurance companies with investment and insurance products

to sell, as well as independent packages marketed by financial experts and consumer

software companies.        In addition, there are packages sold to professional financial

advisors who use these programs in the course of financial planning sessions given to

clients.

           The packages on the market differ in focus, sophistication, and level of detail. As

mentioned above, however, they all share certain conceptual features. A goal is set by

the household for the desired income or expenditure flow in retirement (usually a set

percentage of earned income expected to be received just prior to retirement). Then the

appropriate saving rate (usually assumed to be level over the work life) and optimal asset

allocation are calculated by the program, given certain assumptions, preferences, and

information provided by the household, to enable the household to reach its goal. This

conventional approach is consistent with the way actuaries traditionally have designed




                                              - 13 -
pension plans, that is, a retirement income goal (a replacement rate) is set and the

contribution rate (usually level) necessary to achieve that goal is calculated.

       As representative of the conventional approach, we employ the Quicken Financial

Planner (QFP), manufactured by Intuit, Inc., makers of Quicken and TurboTax software.

To our knowledge, QFP is the most sophisticated and comprehensive planning package

available to the general public; it rivals professional software in its detail and use of

advanced techniques. QFP seems appropriate for households at most income and wealth

levels, perhaps with the exclusion of those households with unusual financial

circumstances and those at the bottom and the very top of the income and wealth

distributions. (QFP, and ESPlanner for that matter, provides little detail on government

assistance programs and estate taxes.)



Inputs and Outputs of QFP

       A detailed description of the QFP is provided in the Appendix of Warshawsky

and Ameriks (1999, forthcoming). Here we summarize that discussion and highlight

certain features of QFP that we employ in our analysis.

       QFP is designed to aid in financial planning for retirement, children’s college

education, and life insurance needs; we ignore here its advice on asset allocation. Basic

demographic and economic (both current and expected future) information is collected

about the household. In the “Income Taxes” section, the respondent household inputs

combine federal and state average income tax rates expected in the periods before and

after retirement. The respondent is given a choice of two methods to do this estimation:

(1) the “demographic average” – the average tax rate paid by the average person in the




                                            - 14 -
respondent’s state of residence within the same range of household income and

demographic situation, or (2) the “tax return” approach – the average tax rate calculated

based on the household’s adjusted gross income and the actual taxes paid in the prior

year. Because we do not know actual taxes paid in the prior year, we employ QFP’s

demographic average method in our analysis; an actual user might input his or her own

tax information using the tax return approach.

       QFP asks for a myriad of details concerning the household’s current and expected

future pension coverage, current investment, real estate holdings, loans, and mortgages

outstanding. In the “Living Expenses” section, the respondent household is given a

choice of two estimation methods: “Rough Estimate” and “Itemized List”. In the first

method, QFP simply asks for the household’s estimated living expenses before and after

retirement, and offers as guidance an abbreviated statement for the current year of cash

flow less “off-the-top” expenditures like taxes, loan payments, housing expenses, and

planned contributions to pension and savings plans.         In the second approach, the

household fills out a detailed budget for the current and future years, and the QFP sums

up pre- and post-retirement living expenses from this list. We employ the first method.

       In the “Social Security estimated benefits” section, QFP again gives the user two

choices in estimation methods: “Rough Estimate” and “Social Security Administration

Estimate.” In the first method, the respondent household is asked to sort itself into one of

four earnings bands; an estimate of Social Security benefits is then generated based on

planned age at retirement. In the second method, the respondent is simply invited to

input the number from the official response to the Request for Personal Earnings and




                                           - 15 -
Benefits Estimate Statement form mailed to the Social Security Administration. We

employ the first method in our analysis.

         QFP has certain advanced planning options allowing for more sophisticated

modeling. In particular, in “Cash Shortfalls”, the respondent is asked whether it plans to

sell investments to cover pre-retirement shortages; although the default answer, which is

conservative, is no, in our analysis, we respond yes.8 In “Realized Gains”, the respondent

is asked to estimate the percentage of the gains in the taxable investment portfolio subject

to taxes every year; we employ the default answer of 100 percent. In “Sweep”, the

respondent is asked what percent of surplus cash flow is swept into taxable savings; we

answer 100 percent, although QFP suggests a more conservative answer of 0%. QFP

defines surplus cash flow as the excess of planned sources over planned uses of annual

money flows. With the cash shortfalls and sweep options employed, the QFP is able to

produce non-constant savings recommendations; these options are unusual in the

conventional approach and narrow the contrast somewhat with the economic approach.

         Another helpful feature of QFP is its comprehensive information about the current

cost of college. Using data from the College Board, QFP reports, by state, for public and

private colleges and universities and community colleges, the cost of (in-state and out-of-

state) tuition, room and board, books, fees, and other expenses. A worksheet is also

available to input expected financial aid, the student’s own income, and gifts from

relatives. This feature would seem to be especially valuable to households with children

8
  Regardless of the answer to the cash shortfall question, QFP uses the following rules regarding sales of
investments. After retirement, the mandatory minimum distributions from tax-deferred retirement accounts
are made first. Then taxable investments are sold. Finally, if more resources are still needed, tax-deferred
accounts are again drawn upon. Before retirement, shortfalls due to special expenses or home down
payments are funded, first by the sale of taxable investments and then by withdrawals from tax-deferred
accounts (along with the payment of tax penalties, if applicable). If the answer to the cash shortfall




                                                   - 16 -
approaching the age of college entrance with knowledge about the type, or the specific

identity, of the college their children will attend. Because all of the cases we examine

involve young families we did not employ this feature of QFP which is not available in

ESPlanner.

         QFP processes all this information in an easy-to-see fashion. It initially gives one

result: whether or not the household can anticipate having the money needed to retire. If

the news is bad, a brief statement of the nature of the problem is given, including the year

when net worth becomes negative or assets are depleted. This is the manner in which

QFP alerts users to infeasible plans as well as to violations of borrowing constraints. If

the household provides QFP with an initial level of expenditure and tells it to maintain

that expenditure level through time and if that expenditure level leads the household in

any future year into debt or into more debt than the household initially had or insufficient

assets to finance retirement, QFP will announce that the household’s plan has failed.

         Once users have generated a plan that hasn’t failed, they can do “What If”

analysis. Specifically, users can change, one at a time, key assumptions and items of

information, such as retirement age or pension contribution rate, and see whether their

original consumption expenditure plan is still feasible with the new inputs.

         QFP’s Insurance Planner uses data already inputted on the household’s

demographic and economic makeup, and asks the respondent for its preferences on the

size of a desired estate and other post-mortem expenses, such as children’s college tuition

and the spouse’s living expenses, to be covered. The Insurance Planner then advises on

the optimal amount of term insurance to hold in the first year of the financial plan. The


question is yes, then shortfalls due to taxes, living expenses, loan payments, and planned saving are
covered by the sequential sale of taxable and tax-deferred investments.


                                                   - 17 -
Insurance Planner is semi-autonomous; none of its outputs, including the premiums on its

recommended insurance coverage, is used in the main corpus of QFP.



IV.    Conceptual and Technical Differences in ESPlanner and QFP

       There are three main conceptual differences between the conventional approach to

financial planning represented by QFP and the economic approach represented by

ESPlanner.    These are the determination of expenditure targets, the treatment of

demographics and economies of scale, and the handling of borrowing constraints.

       Smoothing a household’s standard of living refers to maintaining the same living

standard for each person in the household at each point in time. As mentioned above,

ESPlanner does this for the household, subject to the household’s resources (including

social security), its exogenous housing expenses, its exogenous special expenses, its

endogenous tax liabilities, and its exogenously specified non-mortgage debt limit. In

solving for the time-path of consumption that smooths, to the maximum feasible and

desired degree, the household’s living standard, ESPlanner is endogenously determining

the household’s expenditure targets as well as the amounts the household must save, in

non tax favored form, and insure to achieve these targets.

       By contrast, QFP asks households to set their own expenditure targets. It then

accumulates the household’s excess cash flow (income less expenses less all planned

saving) and sees whether the accumulated sum ever becomes negative given its financial

plans (or, if the household was initially in debt, whether its debt becomes more negative

than the initial level of debt). If the household’s accumulated cash flow never goes into

the red (or too far into the red) and if enough assets are available to finance consumption




                                           - 18 -
in retirement and to meet other user-determined goals, the household’s expenditure plan

is scored a success. Indeed, QFP effectively scores such a plan a complete success in that

it doesn’t encourage users to adjust their expenditure target to keep them from, in effect,

leaving money on the table. One defense of this practice is that because households face

lots of future risks, planning to leave money on the table which can be used on future

rainy days is not such a bad thing. The counter argument is that the amount of money

being left on the table may be far smaller or far greater than the household feels it needs

to protect itself against future risks. Because, QFP, like ESPlanner, permits users to treat

the accumulation of an emergency fund and bequests as special expenditures, the

inclusion of these items would seemingly obviate the need to plan for unspent funds.

       As mentioned in the introduction, in preparing this paper we ran QFP in a manner

that avoids leaving money on the table.      The procedure involves (a) setting an initial

level of consumption expenditures, (b) telling QFP that we want to maintain the same

level of expenditure through time, and (c) iterating on this initial level of consumption

expenditure until the household has very few assets remaining at the end of life.

       The second conceptual difference involves the goal of smoothing through time

household members’ living standards. ESPlanner does this by determining, at each point

in time, the number of adult equivalents and adjusting for economies in shared living.

QFP, in contrast, invites users to make these adjustments for themselves in setting their

consumption expenditure targets.

       The third conceptual difference is the treatment of borrowing constraints.

ESPlanner builds borrowing constraints directly into its consumption expenditure

recommendations.     QFP, on the other hand, tells users whether their exogenously




                                           - 19 -
specified consumption trajectory will, at some point, violate the program’s implicit zero

constraint on future borrowing.     QFP users whose plans are failed by the software

because they run into borrowing constraints are free to rerun the program by lowering

their current and raising their future consumption. But users might also respond by

lowering their initial consumption and continuing to tell QFP that they want to spend the

same amount in the future as in the present.         In so doing, they will arrive at an

expenditure plan that passes QFP’s feasibility criterion, but leaves money on the table.

        Interestingly, in the 24 cases examined below, we never encountered negative net

worth in our use of QFP, whereas we quite often encountered borrowing constraints in

our use of ESPlanner. The reason is the interaction of demographics with borrowing

constraints. In those cases in which ESPlanner generates borrowing constraints, the

household has young children and, therefore, higher consumption expenditure needs

when young than when old.         Our application of QFP ignores this.       Consequently,

compared to economic theory, our practical application of QFP set consumption

expenditure too low when the household is young and too high when the household is

old.   Because the households we examine have relatively high housing and special

expenditures when young, the inappropriately low short-run QFP consumption

expenditures are needed to avoid short-run borrowing constraints.        Also, in order to

make the results of ESPlanner and QFP as comparable as possible, we set the maximum

amount able to be borrowed in ESPlanner to zero.

        In addition to these conceptual differences, there are several technical differences

between the two programs. First, ESPlanner formulates more precise estimates of federal

and state income taxes as well as Social Security benefits compared to QFP’s average




                                           - 20 -
approach. Second, QFP apparently does not adjust for inflation in the first year of

planning, whereas ESPlanner does. This may, however, simply reflect a difference in the

timing conventions of the two programs. Third, ESPlanner integrates life insurance with

the financial plan; premiums need not be entered as an itemized expense. Fourth,

ESPlanner assists users in comparing their actual current saving with the amount being

recommended, whereas QFP encourages users to compare their actual current

expenditures with the amount they ultimately end up targeting.



V.     Comparing Economic Security Planner and Quicken Financial Planner

       The main table of this paper, Table 3, provides a detailed comparison of the

output of the two software programs. The first 20 situations, labeled Case 1 through Case

20, are based on the same stylized household considered above, in which the husband,

George, is aged 29 and the wife, Jane, is aged 27. George earns $50,000 per year in 1999

dollars and expects to retire at age 65. Each case adds some demographic or economic

complexity to their initial situation. Cases 21 through 24 consider four actual households

with quite different economic and demographic circumstances.         To save space, we

present results only for selected years of life, and only for key variables (stated in

inflation-adjusted terms), namely, consumption, taxable savings, taxes, tax-deferred and

taxable assets, and life insurance. We use ESPlanner’s definitions of these variables, and

had to combine several items from QFP’s output tables to make the numbers comparable.

       For all cases and for both Planners, we make the following economic

assumptions, unless otherwise stated.       The expected nominal rate of return on

investments (whether taxable or tax-favored) is 6 percent, and the expected general




                                          - 21 -
inflation rate is 3 percent. When relevant, the expected rate of inflation for college

tuition is assumed to be 5 percent. Federal and state tax rates and rules, as well as

government benefit programs (mainly Social Security), are expected to remain

unchanged in the future.      All households spend their entire lives in Massachusetts.

Version 3.3 (r4) of QFP and version 1.10.37 of ESPlanner were used. Both programs

were run with the computer’s date set to January 1, 1999.



Case 1 – Husband Works

       ESPlanner’s output for Case 1 was discussed above. Recall that the household’s

living standard is perfectly smoothed with the couple spending $25,784 on consumption

until the husband reaches age 95 and passes away. Thereafter, the surviving spouse,

Jane, spends $16,115 on consumption, which suffices to maintain the same living

standard she enjoyed when married. These and all other dollar figures discussed below

are quoted in 1999 dollars.

       QFP recommends a somewhat higher level of consumption expenditure in Case 1:

$27,810 when both George and Jane are alive and $16,686, when Jane is surviving by

herself. It should be recalled, however, that premiums for life insurance are an “off-the-

top” expenditure in ESPlanner, whereas they are (implicitly) included in living expenses

in QFP. Although their 1999 income levels are identical, the two programs recommend

quite different amounts of non tax favored saving for 1999. ESPlanner recommends

about $1,400 more non tax-favored saving in 1999 than QFP! The reason is that QFP

calculates higher levels of taxes for 1999 than does ESPlanner. Although QFP generates




                                          - 22 -
higher taxes than ESPlanner when the couple is young, it generates lower taxes than

ESPlanner when the couple is middle-aged and older.

        In considering these differences, it’s important to bear in mind that QFP is making

approximations in calculating taxes. Specifically, QFP is applying a single average tax

rate over time, independent of the household’s expected schedule of taxable income over

time. In contrast, as described in the Appendix, ESPlanner makes very precise federal

and state tax calculations that include determining whether or not the household should

itemize its deductions, computing the household’s taxable income, and using exact

federal and state tax rate schedules to determine the household’s tax liabilities. Correct

calculation of state taxes is particularly important as households age and accumulate

taxable capital income. The fact that ESPlanner produces much higher taxes when the

couple has significant non tax-favored asset income reflects its incorporation of the very

high rate of capital income taxation by the State of Massachusetts. This rate is roughly

two times higher than the rate levied on labor income. 9

        Although the two programs recommend significantly different 1999 levels of non

tax-favored saving, their 1999 life insurance recommendations are nearly identical.

Neither program recommends life insurance for the non working wife.                                 QFP’s

recommended life insurance for the husband is $680,000. ESPlanner’s is $667,948.

ESPlanner, but not QFP, provides life insurance recommendations for all future years as

well: The husband’s recommended level of life insurance declines over time, and is zero

after he reaches age 57. At age 45, the recommended amount is $293,459.




9
 The Massachusetts legislature is currently considering lowering the tax on personal capital income to the
same rate as is levied on labor income.


                                                   - 23 -
Case 2 Wife Works

       Case 2 assumes that Jane works through her 64th year of life and earns $25,000

per year in 1999 dollars. Because the couple has greater economic resources, it can

sustain a higher living standard, which is what each program recommends. However, the

two programs now differ by almost $6,000 annually with respect to the level of the

couple’s sustainable living standard. ESPlanner has George and Jane consuming $35,883

when both are alive, compared with QFP’s $41,720, a 16 percent difference. Again, tax

calculations and, to a lesser extent, life insurance premiums appear to explain this

difference.   ESPlanner’s 1999 taxes are almost $3,000 higher than QFP’s, and

ESPlanner’s taxes are significantly higher when the couple is middle aged and

approaching retirement. For example, when George is 45, ESPlanner’s taxes are almost

$8,000 higher.    These differences appear to reflect ESPlanner’s inclusion of the

Massachusetts’ 12 percent tax on non tax-sheltered capital income as well as our use in

QFP of the “demographic average” method.

       Associated with these differences in recommended consumption are differences in

recommended non tax-favored saving. ESPlanner recommends 1999 non tax-favored

saving be set at $21,937, whereas QFP recommends it be set at $20,069. When George is

age 45, ESPlanner’s recommended non tax-favored saving is much less than QFP’s --

$24,352 versus $32,354. At George’s age 65, ESPlanner’s recommends much more

dissaving than does QFP -- $21,975 versus $13,491.        Thus, compared with QFP,

ESPlanner recommends slightly more saving when George and Jane are young, and less




                                         - 24 -
saving in middle age and the start of old age, when George and Jane face higher taxes

than QFP says they will face.

        The non-trivial differences between the two programs in saving recommendations

and tax estimates eventuates in non-trivial differences in accumulated assets when the

couple reaches retirement age. According to ESPlanner’s plan, the couple has $871,921 in

taxable assets when George reaches 65. According to QFP’s plan, the couple taxable assets

in George’s 65th year are almost 15 percent larger -- $996,629.

        Turning to the life insurance recommendations, both programs tell George he needs

less life insurance because Jane now has earnings that can help sustain her if George dies

prematurely. ESPlanner is now recommending slightly more insurance than QFP, but the

difference is quite small.



Case 3 Adding Social Security Benefits

        Case 3 adds the assumption that both George and Jane are in Social Security-

covered employment, and are, therefore, paying payroll taxes and can expect benefits at

levels currently legislated. According to ESPlanner, George and Jane receive $18,843 and

$10,515, respectively, in Social Security retirement benefits when each reaches age 65.

These benefit levels are substantially higher than the corresponding $10,049 and $5,266

figures calculated by QFP. The differences here apparently reflect the wage indexation of

Social Security earnings histories by ESPlanner. (ESPlanner follows very precisely the

rules for determining Social Security benefits as detailed in the Social Security

Handbook.10)


10
 ESPlanners’s calculation of the “primary insurance amounts” for the earning members of the household, on
which all benefits are based, are identical to those produced by Social Security’s own ANYPIA program.


                                                  - 25 -
         Because ESPlanner expects the couple to receive significantly more in future Social

Security benefits than does QFP, it recommends less saving prior to retirement. Indeed,

ESPlanner’s 1999 recommended level of non tax-favored saving of $9,629 is one third

lower than QFP’s recommendation of $14,257. The couple’s sustainable living standard is

higher in Case 3 than Case 2 in both programs. For example, with Social Security,

ESPlanner recommends that the couple consume $43,737 each year that both George and

Jane are alive. Without Social Security it recommends they consume $35,883.11

         Case 3’s life insurance recommendations are not much different from those of Case

2. This is not surprising. On the one hand, the availability of Social Security survivor

benefits reduces the need for life insurance for George. On the other hand, the couple’s

higher living standard when both spouses are alive means that Jane’s needs as a survivor

are greater.



Case 4 Adding Housing

         This case builds on Case 3 by adding housing. Specifically, we assume that George

and Jane own a home with a market value of $200,000, annual property taxes of $2,500,

annual maintenance of $1,500, annual homeowners insurance of $400, and a 30-year

mortgage with remaining balance of $170,000 and annual principal and interest mortgage

payments of $1,124 (the mortgage interest rate is 8 percent). The couple is assumed to

remain in their house until the end of their lives.



11
  This difference may suggest that Social Security is, on balance, a plus for George and Jane in terms of their
sustainable living standards. But this is not necessarily so because in Case 2 we did not ascribe to George and
Jane the contributions their employers would otherwise be making on their behalf to Social Security. Those
contributions represent a form of compensation to George and Jane that would, in the absence of Social
Security, presumably be paid directly to them.


                                                    - 26 -
         The need to pay housing expenses reduces the amount of resources that can be

devoted to consumption. The consumption decline is over $10,000 in QFP and over

$8,000 in ESPlanner. The difference between the two programs is again due to taxes.

Because ESPlanner takes into account the deductibility of mortgage interest payments,

ESPlanner’s taxes decline by almost $3,000 annually in moving from Case 3 to Case 4. In

contrast, QFP’s taxes using the demographic average rates are essentially unchanged.

         The need to pay off the household’s mortgage and other housing expenditures

raises recommended life insurance for George under both programs. And both programs

now recommend roughly $60,000 in life insurance for Jane. Intuitively, unlike Jane’s

consumption, which disappears if she dies, the household’s housing expenditures are no

different when Jane passes away. Because Jane’s income contributes to meeting these

expenditures when Jane is alive, insuring that income is important.



Case 5     Adding Children

         In Case 5 we add two children – one born in 1997 and the other born in 2001.

Because QFP doesn’t adjust for household demographics, its recommended annual levels

of consumption and taxable saving are unchanged by the presence of children. Stated

differently, our application of QFP involves smoothing consumption expenditures over the

household’s life cycle, rather than smoothing its living standard. Smoothing a household’s

living standard requires spending more (although not proportionately more) on

consumption in those years when the household has more members.

         Unlike QFP, ESPlanner’s objective is to smooth households’ living standards to the

extent the household desires a smooth living standard and to the extent such smoothing




                                           - 27 -
doesn’t violate the household’s borrowing constraint. Hence ESPlanner’s consumption

recommendations take into account the assumed changes over time in household

composition. In particular, ESPlanner assumes that children remain in their parents’

household through age 18. In determining how much additional consumption is needed to

equalize the living standards of children with those of their parents, ESPlanner permits

users to input child-adult consumption equivalency factors that are child-age specific.

These factors together with the program’s specification of economies to scale in shared

living are used to determine how much household consumption rises or falls when children

enter or leave the household. The household’s recommended consumption expenditure

will vary with changes in its demographic composition even during intervals of time when

the household is liquidity or borrowing constrained.

       For example, consider a household that desires a perfectly smooth living standard

through time, that lives for 60 years (the household head or spouse specifies a maximum

remaining lifespan of 60 years), and that is borrowing constrained over its first 20 years.

ESPlanner will (a) smooth the household’s living standard over the first 20 years, (b)

smooth the household’s living standard over the last 40 years, and (c) make the discrepancy

in living standards between the first 20 years and the last 40 years as small as possible.

       Case 5 illustrates these features of ESPlanner because the additional expenditures

on consumption arising from the presence of the children pushes the household into a

liquidity constrained position. (We assume in all cases that no borrowing is possible.)

Indeed, the household is liquidity constrained over its first 13 years, by which we mean that

its living standard in the first 13 years is lower than in subsequent years. As the Case 5




                                             - 28 -
ESPlanner results show, initial (1999) consumption is $37,105 and initial taxable saving is

$2,981. The corresponding QFP recommendations are $32,600 and $7,299.

       Why is the household saving in 1999 in the ESPlanner results if it is liquidity

constrained? The answer is that the household still attempts to smooth its living standard

over the first 13 years even if it can’t perfectly smooth its living standard over its entire

lifetime. To do so, it needs to save at the beginning of the 13-year interval in anticipation

of the arrival of the second child.       Once the second child is born, ESPlanner’s

recommended consumption expenditure (but not the living standard per person) rises to

$43,383 and ESPlanner’s recommended taxable saving becomes negative. The household

slowly spends down its small stock of net worth, so that by 2008 its net worth is zero.

Between 2009 and 2012 the household’s consumption rises in step with increases in its

disposable income -- the income it has after paying for taxes and housing expenditures.

After 2012 the household again saves positive amounts. In that year, its consumption

equals $43,705. This level is lowered to $40,366 in 2016 when the first child leaves the

household and reduced again to $32,933 when the second child leaves the household.

       In addition to recommending markedly different levels of initial consumption and

taxable saving, QFP and ESPlanner recommend quite different levels of life insurance for

Case 5. QFP’s 1999 recommendations are $520,000 for George and $60,000 for the

wife. The corresponding ESPlanner recommendations are $362,076 and zero. Although

ESPlanner recommends no initial life insurance holdings for Jane, it does recommend she

start buying life insurance in 2003.

       What explains these differences? The answer is Social Security survivor benefits.

The availability of these benefits reduces the need for life insurance on both the husband




                                            - 29 -
and the wife, and the timing of their potential receipt disproportionately reduces the need

for life insurance during years when the children are young. ESPlanner includes these

benefits in forming its life insurance recommendations. QFP, we suspect, does not.12

The survivor benefits to which we refer here are not simply widow and widower benefits

that are available to surviving spouses starting at age 60, but also child, and mother/father

benefits that are available to survivor households with children. Because child benefits

are paid in the form of annual income streams until the children reach age 19 and

mother/father benefits are paid in the form of annual income streams until the children

reach age 16, their remaining present values are smaller the older are the children when

the household first begins receiving these benefits.



Case 6 Financing College Tuition for Children

        Case 6 augments the previous case by incorporating special expenditures in the

form of college tuition payments of $30,000 per year for each child between age 19 and

22. The need to save for these expenditures raises recommended 1999 taxable saving in

both programs, but the recommended increase (relative to Case 5) is almost 30 percent

greater in ESPlanner than in QFP.           And the need to guarantee payment of tuition

regardless of who survives also alters life insurance recommendations. In this case the

increases (relative to Case 5) are roughly the same across the two programs.

        The need to pay for future college expenses changes the timing of the household’s

liquidity constraints in ESPlanner’s calculations. Now the household experiences one

long period of liquidity constrained consumption – between 1999 and 2023. The year


12
  In moving from Case 4 to Case 5, QFP’s recommended life insurance for the husband drops by $60,000,
but we don’t believe this is due to the presence of Social Security survivor benefits.


                                               - 30 -
2023 (when George is 53 and Jane is 51) is the year their youngest child finishes college;

that is, once George and Jane are free from paying college tuition they experience a

discrete increase in their living standard.



Case 7 Establishing an Emergency Fund

         Case 7 adds a need for a $50,000 (in 1999 dollars) emergency fund to be

accumulated by 2035. Both software packages have the household put aside the $50,000

accumulated for an emergency fund in 2035, when George is age 65. This is reflected in

large negative savings at that age in both sets of results. However, QFP recommends that

an additional $671 be saved in 1999, whereas ESPlanner recommends only $26 more be

saved initially, but an additional $1,118 in 2024 – the first year after the household has

finished paying college tuition and is no longer liquidity constrained and is enjoying a

higher living standard. Thus ESPlanner pays for the emergency fund when the couple can

afford to, i.e., when it doesn’t have such pressing needs for other expenditures. In

contrast, QFP pays for the emergency fund by reducing consumption in each year of the

household’s life; this is consistent with the conventional approach’s target-savings

methodology.



Case 8    Adding Taxable Assets

         Case 8 gives $50,000 in taxable assets to the household. ESPlanner uses these

additional resources to finance additional consumption during the period 1999-2023

when the household is liquidity constrained. Hence, its recommended 1999 level of

taxable saving decreases (compared with Case 7) by $1,701, whereas QFP’s




                                              - 31 -
recommended 1999 taxable saving rises by $1,679.           ESPlanner has the household

increase consumption by more than $2,000 in the liquidity-constrained years, whereas

QFP recommends an annual increase of slightly more than $1,000 over the household’s

lifetime. Taxes are higher in QFP owing to the larger accumulation of taxable assets and

the resulting investment income.

         In contrast to this difference in taxable saving recommendations, there is little

difference between the two programs in the response of their life insurance

recommendations to the presence of the initial taxable net worth.          Both programs

recommend minor reductions in the life insurance holdings of both George and Jane.



Case 9    Adding Tax-Deferred Assets

         Case 9 gives George $50,000 in non-taxable assets which he holds in a defined

contribution plan.    Because the household is liquidity-constrained through 2023 and

because the income from these assets is not accessible to the household until late in life,

ESPlanner recommends essentially no changes (compared to Case 8) in taxable saving

for 1999. QFP, on the other hand, recommends that the household reduce its 1999

taxable saving by $1,858. Regarding consumption, QFP suggests a $1,800 increase over

the household’s lifetime, while ESPlanner increases consumption only slightly initially,

but then bumps it up by about $3,000 for the remainder of life.13

         Both programs recommend roughly similar reductions in life insurance holdings.

This point notwithstanding, the recommended 1999 levels of life insurance for George

and Jane remain quite different across the two programs. For example, QFP recommends




                                           - 32 -
Jane have $80,000 of life insurance, whereas ESPlanner recommends she have only

$8,525.



Case 10 Adding Tax-Deferred Saving

         In this case we assume that both George and his employer each contribute $2,500

to a defined contribution plan on behalf of George. Once again we find large differences

in recommended taxable saving responses. QFP tells George and Jane to save almost

$5,000 less in taxable form in 1999. ESPlanner tells them to save just $61 less. Because

George has more future income (his employer’s contributions) to protect, both programs

recommend that George have more life insurance in 1999.                           But ESPlanner now

recommends that Jane have no insurance whereas QFP still recommends she purchase

$80,000 of coverage.



Case 11 Adding Bequests

         This case adds a $50,000 special bequest by both George and Jane. QFP responds

by raising recommended life insurance for each spouse. ESPlanner raises recommended

life insurance just for George; that is, it continues to recommend no life insurance for

Jane. The reason is that were Jane to die, George would have enough resources from his

own labor earnings, the couple’s taxable net worth, and his taxable net worth to sustain a

higher living standard on his own than were Jane alive.



Case 12 Adding a Defined Benefit Pension

13
  Taxes are higher in the last years of life in QFP compared to ESPlanner because taxable as well as tax-
deferred assets are consistently higher in QFP. Also, QFP, as we utilize it, does not seem to recognize the



                                                   - 33 -
         This case gives Jane a $10,000 (in 1999 dollars) defined benefit pension annuity

beginning at age 63. The pension income is not indexed for inflation nor are there

survivor benefits. Here again we have income coming to the household in the post-

liquidity constrained period. Hence, ESPlanner recommends essentially no change in

1999 taxable saving or consumption. QFP, on the other hand, treats the household as

effectively being able to spend this future income in the present. So it recommends a

$1,600 higher level of 1999 consumption and a commensurate reduction in 1999 saving.

Indeed, QFP’s recommended saving for 1999 is now 13 percent less than ESPlanner’s.

         Both programs now recommend less life insurance for George.              But QFP

recommends $20,000 less in life insurance for Jane, while ESPlanner recommends

$33,212 more. QFP’s recommended reduction in life insurance for Jane is curious given

that Jane now has more future income that she needs to protect for George against the

possibility of her early death.



Case 13 Adding an Inheritance

         Case 13 adds a $400,000 (in 1999 dollars) inheritance that Jane will receive in

2027 from her father, but only in the case that Jane is alive. Because this inheritance

arrives too late to relieve the household’s liquidity constraint, there is again very little

change compared to Case 12 in ESPlanner’s 1999 saving recommendations. However,

there is a very large increase in ESPlanner’s recommended life insurance for Jane. This

makes sense; Jane’s inheritance is only available if she’s alive, so she must take out

additional insurance to make sure that George and her children will enjoy this

inheritance.     Quicken also recommends more initial life insurance for Jane, but the


special tax credits, deductions, and exemptions available to the elderly.

                                                    - 34 -
percentage increase (relative to Case 12) is substantially smaller than for ESPlanner.

This appears to reflect our specification in ESPlanner that Jane’s inheritance is contingent

on her being alive. Quicken, in contrast, does not differentiate between non contingent

and contingent receipts or, for that matter, special expenditures.

        The initial amount of insurance recommended by ESPlanner for George declines

(compared with Case 12) because the inheritance (which is insured through Jane’s life

insurance) represents another asset George can use as a survivor to maintain his and the

children’s living standard.

        QFP, because it ignores liquidity constraints, begins spending Jane’s inheritance

right away, raising consumption in 1999 by over $4,500 and reducing 1999

recommended saving to just $754. This $754 recommended level of saving stands in

stark contrast to ESPlanner's $6,793 saving recommendation for 1999.

        Both programs now recommend fairly similar initial levels of life insurance for

Jane. But George’s initial life insurance should, according to ESPlanner, be only about

three fifths of the level recommended by QFP. Interestingly, when Jane is 43, ESPlanner

recommends more life insurance for Jane than for George. Why? Again, because Jane

needs to guarantee that her inheritance will effectively be available to George and the

children if she dies prior to receiving it.



Case 14 Adding Real Wage Growth

        This case leaves out the inheritance of Case 13 and instead assumes that George

and Jane each experience 2 percent growth each year in their real labor earnings.

Because the couple has a lot more income in the future than the present, each program




                                              - 35 -
advocates dissaving in the short run in order to permit a higher level of current

consumption. But ESPlanner recommends almost $8000 more in saving (actually, more

than $800 less in dissaving) than does QFP. Again, liquidity constraints explain this.

Once ESPlanner realizes that the couple can’t perfectly smooth its living standard over its

entire life, it focuses on smoothing the couple’s living standard during the liquidity

constrained interval and the non liquidity constrained interval. This means consuming

less than QFP recommends in the former interval and consuming more than QFP

recommends in the later interval. QFP also suggests a withdrawal (with tax penalties)

from the defined contribution plan in mid-life, which ESPlanner will never recommend

before age 59.



Case 15 Age 62 Retirement of Husband

       This case is identical to Case 12 (that is, no inheritance or real wage growth)

except the husband retires at age 62. Earlier retirement increases QFP’s recommended

1999 taxable saving by almost 30 percent, but leaves ESPlanner 1999 saving

recommendation essentially unchanged. QFP reacts to the reduced lifetime earnings by

lowering current as well as future recommended consumption and thus raising saving.

ESPlanner, in contrast, reacts by cutting consumption in the period after George and Jane

are no longer liquidity constrained – the period when they are otherwise enjoying a

higher living standard.

       Because George has less future labor income to protect, both programs advise

George to purchase less life insurance. QFP’s recommended reduction in insurance for

George is, however, 40 percent greater than ESPlanner’s recommended reduction. Both




                                           - 36 -
programs also advise Jane to buy less life insurance. Indeed, ESPlanner recommends

zero life insurance for Jane, whereas QFP recommends a $100,000 policy.



Case 16 5 Percent Real Rates of Return

       This case is identical to Case 12 except it assumes 8 percent rather than 6 percent

nominal rates of return on taxable and non taxable assets. Because the inflation rate is

still set at 3 percent, this implies real interest rates of 5 percent rather than 3 percent on

these assets. Ignoring liquidity constraints, higher real interest rates permit higher levels

of lifetime consumption. But the household is liquidity constrained. Indeed, the higher

real interest rate generates so much accumulation in their non-taxable accounts that

George and Jane now experience two intervals of liquidity constraints – one prior to their

children completing college and the other between the time their children complete

college and the time (when George is age 65) that they pay off their emergency fund,

start withdrawing their non-taxable assets, and start collecting their Social Security

benefits. Consequently, ESPlanner recommends very little change (compared with Case

12) in initial consumption and, therefore, in initial taxable saving. At George’s age 65,

when the household is in the last year of its second constrained interval, consumption is

$43,489; that is, $2,078 more than in Case 12. At George’s age 66, consumption rises to

$61,057, which is $16,273 (36 percent) more than in Case 12! In contrast to ESPlanner,

QFP cuts initial saving by more than one half. Hence, ESPlanner’s recommended 1999

level of saving is more than twice that of QFP. Again QFP recommends large mid-life

withdrawals from the household’s defined contribution plan.




                                            - 37 -
Case 17 5 Percent Inflation

       This case differs from Case 12 in assuming a 5 percent inflation rate. The higher

inflation rate lowers real returns on taxable and non taxable assets to 1 percent. It also

reduces the real values of the couple’s mortgage payments and Jane’s pension benefits.

QFP reacts to these offsetting factors by reducing (relative to Case 12) household saving

in 1999 by about one quarter. ESPlanner leaves 1999 saving roughly as is.



Case 18 Ages of Death Are 85

       Lowering the latest ages at which George and Jane could die from 95 to 85 would,

absent liquidity constraints, permit George and Jane to consume more each year. Thus,

QFP’s initial consumption rises (relative to Case 12) from $31,270 to $35,570 lowering

initial taxable saving from $5,994 to $4,653. ESPlanner’s initial consumption is changed

only slightly in reflection of a small change in recommended life insurance holdings and,

thus, life insurance premium payments. Hence, initial ESPlanner taxable saving in Case

18 is 46 percent higher than the amount recommended by QFP. QFP’s recommended life

insurance holdings are unaffected by the change in the maximum age of life, whereas

ESPlanner’s recommended holdings decline because the household does not need to

insure its living standard for as long a period of time.



Case 19    10 Percent Higher Post-Retirement Living Standard

       In this exercise, we tell both programs that the household wishes to have a 10

percent higher living standard after George is age 65. Because the couple is liquidity

constrained when young and would otherwise experience more than a 10 percent rise in




                                             - 38 -
its living standard after retirement compared to their youth, this change in assumptions

leads to essentially no change in ESPlanner’s initial consumption and taxable saving

recommendations. But QFP now recommends less initial consumption and more initial

taxable saving. Consequently, the two programs recommend almost the same initial

levels of taxable saving.



Case 20 Downsizing of Home at Retirement

       In this scenario, the couple sells its home when George retires and moves into a

rental property that charges $1,500 per month in rent. This decision frees up the couple’s

home equity for use in financing its consumption in retirement. On the other hand, it

raises considerably the couple’s post-retirement housing expenses.       On balance, the

decision reduces the couple’s ability to finance consumption.

       QFP encourages the couple to immediately cut its consumption and raise its

taxable saving in anticipation of the higher post-retirement housing expenses. ESPlanner,

in contrast, cuts future rather than immediate consumption and, thus, recommends

roughly the same initial taxable saving. Both programs recommend that both spouses

purchase more life insurance. However, as has been the case with the other scenarios,

QFP’s insurance recommendations are considerably higher than those of ESPlanner.

Here, QFP’s 1999 recommended insurance holdings for George and Jane combined total

$800,000. The comparable ESPlanner figure is $561,041 – a 30 percent smaller amount.



Summary of Findings For First 20 Cases




                                          - 39 -
       In looking back at the 20 cases we’ve now considered, several things become

clear. First, the two programs provide remarkably different recommendations even in

simple settings despite the fact that each is designed to help households maintain their

living standards or at least their consumption levels though time.           Second, the two

programs are calculating significantly different levels of taxes and Social Security

benefits   and   these   differences   materially   alter   their   saving    and   insurance

recommendations. Because we have been able to check the accuracy of ESPlanner’s tax

and Social Security benefit calculations, it appears that QFP’s calculation of these

variables may be “soft”. (Of course, there is a broader question applicable to all software

packages and planning exercises about the accuracy of any projection of taxes and Social

Security decades into the future, although QFP does allow the user to lower the estimate

of Social Security benefits to be paid in the future.) Third, the fact that QFP does not

automatically adjust for household composition and liquidity constraints leads it in many

cases to recommend either much less or more taxable saving compared to ESPlanner.

Finally, QFP generally recommends more life insurance than what ESPlanner has

determined that households actually need in order to insure their current living standards

for potential survivors; this may reflect an incomplete estimation of Social Security

survivor benefits.



VI.    Comparing QFP and ESPlanner for Four Actual Households

       This section examines the recommendations of the two software programs when

applied to four actual households.




                                           - 40 -
Case 21   A Young, Low-Income Couple

       This case involves a couple in which each spouse is age 35 and each retires at age

65. They plan to have two children, one in 2001 and one in 2003. The husband earns

$43,000 initially, declining by 2001 to $35,000 and staying constant thereafter. The wife

earns $37,000 in 1999, zero in 2000, $35,000 in 2001, $36,000 in 2002, $37,000 in 2003,

and $38,000 thereafter. The husband receives a gift from his father of $10,000 in 1999

and 2000. As for special expenditures, the couple makes a $15,000 downpayment in

1999 to purchase a house and makes nominal truck loan payments of $4,500 in 1999 and

2000. The couple also plans to spend $20,000 on college tuition for each child between

their ages 19 and 22. The couple plans for funerals of $5,000 each, but doesn’t wish to

leave a bequest. The couple currently has $14,000 in taxable net worth, and the wife has

$3,000 in an IRA. Otherwise the couple has no assets.

       The wife intends to contribute $1,200 to her IRA annually until she retires. Her

withdrawals from her IRA will begin at age 65 and will be taken out in equal annual

payments. The couple is buying a house in 1999 for $150,000. Purchase of the house

causes $2,500 in annual property taxes, $400 in annual homeowner’s insurance

payments, and $2,000 in annual maintenance. The couple intends in 1999 to take out a

$135,000, 30-year mortgage with monthly principal and interest payments of $990. Both

spouses will begin collecting Social Security retirement benefits at age 65. They both

entered past labor income that we need to compute their Social Security benefits in

ESPlanner. The economic assumptions the couple choose are ESPlanner’s default values

including 6 percent nominal interest rates on taxable and non-taxable assets, a 3 percent

inflation rate, and a zero non-mortgage borrowing constraint.




                                          - 41 -
       In running the couple through ESPlanner, we also solicited their current saving

and insurance holdings. Prior to running the software the couple planned to save $19,620

in 1999. The wife has no life insurance, while the husband has $30,000.

       In ESPlanner we find that the couple is never liquidity constrained. On the other

hand, the couple never accumulates a significant stock of taxable assets. As the table for

Case 21 makes clear, the couple is advised to consume $26,866 initially and $38,500

when both children are at home. Our application of QFP, on the other hand, recommends

constant consumption of $26,920 when both spouses are alive, regardless of the presence

of children. Here ESPlanner gives a more intuitive recommendation; children cost a lot

of money and this must be reflected in household savings decisions.

       QFP and ESPlanner agree that husband and wife should have equivalent life

insurance holdings, reflecting their equivalent economic contribution to the household.

Again, however, ESPlanner suggests lower life insurance than QFP.



Case 22 A Middle-Aged, Upper-Income Couple

       This case involves a couple with a 40 year-old wife and a 39 year-old husband.

They have two children, one born in 1991, the other born in 1993. The wife doesn’t

work. The husband works earning $200,000 in 1999 and 2000. Starting in 2001 and

continuing until his retirement at age 55, the husband expects to earn $100,000. They

plan to send each of their children to college for four years at a cost of $30,000 per child

per year. They have no special bequests and plan for funerals of $5,000 each. The

husband currently has $800,000 in life insurance; the wife has none.          The couple’s

taxable assets are $225,500. The wife has an IRA with a 1999 balance of $84,700, and




                                           - 42 -
the husband has a 401k with a 1999 balance of $148,000. Both plan to withdraw their

non-taxable assets (and make them taxable) at age 59. The couple is currently saving

$11,765 in taxable form. The husband plans to contribute $9,500 into his 401k plan each

year and expects his employer to contribute $6,000. The wife does not intend to make

additional IRA contributions. The couple owns a $475,000 house with annual property

taxes of $5,200, annual maintenance of $1,500, annual homeowners insurance of $500,

and a 29-year-old $170,000 mortgage with monthly payments of $1,131.              Each spouse

intends to take his/her Social Security retirement benefits starting at age 62.

       QFP and ESPlanner recommend vastly different amounts of consumption, taxable

saving, and life insurance for this household. QFP recommends more than twice the life

insurance for the husband than is recommended by ESPlanner.              Differences in tax

calculations, in the treatment of household composition, and in the treatment of liquidity

constraints appear to explain the different consumption and saving recommendations.

To begin, ESPlanner sets consumption much higher in earlier than in later years because

it realizes that the couple needs to spend more when it has children. Second, ESPlanner

calculates the couple’s short-run taxes to be much higher than those generated by QFP,

reflecting higher Massachusetts’s income taxes on capital income. Note that QFP does

not allow for the employer’s matching contribution to the 401(k) plan to reflect inflation-

induced increases in pay.        Also QFP’s Social Security benefits are lower than

ESPlanner’s.



Case 23 An Older, Very High Income Couple




                                            - 43 -
       This case involves a couple in which the husband is age 64 and the wife is age 57.

The husband intends to work for two more years, earning close to $400,000 over the two

years. The couple has a variety of large special expenses in the short run, including an

expensive home renovation. The husband has two nominal pensions providing close to

$200,000 annually that he expects to collect starting after retiring.     Each spouse is

planning for a $5,000 funeral. The couple also wants to give its children a $2 million gift

in 2025. The couple’s taxable net worth is close to $3 million. The wife has a very small

IRA account, and the husband has a 401k account with balances that are close to three-

quarters of a million dollars.   Each spouse elects to withdraw the smallest amount of

funds from these tax-favored accounts permitted by law. The couple owns a house with a

market value of $1,200,000. The annual property taxes, maintenance, and homeowners

insurance total $6,000, $13,000, and $1,000, respectively. There is a 25-year $525,000

mortgage on the property with a monthly payment of $3,318. The couple plans to sell its

home in 2025 and use the proceeds as well as other funds to make the $2 million gift.

After selling its home, the couple plans to rent a home for $4,000 per month. The couple

uses the default economic assumptions.

       QFP and ESPlanner agree in this case that neither spouse needs life insurance, but

they disagree very strongly about the amount of taxes the couple will pay initially and

over time and the rate at which the couple should dissave (spend down) its taxable assets.

ESPlanner calculates the couple’s 1999 taxes at $182,449, whereas QFP calculates them

at $237,681. This is a 30 percent difference. ESPlanner takes into account the tax

deductibility of special expenditures, and ESPlanner’s much lower 1999 taxes may reflect

the fact that some of the couple’s very large 1999 special expenditures are tax deductible.




                                           - 44 -
Interestingly, ESPlanner’s calculated taxes are higher than are QFP’s when the husband

is age 75, but then fall below QFP’s.

         Because ESPlanner calculates that the couple will generally pay less in taxes

initially and overtime, it recommends considerably higher consumption expenditures. In

1999, ESPlanner says the household can consume $204,510, whereas QFP tells the

household not to consume more than $186,880. ESPlanner recommends the couple

dissave $317,615 in 1999 – a very large sum, which reflects, in large part, the couple’s

very substantial special expenditures in 1999. QFP, in contrast, recommends the couple

dissave $138,380.



Case 24 A Middle-Aged Low-Income Divorcee

         This case describes a 59-year-old divorcee who plans to work until age 70 and

whose life expectancy is age 85. She earns $35,000 a year, has $32,000 in assets (evenly

divided between taxable and tax-deferred accounts), is making a nominal loan repayment

of $4,500 for the next three years, and pays $10,200 a year for rent. Her current employer

contributes 20 percent of pay to a defined contribution plan, and she will receive $4,000 a

year in nominal benefits from a prior employer’s defined benefit pension plan.

         ESPlanner gives a higher standard of living than QFP and allows greater savings

withdrawals for this woman. These recommendations are almost entirely due to

ESPlanner’s higher estimate of Social Security benefits -- $21,430 compared to $9,232 in

QFP.14 In fact, ESPlanner’s higher estimate for Social Security benefits produces a



14
   In part, the benefit is high because a) our middle-aged divorcee doesn’t plan to start collecting benefits
until she is age 70 and b) ESPlanner incorporates delayed retirement credits and benefit recomputations in
its calculation of retirement benefits.


                                                    - 45 -
liquidity constraint in the first decade of planning, as the replacement of income in

retirement for this woman is so high.



VI.    Summary and Conclusions

       This paper used Economic Security Planner and Quicken Financial Planner to

illustrate and contrast the economic and conventional approaches to financial planning.

After clarifying the main conceptual and technical differences between the two programs,

the paper compared their consumption, saving, and insurance recommendations for 20

stylized and 4 actual households. These recommendations are remarkably different even

for very simple cases. The differences are, however, readily explained. They are due to

very different tax and Social Security benefits calculations and to very different

treatments of demographics and borrowing constraints.




                                         - 46 -
                                    References


Ando, Albert, and Franco Modigliani, “The ‘Life Cycle Hypothesis’ of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests,” American Economic Review, 53, 1963.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Life Insurance of the Elderly: Its
Adequacy and Determinants,” in Gary Burtless, ed., Work, Health, and Income Among
the Elderly, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “The Adequacy of Life Insurance
Purchases." Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 215-241, 1991.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, The Vanishing Nest Egg: Reflections on Saving in America, New
York: Priority Press, 1991.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “The Merrill Lynch Baby Boom Retirement Index: Update ‘95,”
Stanford University, mimeo, 1995.

Campbell, John Y., Joao F. Cocco, Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout,
“Investing Retirement Wealth: A Life-Cycle Model,” NBER Working Paper No. W7029,
1999.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Kenneth L. Judd, “Social Security and Individual Welfare:
Precautionary Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll Tax,” American Economic
Review, 77 pp. 97-112, 1987.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, Stephen P. Zeldes, “Precautionary Saving and
Social Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy 103(2), pp. 360-399, 1995.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Avia Spivak, and Lawrence H. Summers, “The Adequacy of
Savings,” American Economic Review, 72(5), pp. 1056-69, 1982

Warshawsky, Mark and John Ameriks, “What Does Financial Planning Software Say
About Americans’ Preparedness for Retirement?” in Olivia S. Mitchell, P. Brett
Hammond, and Anna Rappaport, editors, Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement
Wealth, Pension Research Council, forthcoming, 1999.

Yaari, Menahem E., “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 32, pp. 137-50, 1965.




                                       - 47 -
 Table 1 George’s and Jane’s Non Tax-Favored Balance Sheet in Case 1

Year   George’s   Jane’s   Income   Spending   Taxes    Non Tax-   Non Tax-
         Age      Age                                   Favored    Favored Net
                                                        Saving     Worth
1999     29         27     50,000    26,588    8,640     14,772       14,772
2000     30         28     50,430    26,562    8,872     14,996       29,769
2001     31         29     50,867    26,535    9,108     15,224       44,992
2002     32         30     51,310    26,509    9,347     15,454       60,446
2003     33         31     51,761    26,488    9,590     15,683       76,129
2004     34         32     52,217    26,460    9,837     15,920       92,049
2005     35         33     52,681    26,432    10,088     16,161      108,211
2006     36         34     53,152    26,435    10,342     16,375      124,586
2007     37         35     53,629    26,420    10,698     16,511      141,097
2008     38         36     54,110    26,422    11,083     16,605      157,702
2009     39         37     54,593    26,430    11,470     16,693      174,395
2010     40         38     55,079    26,421    11,859     16,799      191,195
2011     41         39     55,569    26,424    12,250     16,895      208,089
2012     42         40     56,061    26,437    12,644     16,980      225,069
2013     43         41     56,555    26,443    13,040     17,072      242,142
2014     44         42     57,053    26,445    13,437     17,171      259,312
2015     45         43     57,553    26,442    13,837     17,274      276,585
2016     46         44     58,056    26,425    14,240     17,391      293,976
2017     47         45     58,562    26,418    14,645     17,499      311,475
2018     48         46     59,072    26,388    15,053     17,631      329,106
2019     49         47     59,586    26,357    15,464     17,765      346,871
2020     50         48     60,103    26,320    15,878     17,905      364,777
2021     51         49     60,625    26,274    16,295     18,056      382,833
2022     52         50     61,150    26,218    16,716     18,216      401,050
2023     53         51     61,681    26,151    17,140     18,390      419,440
2024     54         52     62,217    26,063    17,569     18,585      438,025
2025     55         53     62,758    25,956    18,002     18,800      456,825
2026     56         54     63,306    25,820    18,440     19,046      475,871
2027     57         55     63,860    25,784    18,883     19,193      495,063
2028     58         56     64,419    25,784    19,331     19,304      514,368
2029     59         57     64,982    25,784    19,781     19,417      533,785
2030     60         58     65,547    25,784    20,233     19,530      553,316
2031     61         59     66,116    25,784    20,688     19,644      572,960
2032     62         60     66,688    25,784    21,146     19,758      592,719
2033     63         61     67,264    25,784    21,606     19,874      612,592
2034     64         62     67,842    25,784    22,069     19,989      632,582
2035     65         63     18,425    25,784    8,018     -15,377      617,205
2036     66         64     17,977    25,784    7,776     -15,583      601,622
2037     67         65     17,523    25,784    7,531     -15,792      585,830
2038     68         66     17,063    25,784    7,283     -16,004      569,826
2039     69         67     16,597    25,784    7,031     -16,218      553,608
2040     70         68     16,125    25,784    6,776     -16,435      537,173
2041     71         69     15,646    25,784    6,517     -16,655      520,518
2042     72         70     15,161    25,784    6,256     -16,879      503,639
2043     73         71     14,669    25,784    5,990     -17,105      486,534
2044     74         72     14,171    25,784    5,721     -17,334      469,201
2045     75         73     13,666    25,784    5,448     -17,566      451,635




                                     - 48 -
                            Table 1 (Continued)


Year   George’s   Jane’s   Income   Spending   Taxes   Non Tax-   Non Tax-
         Age      Age                                  Favored    Favored Net
                                                       Saving     Worth
2046     76         74     13,154    25,784    5,172    -17,802      433,833
2047     77         75     12,636    25,784    4,892    -18,040      415,793
2048     78         76     12,110    25,784    4,608    -18,282      397,512
2049     79         77     11,578    25,784    4,321    -18,527      378,985
2050     80         78     11,038    25,784    4,029    -18,775      360,210
2051     81         79     10,492    25,784    3,734    -19,026      341,184
2052     82         80     9,937     25,784    3,435    -19,282      321,903
2053     83         81     9,376     25,784    3,132    -19,540      302,363
2054     84         82     8,807     25,784    2,824    -19,801      282,562
2055     85         83     8,230     25,784    2,513    -20,067      262,495
2056     86         84     7,645     25,784    2,197    -20,336      242,159
2057     87         85     7,053     25,784    1,877    -20,608      221,551
2058     88         86     6,453     25,784    1,553    -20,884      200,667
2059     89         87     5,845     25,784    1,403    -21,342      179,326
2060     90         88     5,223     25,784    1,254    -21,815      157,511
2061     91         89     4,588     25,784    1,101    -22,297      135,214
2062     92         90     3,938     25,784     945     -22,791      112,424
2063     93         91     3,274     25,784     786     -23,296      89,129
2064     94         92     2,596     25,784     623     -23,811      65,318
2065     95         93     1,902     30,784     457     -29,339      35,980
2066                94     1,048     16,115     286     -15,353      20,627
2067                95      601      21,115     113     -20,627         0




                                     - 49 -
Table 2 Jane’s Survivor Non Tax-Favored Balance Sheet in Case 1


 Year   Jane’s   Income    Spending   Taxes     Non Tax-   Non Tax-
        Age                                     Favored    Favored Net
                                                Saving     Worth
 2021     49     518,691      0         0        518,691      518,691
 2022     50     15,108     16,115    7,084       -8,091      510,599
 2023     51     14,872     16,115    6,957       -8,200      502,399
 2024     52     14,633     16,115    6,828       -8,310      494,090
 2025     53     14,391     16,115    6,697       -8,421      485,668
 2026     54     14,146     16,115    6,565       -8,534      477,134
 2027     55     13,897     16,115    6,431       -8,649      468,486
 2028     56     13,645     16,115    6,295       -8,765      459,722
 2029     57     13,390     16,115    6,157       -8,882      450,840
 2030     58     13,131     16,115    6,017       -9,001      441,839
 2031     59     12,869     16,115    5,876       -9,122      432,718
 2032     60     12,603     16,115    5,732       -9,244      423,475
 2033     61     12,334     16,115    5,587       -9,368      414,107
 2034     62     12,061     16,115    5,439       -9,493      404,615
 2035     63     11,785     16,115    5,290       -9,620      394,995
 2036     64     11,505     16,115    5,139       -9,749      385,246
 2037     65     11,221     16,115    4,985       -9,879      375,366
 2038     66     10,933     16,115    4,830      -10,012      365,354
 2039     67     10,641     16,115    4,673      -10,147      355,208
 2040     68     10,346     16,115    4,513      -10,282      344,926
 2041     69     10,046     16,115    4,351      -10,420      334,507
 2042     70      9,743     16,115    4,187      -10,559      323,947
 2043     71      9,435     16,115    4,021      -10,701      313,247
 2044     72      9,124     16,115    3,853      -10,844      302,402
 2045     73      8,808     16,115    3,682      -10,989      291,413




                                       - 50 -
                            Table 2 (Continued)


Year   Jane’s   Income   Spending   Taxes     Non Tax-   Non Tax-
       Age                                    Favored    Favored Net
                                              Saving     Worth
2046     74      8,488    16,115    3,510      -11,137      280,276
2047     75      8,163    16,115    3,334      -11,286      268,990
2048     76      7,835    16,115    3,157      -11,437      257,553
2049     77      7,502    16,115    2,977      -11,590      245,963
2050     78      7,164    16,115    2,795      -11,746      234,217
2051     79      6,822    16,115    2,610      -11,903      222,314
2052     80      6,475    16,115    2,423      -12,063      210,252
2053     81      6,124    16,115    2,233      -12,224      198,028
2054     82      5,768    16,115    2,041      -12,388      185,640
2055     83      5,407    16,115    1,846      -12,554      173,086
2056     84      5,041    16,115    1,649      -12,723      160,364
2057     85      4,671    16,115    1,448      -12,892      147,472
2058     86      4,295    16,115    1,246      -13,066      134,406
2059     87      3,915    16,115    1,040      -13,240      121,166
2060     88      3,529    16,115     847       -13,433      107,733
2061     89      3,138    16,115     753       -13,730      94,003
2062     90      2,738    16,115     657       -14,034      79,969
2063     91      2,329    16,115     559       -14,345      65,625
2064     92      1,911    16,115     459       -14,663      50,963
2065     93      1,484    16,115     356       -14,987      35,976
2066     94      1,048    16,115     251       -15,318      20,658
2067     95       602     21,115     144       -20,657         0




                                     - 51 -
                                            Table 3 Comparing Results from ESPlanner and QFP


                                                                             Case 1

Husband Works, Wife Doesn’t Work, No Social Security Benefits, No Housing, No Children, No College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable
Assets, No Tax-Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65
Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No
Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving            Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp      Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      27,810     25,784     13,383     14,772      9,296    8,640       13,312   14,772       0          0    680,000    667,948      0           0
   45           43      27,810     25,784     20,526     17,274     11,729   13,837      264,240   276,585      0          0     N.C.      293,458    N.C.          0
   65           63      27,810     25,784    (9, 653)   (15,377)     6,457    8,018      664,601   617,205      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83      27,810     25,784   (20, 963)   (20,067)     2,378    2,513      268,731   262,495      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      16,686     16,115   (17,156)    (20,627)        10     113         1,064      0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                             Case 2

Husband Works, Wife Works, No Social Security Benefits, No Housing, No Children, No College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No
Tax-Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for
Husband, 3 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at
Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving            Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp      Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      41,720     35,883    20,069      21,937     13,944   16,624       19,962   21,937       0          0    460,000    461,763      0           0
   45           43      41,720     35,883    32,354      24,352     17,594   25,223      396,258   393,396      0          0     N.C.      129,531    N.C.          0
   65           63      41,720     35,883   (13,491)    (21,975)     9,683   12,128      996,629   871,921      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83      41,720     35,883   (30,437)    (28,678)     3,561    4,261      402,571   365,003      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      25,032     22,427   (25,757)    (26,776)         9     129          888       0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                                - 52 -
                                                                           Case 3

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, No Housing, No Children, No College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No Tax-
Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband,
3 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                    Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27      42,700     43,737    14,257      9,629     18,564   21,093       14,182    9,628       0          0    420,000    449,205      0           0
   45          43      42,700     43,737    21,867     10,724     21,156   24,882      281,513   173,344      0          0     N.C.      175,054    N.C.          0
   65          63      42,700     43,737   (11,410)   (10,336)     8,897    7,464      706,929   384,790      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83      42,700     43,737   (22,331)   (12,414)     4,986    2,939      285,399   155,930      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95      25,620     27,336   (17,480)   (13,124)     1,471      13         1,929      0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                           Case 4

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, No Children, No College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No Tax-
Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband,
3 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                    Deferred Assets        Insurance           Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken      Esp      Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27     32,600     35,586     7,299     2,967      18,527   18,166       7,260      2,968      0          0    580,000    588,754   60,000      63,873
   45           43     32,600     35,586    16,082     6,796      20,141   21,688      175,623    85,798      0          0     N.C.      299,112    N.C.          0
   65           63     32,600     35,586    (9,363)   (7,246)      7,596    4,900      573,110   277,120      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83     32.600     35,586   (17,934)   (8,935)      4,485    1,890      233,830   114,104      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95     19,560     22,241   (15,759)   (7,577)      1,477      0         2,309       0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. not computed




                                                                              - 53 -
                                                                                       Case 5

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, No College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No Tax-
Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband,
3 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of        Consumption              Taxable Saving                  Taxes             Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife       (Living Expenses)                                                                                Deferred Assets        Insurance           Insurance
                         Quicken       Esp        Quicken          Esp       Quicken        Esp      Quicken      Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
    29          27        32,600      37,105        7,299         2,981       18,527      16,982       7,260      2,981      0          0    520,000    362,076   60,000         0
    45          43        32,600      43,705       16,082          (66)       20,141      17,997     175,623        0        0          0     N.C.      325,241    N.C.       39,248
    65          63        32,600      32,933       (9,363)       (5,054)       7,596       3,113     573,110    202,142      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
    85          83        32,600      32,933      (17,934)       (6,465)       4,485       1,177     233,830     85,817      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95        25,620      20,583      (15,759)       (5,966)       1,477         0         2,309        0        0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Assume for QFP, a $5,000 annual allowance per child in the life insurance calculator. N.C. -- not computed




                                                                                       Case 6

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, No Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No Tax-Deferred
Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
     Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of         Consumption            Taxable Saving               Taxes               Taxable Assets        Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife        (Living Expenses)                                                                               Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                          Quicken      Esp        Quicken        Esp      Quicken        Esp      Quicken        Esp      Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27          28,270     31,189       11,768       8,773      18,550      16,982      11,706       8,773        0          0    580,000    414,718   120,000     50,578
   45          43          28,270     36,466       (8,241)      7,904      20,751      20,440     232,922      122,396       0          0     N.C.      362,119    N.C.       78,886
   65          63          28,270     31,592       (7,842)     (3,944)      6,597       2,213     470,249      164,404       0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83          28,270     31,592      (14,643)     (5,216)      4,087        822      192,892      71,712        0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95          16,962     19,745      (13,056)     (5,152)      1,484         0         3,257         0          0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                                         - 54 -
                                                                           Case 7

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, No Taxable Assets, No Tax-Deferred
Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                    Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27      27,620     31,130    12,439      8,799     18,554   16,982       12,374    8,798       0          0    600,000    427,175   140,000     66,224
   45          43      27,620     36,397    (7,193)     7,905     20,880   20,449      246,186   122,829      0          0     N.C.      378,165    N.C.       97,426
   65          63      27,620     30,312   (59,154)   (52,587)     6,433    2,513      453,403   128,708      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83      27,620     30,312   (14,208)    (4,021)     4,007     491       184,689   58,602       0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95      16,572     18,945   (12,723)    (4,375)     1,460      0            863      0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                           Case 8

Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, No Tax-Deferred Assets,
No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent Real
Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-      Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                    Deferred Assets        Insurance            Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken      Esp   Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27      28,900     33,261    14,118      7,098     19,057   18,081       63,549   58,597       0          0    580,000    415,500   120,000     54,244
   45          43      28,900     38,888    (7,518)     5,568     21,593   20,816      290,959   137,713      0          0     N.C.      373,522    N.C.       92,783
   65          63      28,900     30,312   (59,838)   (52,587)     6,983    2,513      484,537   128,708      0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83      28,900     30,312   (15,211)    (4,021)     4,317     491       196,718   58,602       0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95      17,340     18,945   (13,542)    (4,375)     1,464      0            247      0         0          0     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                              - 55 -
                                                                           Case 9

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, No Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3
Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance           Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27      30,700     33,437    12,260      7,030     19,047   18,081       61,701   58,530     53,000     53,000    540,000    370,828   80,000       8,525
   45          43      30,700     39,094   (10,500)     5,567     21,309   20,791      254,150   137,527    83,902     83,902     N.C.      323,502    N.C.       39,567
   65          63      30,700     34,034   (64,543)   (51,371)     6,027    3,601      385,117   91,156    148,987     141,832    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83      30,700     34,034   (11,078)    (2,652)     5,113    2,175      141,897   46,955     86,088     61,304     N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95      18,420     21,271       0       (6,635)     4,365      0           0         0        4,921        0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                           Case 10

 Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
 Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, No Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3
 Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of      Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband       Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance           Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29          27      33,020     31,910     7,285      6,769     19,021   17,274       56,752   58,268     58,161     58,000    600,000    458,962   80,000         0
   45          43      33,020     37,308   (18,640)     5,787     20,694   20,002      155,433   137,586   195,168     191,910    N.C.      303,522    N.C.          0
   65          63      33,020     40,821   (74,300)   (48,332)     3,262    6,395      120,357      0      478,571     446,422    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85          83      33,020     41,031       0         817       7,194    6,126         0      17,857    273,608     192,956    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased       95      19,812     25,645       0      (10,890)     4,650      5           0         0        1,770        0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                              - 56 -
                                                                                             Case 11

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, No Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3
Percent Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of         Age of         Consumption              Taxable Saving                  Taxes                Taxable Assets            Husband’s Tax-               Husband’s Life            Wife’s Life
Husband          Wife       (Living Expenses)                                                                                           Deferred Assets               Insurance                Insurance
                           Quicken         Esp       Quicken          Esp      Quicken          Esp       Quicken         Esp        Quicken         Esp         Quicken        Esp       Quicken       Esp
    29           27         32,670       31,851        7,646         6789       19,023        17,274       57,112       58,289        58,161       58,000        660,000      490,331     140,000        0
    45           43         32,670       37,240      (18,036)        5,786      20,627        20,010       162,613     137,964       195,168      191,910          N.C.       335,521      N.C.          0
    65           63         32,670       39,996      (73,432)      (47,454)      3,499         6,596       139,852       9,582       478,571      446,422          N.C.          0         N.C.          0
    85           83         32,670       39,996           552        2,295       7,373         6,646       34,923       52,418       276,528      192,956          N.C.          0         N.C.          0
 Deceased        95         19,602       24,998           (33)     (10,949)     14,842          713           0            0           1,943          0            N.C.          0         N.C.          0
In QFP, a bequest is entered separately in two locations: as a special expense at the end of the year of the wife’s death and as a “specific bequest” in the life insurance calculator.




                                                                                             Case 12

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of         Age of         Consumption              Taxable Saving                  Taxes                Taxable Assets           Husband’s Tax-              Husband’s Life              Wife’s Life
Husband          Wife        (Living Expenses)                                                                                         Deferred Assets               Insurance                 Insurance
                            Quicken      Esp          Quicken         Esp       Quicken         Esp       Quicken         Esp        Quicken       Esp          Quicken      Esp          Quicken       Esp
   29             27         34,270     31,870          5,994        6780        19,014       17,274       55,469       58,280       58,161      58,000         620,000    449,309        120,000     33,212
   45             43         34,270     37,262        (20,826)       5,747       20,605       20,002      129,758       137,562      195,168     191,910         N.C.      293,091         N.C.       54,671
   65             63         34,270     41,411        (67,672)     (41,814)       4,659        9,097       95,865          0         422,254     446,422         N.C.          0           N.C.          0
   85             83         34,270     44,784            870        2,017        7,775        7,970       37,896       62,323       243,987     192,956         N.C.          0           N.C.          0
Deceased          95         20,562     27,990         (4,816)     (11,094)      14,087        1,753         0             0           835          0            N.C.          0           N.C.          0




                                                                                                - 57 -
                                                                           Case 13

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent Real
Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of     Age of       Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-         Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband      Wife      (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29         27       38,930     31,813     754        6,793     19,336   17,274       50,266   58,293    58,161      58,000    520,000    315,383   220,000    202,813
   45         43       38,930     37,196   (29,630)     5,785     20,766   20,011       30,305   138,000   195,168     191,910    N.C.      143,101    N.C.      248,239
   65         63       38,930     55,126   (60,827)   (53,745)     8,619   16,234      503,385   294,359   116,943     446,422    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85         83       38,930     55,126   (13,690)    (7,617)     6,640   10,802      237,575   174,230   67,572      192,956    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased      95       23,358     34,454   (52,462)   (17,431)     5,185    1,810          0        0       1,838         0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0




                                                                           Case 14

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent Real
Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of     Age of       Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life          Wife’s Life
Husband      Wife      (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets         Insurance            Insurance
                      Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp      Quicken       Esp
   29         27       49,950     43,664   (13,320)    (5,292)    21,458   17,274      36,327    46,208    58,161      58,000    700,00    693,279    40,000      19,965
   45         43       49,950     51,051   (18,332)     9,332     25,319   27,316       17,470   41,951    142,660     191,910    N.C.     477,309     N.C.       40,363
   65         63       49,950     54,816   (66,546)   (53,488)     9,431   16,022      481,141   285,514   247,912     446,422    N.C.         0       N.C.          0
   85         83       49,950     54,816   (12,251)    (7,328)     8,848   10,717      213,715   170,862   143,248     192,956    N.C.         0       N.C.          0
Deceased      95       29,970     34,260   (36,065)   (17,240)     9,667    1,808          0        0       1,172         0       N.C.         0       N.C.          0

In QFP, the Social Security benefits are increased compared to earlier cases because final salary, in real terms, is higher than current salary.




                                                                              - 58 -
                                                                            Case 15

 Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
 Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 62 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
     Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-         Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      32,580     31,921     7,739      6,767     18,043   17,274       57,204   58,266    58,161      58,000    580,000    373,288   140,000     77,831
   45           43      32,580     37,322   (17,881)     5,744     20,736   19,995      164,459   137,232   195,168     191,910    N.C.      225,327    N.C.      105,337
   65           63      32,580     39,337   (16,527)   (45,168)     4,168    7,619       57,671    8,216    462,204     374,185    N.C.          0      N.C.        4,578
   85           83      32,580     39,337     1,694      1,489      7,599    6,754       24,230   62,050    257,751     161,733    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      19,548     24,586     (765)     (8,116)    14,700    1,706          0        0        356          0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                            Case 16

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age-65 Retirement for Husband, 5 Percent
    Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets     Husband’s Tax-         Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      38,280     33,019     2,557      6,423     19,377   17,641       51,896   57,924    59,214      59,000    480,000    343,402   100,000        0
   45           43      38,280     38,606   (26,219)     6,258     20,754   20,899       64,950   136,646   247,992     242,859    N.C.      221,604    N.C.          0
   65           63      38,280     43,489   (72,394)   (27,374)     4,312   17,344       45,798      0      442,045     737,371    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83      38,280     61,057      274       2,873      8,327   17,064          272   71,394    302,224     366,853    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      22,968     38,161       0      (21,109)    15,538    2,299            0      0       2,616         0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                               - 59 -
                                                                            Case 17

 Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age-65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
     Real Returns, 5 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance           Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      36,200     32,944     5,013      5,714     19,175   17,466       54,326   58,214     59,214     59,000    640,000    523,737   80,000         0
   45           43      36,200     38,518   (12,539)     5,705     20,499   20,867      121,785   130,820   196,577     192,255    N.C.      297,628    N.C.       17,509
   65           63      36,200     42,473   (70,059)   (43,539)     5,555    9,048      129,525      0      477,833     442,959    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83      36,200     42,854      117       1,715      8,243    7,855       52,689   68,786    273,140     190,622    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      21,720     26,784    (3,510)   (12,185)    14,593    2,102            0      0        2,970        0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                            Case 18

Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
        Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Death at Age 85, Desired Stable Standard of Living, No Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      35,570     31,912     4,653      6,785     19,007   17,274       54,134   58,284     58,161     58,000    620,000    428,054   120,000     15,433
   45           43      35,570     37,312   (23,169)     5,753     20,577   20,001      102,987   137,504   195,168     191,910     N.C      288,392     N.C       33,455
   65           63      35,570     41,811   (69,568)   (37,751)     4,470   11,309       76,366      0      339,476     439,630     N.C          0       N.C          0
   85           83      35,570     48,457       0      (52,075)     4,964   10,655            0   24,509     78,292        0        N.C          0       N.C          0
Deceased        85      21,342     30,286       0      (12,169)    15,205    1,899            0      0          518        0        N.C          0       N.C          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                               - 60 -
                                                                            Case 19

 Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
  Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, Real Wage Growth, Age 65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
  Real Returns, 3 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, 10 Percent Higher Post-Retirement Living Standard, No Downsizing of Home at
                                                                Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      33,550     31,871     6,738      6,779     19,018   17,274       56,208   58,279     58,161     58,000    640,000    449,185   120,000     32,823
   45           43      33,550     37,264   (19,561)     5,748     20,650   20,002      144,552   137,550   195,168     191,910     N.C      294,626     N.C       54,213
   65           63      36,355     44,900   (69,595)   (45,263)     4,736    9,254      103,720    3,282    467,578     446,422     N.C          0       N.C          0
   85           83      36,355     44,900     1,021      1,909      8,233    8,001       37,987   63,541    249,381     192,956     N.C          0       N.C          0
Deceased        95      21,813     28,063    (3,074)   (11,165)    14,690    1,753            0      0        5,167        0        N.C          0       N.C          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                            Case 20

 Stylized Couple: Husband Works, Wife Works, Social Security Benefits, Housing, Children, College, Emergency Fund, Taxable Assets, Tax-
Deferred Assets, Tax-Deferred Saving, Bequests, Pensions, No Inheritance, No Real Wage Growth, Age-65 Retirement for Husband, 3 Percent
       Real Returns, 5 Percent Inflation, Max Death Ages are 95, Desired Stable Standard of Living, Downsizing of Home at Retirement


 Age of       Age of      Consumption         Taxable Saving           Taxes              Taxable Assets      Husband’s Tax-        Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife     (Living Expenses)                                                                     Deferred Assets          Insurance            Insurance
                       Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken     Esp       Quicken     Esp     Quicken       Esp     Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp
   29           27      32,430     31,728     7,894      6,827     19,024   17,274       57,358   58,327     58,161     58,000    660,000    497,077   140,000     63,964
   45           43      32,430     37,096   (17,624)     5,746     21,752   20,020      167,536   138,403   195,168     191,910    N.C.      341,353    N.C.       91,374
   65           63      32,430     37,311   (73,194)   (49,802)     7,012   14,379      329,501   225,243   478,571     446,422    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
   85           83      32,430     37,311    (5,664)    (3,241)     9,276   10,932      133,455   188,583   276,528     192,956    N.C.          0      N.C.          0
Deceased        95      19,458     23,319   (11,183)   (74,708)    15,383    3,291            0      0        2,820        0       N.C.          0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                               - 61 -
                                                                                    Case 21
                                                                          A Young, Low-Income Couple


 Age of        Age of        Consumption             Taxable Saving                Taxes               Taxable Assets        Wife’s Tax-Deferred         Husband’s Life            Wife’s Life
Husband         Wife       (Living Expenses)                                                                                        Assets                  Insurance               Insurance
                          Quicken      Esp         Quicken        Esp      Quicken        Esp       Quicken       Esp        Quicken         Esp       Quicken       Esp       Quicken       Esp
   35           35         26,920     26,866         7,863       5,424      19,901       20,355      21,683      19,845       4,419         4,380      340,000    242,122      340,000    236,396
   45           45         26,920     38,500        16,947       3,447      19,222       16,812     132,998      46,839      18,400        17,984       N.C.      169,566       N.C.      197,139
   65           65         26,920     26,866        21,667       (797)      16,439        312       374,766      43,794      64,356        59,321       N.C.       25,735       N.C.       31,197
   85           85         26,920     26,866       (16,730)     (2,414)      3,083         96       266,097      11,375      36,592        15,489       N.C.        9,477       N.C.       10,813
   90           90         13,460     26,866           0        (1,030)      3,316          7             0         0         3,013           0         N.C.          0         N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                                        Case 22

                                                                   A Middle-Aged, Upper-Income Couple


 Age of        Age of         Consumption             Taxable Saving              Taxes                Taxable Assets              Couple’s Tax-            Husband’s Life         Wife’s Life
Husband         Wife        (Living Expenses)                                                                                     Deferred Assets              Insurance            Insurance
                           Quicken       Esp       Quicken       Esp      Quicken          Esp       Quicken        Esp         Quicken       Esp        Quicken       Esp     Quicken       Esp
   39            40         39,390     48,909      102,508     57,063      48,366        70,217      324,909      289,328       262,661     262,162      960,000     474,795      0           0
   45            46         39,390     48,909       21,883      4,526      30,154        28,969      494,700      366,871       411,295     411,486         N.C.     184,907    N.C.          0
   65            66         39,390     35,925          0          0        11,804         7,364         0             0         843,756     675,978         N.C.         0      N.C.          0
   85            86         39,390     41,823        (632)       194       10,191         7,468       1489         3,130        343,461     288,373         N.C.         0      N.C.          0
   95         Deceased      21,008     28,683          0          0         5,781         6,710         0             0          1,325          0           N.C.         0      N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed. Note: QFP does not allow the employer’s matching contribution to a tax-deferred account to reflect inflation-induced increases in pay.




                                                                                           - 62 -
                                                                                    Case 23

                                                               An Older, Very High Income Couple


 Age of       Age of        Consumption           Taxable Saving                Taxes                    Taxable Assets       Couple’s Tax-Deferred     Husband’s Life     Wife’s Life
Husband        Wife       (Living Expenses)                                                                                            Assets             Insurance         Insurance
                         Quicken      Esp      Quicken         Esp        Quicken       Esp       Quicken           Esp       Quicken          Esp      Quicken   Esp    Quicken     Esp
   64           57       186,880    204,510   (138,380)     (317,615)     237,681     182,449     2,608,876      2,566,384     835,135       835,135       0        0       0          0
   75           68       186,880    204,510     64,289       (64,357)     110,389     131,659     2,474,844      1,815,234    1,005,179     1,086,296    N.C.       0     N.C.        0
   85           78       186,880    204,510    (37,627)     (133,145)      74,006     55,720      1,958,129       799,840      748,607        980,869    N.C.       0     N.C.        0
Deceased        90        24,917    127,819        0        (118,883)       8,961       46            0              0           7,131          0        N.C.       0     N.C.        0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                                    Case 24

                                                               A Middle-Aged Low-Income Divorcee


  Age            Consumption        Taxable Saving              Taxes                Taxable Assets          Tax-Deferred Assets       Life Insurance
              (Living Expenses)
             Quicken      Esp     Quicken       Esp       Quicken        Esp    Quicken           Esp        Quicken        Esp     Quicken       Esp
   59         13,390     17,320    (119)      (5,517)      8,139        8,977    15,747         10,063       24,185       23,960       0           0
   65         13,390     17,508    6,146         0         8,691        9,446    36,579            0         76,835       73,644     N.C.          0
   70         13,390     21,654   (3,543)       987        3,865        1,550    60,103           987        114,696      106,266    N.C.          0
   75         13,390     21,654   (5,592)       328        3,098        1,763    32,923          3,992       90,964       75,790     N.C.          0
   85          1,116     21,654      0        (1,370)       326         2,007       0              0          2,053          0       N.C.          0
N.C. – not computed




                                                                                     - 63 -
                                           Appendix

                   ESPlanner’s Tax and Social Security Benefit Calculations

This appendix describes ESPlanner’s tax and Social Security benefit calculations..

Federal Income Tax Calculations
ESPlanner’s calculations of federal income taxes in each future year take into account the
household’s year-specific marital status. Thus, in the case of married households, the marital
status is married when both spouses are alive and single when on is deceased. Households that
are married are assumed to file jointly. The tax schedules for each filing status are taken from
the federal income tax booklet for the latest available tax year—usually the year prior to the
“current” year entered by the user. The tax schedule is applied to the program’s calculation of
federal taxable income. Federal taxable income equals federal Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) less
personal exemptions and less the standard or itemized deduction, whichever is larger.

AGI for each year includes projected incomes in current dollars from the following sources:
Labor income (wages and salaries), self-employment income, asset income projected by the
program based on user inputs of initial non-tax-favored net worth and rates of return, and on the
optimal spending plan computed by the program. AGI also includes taxable asset income,
taxable social security benefits, taxable special receipts, taxable distributions from defined
benefit pension plans and taxable withdrawals from tax-favored saving plans. Each of these
items is based upon the user’s inputs and preferences. Non-taxable special receipts and
withdrawals from non-deductible tax-favored accounts are not included in AGI. Deductible
contributions to tax-favored retirement accounts are subtracted from income in calculating each
year’s AGI. Employer contributions to tax-favored retirement accounts are not included in AGI.
However, withdrawals from these accounts are included.

The Tax Schedule
The tax schedules for the two types of filing statuses implemented in ESPlanner are taken from
the federal income tax booklet for the 1998 tax year—the latest year for which the federal
schedules are available. These schedules are as follows:

(1)                    (2)                  (3)                      (4)
If taxable                                                           of the
income                 but not              the tax                  amount
is over--              over--               is--                     over--

Married filing jointly:
     $0                   $42,350     ---------- 15 %                     $0
 42,350                 102,300      $6,352.50 + 28 %                 42,350
102,300                 155,950      23,138.50 + 31 %                102,300
155,950                 278,450      39,770.00 + 36 %                155,950
278,450                 ----------   83,870.00 + 39.6%               278,450



                                              - 64 -
Single:
     $0                $ 25,350           ---------- 15 %                   $0
 25,350                   61,400       $3,802.50 + 28 %                 25,350
 61,400                 128,100        13,896.50 + 31 %                 61,400
128,100                 278,450        34,573.50 + 36 %                128,100
278,450                 ----------     88,699.50 + 39.6%               278,450

The Indexation of the Tax Schedule
Tax-rate brackets and infra-marginal tax amounts (all of the dollar amounts listed in the tax
schedules) are adjusted for inflation in each year over the household’s lifetime. This is done to
ensure that the schedule keeps pace with the growth of income in current dollars. The indexation
is done using the user-specified rate of inflation.

*Adjustment for the current year
Because the tax schedules listed above are applicable for the 1998 tax year whereas the user will
enter 1999 as the current year, all tax brackets and infra-marginal tax amounts [the dollar
amounts shown in column (3) in the schedules listed above] are indexed for inflation at the user-
specified annual rate. This is done to avoid subjecting 1999 taxable income to tax schedules
appropriate for 1998—that is, based on the wage and price levels prevailing in 1998.

Standard Deductions and Exemptions
The standard deduction and personal exemption amounts are also taken from the tax year prior to
the “current” year (tax year 1998 in the current version). The amount subtracted from AGI for
each personal exemption was $2,700. The standard deductions were $7,100 for the “married
filing jointly” filing status and $4,250 for the “single” filing status. These amounts are also
indexed for inflation for each future year based on the user-specified future rate of inflation. The
number of personal exemptions allowed equals 2 plus the number of children for “married and
filing jointly” and 1 plus the number of children for the “single” filing statuses. The personal
exemption amount that can be deducted from AGI in calculating taxable income is phased out if
AGI is above certain dollar limits depending upon the filing status. ESPlanner takes account of
the phase-out of personal exemptions based on these dollar limits indexed for inflation.

The Decision to Itemize
ESPlanner takes the maximum of the standard deduction or itemized deduction where the latter
includes mortgage interest payments, property taxes, state and local income tax payments, and
tax-deductible special expenditures that the user specifies—such as alimony payments, charitable
contributions, and deductible medical expenses. Note that state and local income tax payments
are deductible only if they are being withheld from pay or the user makes estimated tax payments
during the during the tax year. ESPlanner assumes withholding or pre-payment in every case.



The Phase Out of Itemized Deductions



                                               - 65 -
Federal income tax rules phase out itemized deductions for high income taxpayers (both, married
filing jointly and single payers). For the 1998 tax year, the amount of the deduction is reduced
by 3¢ for every dollar of AGI in excess of $124,500 with the total reduction limited to 80 percent
of the original amount. The reduction does not apply to certain components of the itemized
deductions claimed—such as medical care expenses, investment interest, and casualty and theft
losses. Because ESPlanner does not distinguish between these and other sources of itemized
deductions, the phase-out rules are applied to the entire itemized deduction.

The Child Tax Credit
The child tax credit equals $400 times the number of qualifying children in the household. The
tax credit is phased out if AGI is over the threshold of $110,000 for the “married and filing
jointly” status and of $75,000 for the “single” filing status. The phase-out rate is $50 for each
$1000 of income in excess of the applicable threshold. The amount of the child tax credit equals
the computed amount or the federal income tax liability net of the earned income tax credit,
whichever is less. If the earned income tax credit exceeds the federal income tax liability, the
child tax credit is applied against the payroll tax liability.

The Earned Income Credit
The program’s calculation of the earned income credit adheres to the EIC worksheet in federal
Form 1040. ESPlanner first checks for eligibility to take EIC based on investment income and
on taxable and non-taxable (employer contributions to 401k plans, for example) earned income
thresholds for households with no qualifying child and those with at least one qualifying child
(adopted, foster, step-and grand-children are excluded in ESPlanner’s calculations). Next, EIC is
computed based on the EIC schedule for taxable and nontaxable income. If the EIC is non-zero,
it applies if AGI is less than certain dollar thresholds ($5600 for households without a qualifying
child and $ 12,300 for households with at least 1 qualifying child). If AGI is greater than these
dollar amounts, EIC is based on the AGI.

Payroll Taxes
In each year, the payroll tax for a married household is the sum of the two spouses’ payroll taxes.
Each spouse’s tax equals the employee share of the OASDI tax rate (6.2 percent) applied to labor
earnings up to the taxable maximum level plus the employee share of the HI tax rate (1.45
percent) applied to total labor earnings. If earnings from self-employment are present, these are
included in the calculation only to the extent that labor earnings fall short of the taxable
maximum limit for the OASDI tax. The entire labor income from self-employment in taxed on
account of the HI tax. In the case of self-employment income, the employer plus employee tax
rates for OASDI and HI are applied.

The Taxation of Social Security Benefits
Social Security benefits are taxed by including these benefits in the federal income tax base in
the following manner. If the sum of AGI and 50 percent of Social Security benefits falls short of
$25,000 (adjusted for inflation for future years) if single and $32,000 (same qualifier) if married,
then none of the benefits are taxable. If the sum exceeds the applicable dollar threshold, but the
excess is less than $9,000 if single ($12,000 if married), then the smaller of one-half of the



                                               - 66 -
excess or 50 percent of the benefit is taxable and is included in the federal income tax base. In
addition, if the aforementioned excess is greater than the dollar thresholds, 85 percent of this
excess or 85 percent of the benefit, whichever is smaller, is also added to the federal income tax
base.

State Income Tax Calculations
State income taxes are calculated for each state that imposes an income tax according to the
specific tax rules applicable in user’s state of residence. In most cases, the state income tax base
equals the federal AGI re-adjusted for taxable Social Security benefits. State income tax
calculations incorporate special features peculiar to each state: For example, some states (such as
Massachusetts) impose special taxes on asset incomes. State-specific personal, spousal, and
dependent exemptions (including additional exemptions for the elderly) and the applicable
standard deductions are used to calculate the state taxable income. State taxes are calculated by
applying the state’s tax rate schedule to the taxable income.


Social Security Benefit Calculations
Retirement Benefits
Eligibility – Before ESPlanner provides you (and your spouse if married) Social Security
retirement benefits, it checks that you are fully insured. Individuals must be fully insured to
receive retirement benefits based on their earnings records. Becoming fully insured requires
sufficient contributions at a job (including self-employment) covered by Social Security. For
those born after 1929, acquiring 40 credits prior to retirement suffices for fully-insured status.
Earnings between 1937 and 1951 are aggregated and divided by $400, and the result (rounded
down to an integer number) are the pre-1952 credits which are added to the credits earned after
1950 in determining insured status. After 1951, workers earn one credit for each quarter of the
year they work in Social Security-covered employment and earn above a specified minimum
amount. The year of first eligibility for retirement benefits is the year in which the individual
becomes age 62. The individual is entitled to retirement benefits after an application for benefits
is submitted, but never before age 62.

Determination of Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) -- The PIA is the basis for all benefit
payments made on a worker’s earnings record. There are several steps in computing the PIA.
Base years are computed as the years after 1950 up to the first month of entitlement to retirement
benefits begins. For survivor benefits, base years include the year of the worker's death.

Elapsed years are computed as those years after 1950 (or after attainment of age 21, whichever
occurs later) up to (but not including) the year of first eligibility. The maximum number of
elapsed years for an earnings record is 40 (it could be shorter, for purposes of calculating
survivor benefits if the person dies prior to age 62).

Computation years are calculated as the number of elapsed years less 5, or 2, whichever is
greater. Earnings in base years (up to the maximum taxable limit in each year, and through age
60 or two years prior to death, whichever occurs earlier) are wage-indexed according to



                                               - 67 -
economy-wide average wages. Of these, the highest earnings in years equaling the number of
computation years are added together and the sum is divided by the number of months in
computation years to yield Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME).

Bend Points -- The AIME is converted into a PIA using a formula with bend points. The bend
point formula is specified as 90 percent of the first X dollars of AIME plus 32 percent of the next
Y dollars of AIME plus 15 percent of the AIME in excess of Y dollars. The dollar amounts X
and Y are also wage indexed and are different for different eligibility years. The dollar amounts
pertaining to the year of attaining age 60 (or, for survivor benefits, the second year before death,
whichever is earlier) are applied in computing the PIA.

Benefits- A person who begins to collect benefits at his or her "normal retirement age" (currently
age 65) receives the PIA as the monthly retirement benefit. In subsequent years, the monthly
benefit is adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to maintain its purchasing
power.

Increases in Normal Retirement Ages -- After 2003 normal retirement ages are scheduled to
increase by 2 months for every year that a person’s 65th birthday occurs later than the year 2003.
This progressive increase in the normal retirement age for those born later ceases between the
years 2008 through 2020; those attaining age 65 in these years have a normal retirement age of
66. The postponement in retirement ages resumes after 2020 such that those born after 2025 have
a normal retirement age of 67. All cohorts attaining age 65 after that year have a normal
retirement age of 67.

Reductions for Age -- A person who begins to collect retirement benefits earlier than the normal
retirement age receives a reduction for age. The reduction factor is 5/9 of 1 percent for each
month of entitlement prior to the normal retirement age. The reduced benefit payment (except for
the inflation adjustment) continues even after the person reaches or surpasses the normal
retirement age. If the number of months of reduction exceeds 36 months (for example, in case of
entitlement at age 62 when the normal retirement age is 67), then the reduction factor is 5/12 of 1
percent for every additional month of early entitlement.

Delayed Retirement Credits--Those who begin to collect benefits after their normal retirement
age (up to age 70) receive delayed retirement credits. The amount of the delayed retirement
credit for each month of delayed entitlement depends on the year in which a person attains
normal retirement age. For example, those attaining age 65 in 1997 receive an additional 5
percent in monthly benefits for each year of delay in entitlement. However, those attaining age
65 in the year 2008 will receive an additional 8 percent in benefits for each year of delayed
entitlement.

Earnings Test -- If a person continues to work and earn after the month of entitlement, benefits
are reduced because of an earnings test. Beneficiaries under the normal retirement age, lose $1
for each $2 earned above an earnings limit. Those older than the normal retirement age, lose $1
for each $3 earned above a higher earnings limit. The earnings limits have already been specified



                                               - 68 -
through the year 2000 and are scheduled to grow with average wages in subsequent years. All
benefits payable on a worker’s earnings record, including the worker’s own retirement benefits
and spousal and child dependent benefits, are proportionally reduced by the testing of the
worker’s earnings.

Recomputation of Benefits -- Earnings in any year after entitlement to benefits are automatically
taken into account in a recomputation of the PIA for determining the subsequent year's benefit
amount. However, these earnings are not indexed before they are included in the AIME
calculation. If such earnings are higher than some prior year's earnings (indexed earnings through
age 60 or unindexed earnings after age 60), they result in an increase in the PIA and benefit
payable. If they are lower than all previous year's earnings, they will not lower the PIA or
benefits since only the highest earnings in base years are included in the calculations.

Spousal and Child Dependent Benefits
Eligibility -- Wives and husbands of insured workers (including divorced spouses) are entitled to
spousal benefits if the couple was married for at least 10 years at the time of application for
spousal benefits, the spouse is over age 62 or has in care a child under age 16 entitled to benefits
under the insured worker's record, and the insured worker is collecting retirement benefits.
Children of insured workers under age 16 are entitled to child dependent benefits if the child is
unmarried and the worker is collecting retirement benefits.

Benefits -- Spousal and child benefits equal 50 percent of the insured worker's PIA (each). Child
dependent benefits may be lower only if the family maximum applies. Spousal benefits may be
lower due to the family maximum, a reduction for age, the application of the earnings test, or the
spouse’s receipt of retirement benefits based or her or his own earnings record.

Family Maximum -- All benefits paid under a worker's record (except retirement benefits or
divorced spousal benefits) are reduced proportionately to bring them within the family maximum
benefit level. The maximum benefits payable on a worker's earnings record is determined by
applying a bend point formula to the PIA similar to that applied to the AIME in calculating the
PIA. For example, the family maximum equals 150 percent of the first $X of PIA plus 272
percent of the next $Y of the PIA plus 134 percent of the next $Z of the PIA plus 175 percent of
the PIA greater than $X+$Y+$Z. The values X, Y, and Z are adjusted for each year of the
calculation according to the growth in economy-wide average wages. In case the spousal benefit
is eliminated for any reason, the benefits payable on the insured worker's record are subjected to
the family maximum test again, treating the spouse as though he/she were not eligible for spousal
benefits. This may result in higher benefits for children who may be eligible for dependent
benefits under the worker's record.

Reduction of Spousal Benefits for Age -- Spouses eligible for the spousal benefit may elect to
receive (may become entitled for) their benefits before normal retirement age. In this case the
spousal benefit is reduced by 25/36 of 1 percent for each month of entitlement prior to normal
retirement age. If the number of months of reduction exceeds 36 months (for example, in case of




                                               - 69 -
entitlement at age 62 when the normal retirement age is 67), then the reduction factor is 5/12 of 1
percent for every additional month of early entitlement.

Earnings Testing and Redefinition of Spousal Benefits -- If a spouse is earning above the amount
allowed by the earnings test, the spousal benefits he or she is eligible to receive will be earnings
tested according to the pre- and post-normal retirement schedule described above. If a spouse is
already collecting retirement benefits, the spousal benefit is redefined as the greater of the excess
of the spousal benefit over the spouse's own retirement benefit or zero.

Survivor Benefits (Widow(er), Father/Mother, and Children)
Eligibility-- The surviving spouse of a deceased worker is eligible for widow(er) benefits if the
widow(er) is at least age 60, is entitled (has applied for widow[er] benefits), the worker died
fully insured, and the widow(er) was married to the deceased worker for at least 9 months. The
widow(er) of a deceased worker is eligible for father/mother benefits if the widow(er) is entitled
to benefits (has applied), the worker died fully insured, the widower has in care a child of the
worker. A surviving child is eligible for child survivor benefits on the deceased worker's record
if the child is under age 18 and is entitled (an application has been filed) and the worker was
fully insured.

Survivor Benefits-- Monthly benefits equal 100 percent of the worker's PIA for a widow(er); they
equal 75 percent of the PIA for father/mother and child survivor benefits. Widow(er) and child
survivor benefits may be lower only if the family maximum applies. Widow(er)s may become
entitled to (elect to receive) survivor benefits earlier than normal retirement age, but not earlier
than age 60. In this case the reduction is 19/40 of 1 percent for each month of entitlement prior to
normal retirement age. After the widow(er) is 62, he or she is may become entitled to (elect to
receive) retirement benefits based on her own past covered earnings record. In this case the
widow(er) benefits are redefined as the excess over own retirement benefit or zero, whichever is
greater. Finally, widow(er) survivor and own retirement benefits are also subject to the earnings
test. If the deceased worker was already collecting a reduced retirement insurance benefit, the
widow(er)'s benefit cannot be greater than the reduced widow(er) benefit or the greater of 82.5
percent of the worker's PIA or the worker's own retirement benefit. If the deceased worker was
already collecting a retirement insurance benefit greater than the PIA because of delayed
retirement, the widow(er) or is granted the full dollar amount of the delayed retirement credit
over and above the (reduced) widow(er) benefit. Father/mother benefits are not similarly
augmented by delayed retirement credits that the deceased worker may have been receiving.
Father/Mother Benefits -- These benefits may be reduced if the family maximum applies or if the
father or mother is entitled to the own retirement benefit. In this case the father/mother benefit is
redefined as the excess over the father or mother’s own retirement benefit or zero, whichever is
greater. Father /mother benefits are also subject to the earnings test. On the other hand, they are
not reduced for age. For those eligible to receive both widow(er) and father/mother benefits, the
program calculates both and takes the larger benefit.

Calculation of a Deceased Worker's PIA -- The calculation of survivor benefits in the case of a
widow(er) benefits uses the larger of two alternative calculation’s of the deceased worker's PIA.



                                                - 70 -
These are the "wage indexing" method and the "re-indexing" method. Moreover, the year up to
which the worker's wages are indexed may be different depending upon whether the deceased
worker would have become age 62 before or after the widow(er) attains age 60.

The wage-indexing method -- the last year for indexing earnings is the earlier of a) the year the
worker dies minus 2 years or b) the year worker would have attained age 60. Bend point formula
dollar amounts are taken from the earlier of the year the worker dies or the year the worker
would have attained age 62. The PIA thus calculated is inflated by the CPI up to the year the
widow(er) turns age 60 (if later) to obtain the PIA value on which widower benefits would be
based. Where applicable, these benefits are then adjusted for the family maximum, reduction for
age, delayed retirement credits, and the earnings test.

The reindexing method -- The worker's original earnings are indexed up to the earlier of the year
the widow(er) attains age 58 or b) the year the worker attains age 60. The elapsed years are
computed as the number of years from 1951 (or the worker's age 22 if later) through the year the
widow(er) attains age 60. The computation years equal elapsed years minus 5 years (computation
years cannot be less than 2). Bend point formula dollar values are applied from the year the
widow(er) attains age 60. There is no subsequent indexing of the PIA for inflation.

The Sequencing of Widow(er) Benefit Calculations -- Widow(er) benefit reductions follow these
steps: First the widow(er) plus children's benefits are subjected to the family maximum. Second,
the widow(er) benefit is reduced for early entitlement (of the widow(er) prior to normal
retirement age). Third, the widow(er) benefit is compared to the widow(er) own retirement
benefit if entitled to the latter. Fourth, the widow(er) benefit is redefined as the excess over own
benefit if own benefit is positive. Finally the earnings test is applied, first to the widow(er)'s own
benefit and then to the widow(er) benefit that is in excess of own benefit. If the widow(er)
benefit is eliminated as a result of these tests, the benefits payable on the insured worker's record
are subjected to the family maximum test again, treating the widow(er) as though he/she were
not eligible for the widow(er) benefit. This procedure can potentially increase children's benefits
if the family maximum limit was binding the first time through.




                                                - 71 -
