                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            STOCK REPURCHASES IN CANADA:
                         PERFORMANCE AND STRATEGIC TRADING

                                            David Ikenberry
                                           Josef Lakonishok
                                            Theo Vermaelen

                                          Working Paper 7325
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7325


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




We appreciate the research assistance of Pricha Sethapakdi. Timothy Baikie, Special Counsel Market
Regulation for the Toronto Stock Exchange, was helpful in providing data and counsel. We also thank Dino
Mastroianni and Vinod Chandrashekaran from BARRA for their help and comments. We appreciate the
comments of Louis Chan, Ken French, Ravi Jagannathan, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Jason Karceski, Inmoo
Lee, Raghu Rau, Cliff Stephens, René Stulz, Sheridan Titman and seminar participants at the University of
Washington, University of Texas and Catholic University Leuven. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by David Ikenberry, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Stock Repurchases in Canada: Performance and Strategic Trading
David Ikenberry, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen
NBER Working Paper No. 7325
August 1999
JEL No. G14, G32

                                                ABSTRACT

        During the 1980s, U.S. firms that announced stock repurchase programs earned favorable long-run
returns. Recently, concerns have been raised regarding the robustness of these findings. This comes at a
time of explosive worldwide growth in the adoption of repurchase programs. This study provides out-of-
sample evidence for 1,060 Canadian repurchase programs announced between 1989 and 1997. As in the
U.S., the Canadian stock market seems to discount the information contained in repurchase
announcements. Value stocks announcing repurchase programs have particularly favorable returns.
Canadian law requires companies to report how many shares they repurchase on a monthly basis. We find
that managers are sensitive to mispricing as completion rates are higher in cases where undervaluation may
be a more important factor. Moreover, trades are linked to price movements; managers buy more shares
when prices fall and reduce their buying when prices rise.



David Ikenberry                                              Josef Lakonishok
Rice University                               University of Illinois
Houston, Texas 77005                                         1206 S. Sixth St.
                                                             Champaign, Illinois 61820
                                                             and NBER

Theo Vermaelen
INSEAD
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
France
1. Introduction

        In recent years, corporations have dramatically increased the amount of capital devoted to

repurchasing their own shares. In the mid-1980s, repurchase program announcements in the U.S.

amounted to roughly $25 billion per year. Between 1996 and 1998 however, more than 4,000 open

market repurchase programs were announced which, if fully completed, amount to roughly $550 billion. 1

During the first quarter of 1999 alone, Securities Data Company reports nearly 350 program

announcements totalling $40 billion. Interest in corporate repurchase programs is not limited to the U.S.

as repurchase activity worldwide has grown in recent years. Countries such as Hong Kong and Japan

recently implemented new regulations allowing companies for the first time to repurchase their shares. A

recent Goldman Sachs study (March 1999) foresees stock repurchases becoming more common in

Europe and discusses the potential impact on European equity values.

        The literature is rich with motives as to why firms might repurchase their own stock. The list

includes, for example, tax benefits, distributing excess cash and adjusting capital structure. Yet these

reasons are not as popular with managers who often suggest when announcing buyback programs that

current market prices are too low and hence their stock is an attractive investment (Dann (1983) and

Wansley, Lane, and Sarkar (1989)). Several studies report evidence consistent with this managerial story

of undervaluation. In a comprehensive examination of U.S. open market repurchase programs during the

1980s, Ikenberry, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1995) find that the market's initial response to repurchase

announcements is not complete. They report annualized abnormal performance of 2.9% over a four-year

period following the announcement. For value stocks, where a stronger case can be made for




   1
     For comparison, the NYSE reports that aggregate cash dividends paid by member firms over this period was
approximately $490 billion.

                                                       1
                                                                                                                       2

undervaluation, the annual abnormal return was 6.4% over the same post-announcement period. 2

          Although previous studies have examined hundreds of repurchase program announcements, the

history of this transaction is rather short, only becoming pervasive in the U.S. in the late 1980s.

Moreover, international evidence regarding repurchases is limited as many countries have only recently

allowed firms to repurchase stock. Thus, a degree of skepticism regarding the existing evidence on share

repurchases is warranted. As Merton (1985) suggests, we are biased toward publishing "exciting" results.

Indeed, recent papers have drawn into question the results of several studies that examine long-run stock

performance because of the sensitivity of the results to the methods used to calculate abnormal returns.3

Studies on stock repurchases have been included in these critiques.

          Given the recent growth in repurchase activity worldwide, fresh evidence on long-run

performance of repurchasing firms is of interest. While many countries now allow repurchases, the only

country outside the U.S. that has a reasonable sample at this point is Canada. Thus, we examine open

market programs announced by firms trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE). Moreover, we

utilize programs announced between 1989 and 1997, a time period that generally follows the sample

period examined in earlier U.S. studies. Our sample is comprehensive and contains 1,060 program

announcements authorizing $35 billion in repurchases. This analysis is supplemented with evidence of

long-run stock performance following the issuance of shares. Specifically, we consider Canadian

seasoned equity offerings and acquisitions that were at least partially financed with equity. A result

consistent with repurchases would show a downward drift in stock performance after an announcement

of an increase in shares outstanding.



   2
     In an earlier paper on fixed-price tender offer repurchases, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1990) also find evidence
of positive abnormal returns lasting at least two years following the announcement.

   3
       For example, Fama (1998) and Mitchell and Stafford (1997).
                                                                                                            3

        Canadian data is of particular interest, however, because firms must report each month the

number of shares they actually repurchase. This information is summarized by the exchanges and

published on a timely basis. Precise, periodic information on repurchase activity does not exist for U.S.

firms. Moreover, U.S. reporting conventions even make it difficult to obtain good estimates of overall

completion rates (Stephens and Weisbach (1998)). Our unique data allow us to accurately measure

program completion rates and examine factors that affect these managerial decisions.

        Access to monthly repurchase data allows us to study whether managers execute share

repurchases strategically in response to market movements. Managers repurchase stock for a variety of

reasons, many of which may not relate to mispricing. For example, to the extent that firms repurchase

shares to avoid dilution in earnings from the exercise of options, or use repurchases as a tax efficient

alternative to paying cash dividends, one would not expect to find a relation between price movements

and the level of repurchase activity in a given month. Also, if managers view the market as efficient, we

would not expect them to react to price movements. However, managers often mention undervaluation

as an important motive for repurchasing shares. To the extent that they believe prices deviate from their

intrinsic value, we expect to observe managers repurchasing shares more aggressively when prices are

falling. Likewise, we expect the incentive to repurchase shares to diminish after a rise in prices. Data

from Canada enable us to assess the extent to which managers trade strategically and thus should help us

better understand what motivates repurchase activity.

        We find that undervaluation appears to be just as important a consideration for repurchasing

shares in Canada as earlier findings suggest for the U.S. Using the Fama-French (1993) three-factor

model, Canadian firms repurchasing shares show abnormal performance of 0.59% per month over a

three-year period following the announcement. In the year prior to the announcement, abnormal returns

are negative, -0.35% per month. Such poor pre-announcement performance and subsequent out
                                                                                                                4

performance are consistent with undervaluation being a motivating factor for stock repurchases. A

stronger case for undervaluation as a motive for repurchasing shares can be made for value stocks. The

results are consistent with this hypothesis. Canadian value stocks that announce repurchases experience

abnormal returns of 0.76% per month whereas the comparable return for growth stocks is only 0.28% per

month.

         We also evaluate performance subsequent to an increase in shares where firms either issued

seasoned equity or acquired other firms with stock. Here, the results are again consistent with the notion

that mispricing is a factor in managerial decision making. Abnormal returns are high prior to SEOs or

equity-financed acquisitions made by TSE firms, yet subsequent abnormal return performance is

substantially negative.

         The results suggest that managers trade strategically. Price changes seem to have a major

impact on repurchase activity. Consistent with the undervaluation story, an increase in prices leads to a

reduction in the number of shares repurchased, whereas a drop in stock prices leads to a larger fraction

of shares repurchased. Completion rates are also higher for value stocks than for growth stocks.

Moreover, firms that actively repurchased shares experience only modest returns while the program was

in effect. Yet, these firms enjoy sizeable abnormal returns in subsequent years. Conversely, companies

that did not buy any shares show strikingly large excess returns while the program is in effect, yet no

evidence of positive abnormal returns in subsequent years. Overall, the results suggest that managers'

repurchase decisions are sensitive to prevailing market prices, a result consistent with the undervaluation

hypothesis.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the institutional setting surrounding

repurchase programs in Canada and also describes how we formed our sample. Section 3 reviews the

methodology used to evaluate long-run performance. Section 4 provides descriptive information regarding

sample programs and documents the short-run market reaction to repurchase announcements. Section 5
                                                                                                                      5

presents evidence on subsequent long-run performance. Section 6 reports evidence on program

repurchase completion rates and the extent to which managers execute repurchase programs

strategically. Section 7 further examines the strategic nature of repurchase decisions by examining long-

run performance conditional on various levels of repurchase activity. Section 8 provides results for the

opposing case where managers issue equity either through SEOs or stock-financed acquisitions.

Concluding remarks are provided in section 9.



2. Repurchases in Canada

a. Institutional aspects of repurchases in Canada

          The regulatory environment affecting Canadian open market repurchase programs differs from

that in the U.S. In Canada, these programs are referred to as "Normal Course Issuer Bids." The primary

oversight mechanism for these programs is provided by the exchange where the company's stock trades.

Unlike U.S. firms, Canadian firms must receive approval from the exchange before initiating a repurchase

program. The application process to repurchase stock at the TSE is generally straightforward and is

usually completed in a limited number of days. As in the U.S., these programs are the most common

mechanism firms use to repurchase shares.4 Once authorized, programs last one year and are limited to

the maximum of either 10% of public float or 5% of shares outstanding. Thus, in many cases, the number

of authorized shares exceeds 5% of the share base.

          TSE rules also govern how listed firms execute their repurchase programs.5 Briefly, these rules




   4
      Fixed-price tender offers, referred to as "Substantial Issuer Bids," are also permitted in Canada and do not have
limits on the amount of stock that can be repurchased. As in the U.S., this form of repurchase is not common.
Dutch-auction tender offers, though permitted by law, have only recently occurred in Canada. In this study, we only
examine repurchase programs executed via open market transactions, or Normal Course Issuer Bids.

   5
       See Part 28 of the Policies of the Toronto Stock Exchange.
                                                                                                                      6

state that TSE firms may commence repurchasing stock two days after receiving approval from the TSE.

Programs must be executed through a single broker. Cumulative repurchases over the trailing 30

calendar days must not exceed 2% of the outstanding shares. Firms are also restricted from repurchasing

shares on an up-tick. Similar rules exist in the U.S. 6

b. The Sample

         We obtained the complete record of common stock repurchase programs announced by TSE-

listed firms between 1989 and 1997. Information regarding all authorized repurchase programs is

published periodically in The Daily Record, a TSE publication. Once a month, the TSE publishes a

comprehensive overview of the status of all authorized programs including the program's size, termination

date, the number of share purchased in the previous month (including those purchased on other

exchanges) and the total shares repurchased to date in the program. During this time period, 1,159

program authorizations were announced by TSE firms.

         Monthly stock returns were obtained from the TSE/University of Western Ontario database, a

dataset free of survivor bias. However, our returns from this database end in December 1995. Thus,

from January 1996 to December 1998, monthly returns were obtained from Compustat and Datastream.

From these sources, we located returns for 1,060 repurchase programs.

         Some of our analysis requires fundamental information, specifically the book-to-market ratio.

Compustat was our primary source for this information. However, Compustat's coverage of Canadian

firms is not complete. In addition, Canadian firms that are de-listed are not included in Compustat's


   6
     U.S. securities law governing stock repurchases has evolved gradually, adopting its present form in 1984 when
Congress adopted S.E.C. Rule 10b-18, a "safe-harbor" provision relating to stock repurchases. This rule does not
impose strict limits as is the case in Canada, but rather provides firms protection from legal liability for price
manipulation when repurchasing stock if firms execute repurchase trades within certain limitations relating to price,
volume and time-of-day. These provisions are not statutory rules. Companies often voluntarily repurchase shares
outside of these limits (Cook, Krigman and Leach, 1997). Moreover, Rule 10b-18 does not apply to all types of
repurchase transactions including, for example, pension-plan related (ERISA) trades. In addition, at certain times (for
example, following the crash of 1987), some of the Rule 10b-18 limitations are lifted.
                                                                                                              7

research file. For these cases, we obtained book-equity values from a special file prepared for us by

Standard and Poor's. As a further step, we hand collected missing book-equity values from Moody's

International Manuals. From these sources, book-to-market ratios were obtained for 86% of our sample.

3. Methodology

a. Portfolio formation

        Our examination of long-run performance focuses on portfolio returns produced in calendar-time.

Several recent papers report evidence based on this approach including Ikenberry, Lakonishok and

Vermaelen (1995), Loughran and Ritter (1995), Womack (1996) and Mitchell and Stafford (1997). To

use this approach, we calculate monthly returns in calendar-time for a portfolio of repurchase firms.

Firms are added to the portfolio at the beginning of the month following their repurchase announcement

and retained for the next three years or until the stock no longer trades. At the beginning of each month,

the portfolio is rebalanced so that each stock receives the same weight. Over time, new companies enter

the portfolio and old companies leave, causing the number of stocks in the portfolio to vary. In some

months, the number of stocks in the portfolio is small. To reduce the impact of idiosyncratic noise,

particularly when we partition our dataset into various sub-samples, months where a portfolio contains six

stocks or less are dropped from our analysis.

        The portfolio described above assumes that repurchase firms are held for three years, beginning

in the month following the announcement. In addition to this strategy, we calculate portfolio returns for

other investment horizons including year 1, year 2 and year 3 following the announcement. For example,

for the year 1 portfolio, a monthly time-series of returns is calculated for firms that announced a program

in the previous 12 months. Similarly, we also report performance for year -1.

b. Benchmark models and index returns

        Using the calendar-time portfolio approach, we estimate abnormal performance using two
                                                                                                                            8

benchmarks. We first evaluate performance using a standard one-factor, CAPM approach. Here, we

regress the time-series of monthly excess returns to the repurchase portfolio on excess market returns:

                                               rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + åt                                    (1)

where rp,t is the monthly return to a given calendar-time portfolio. The risk-free return, rf,t, is the return to

the 30-day Canadian government bill. The return to the TSE Index is our market return, rm,t . Abnormal

performance is measured by á.

        The focus of our performance analysis relies on the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model:

                 rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t ) + â s m l(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt   (2)

The first term in equation (2) controls for general market movements in a given month t. The last two

terms in equation (2) are value/growth and size factors. These factors are calculated using BARRA's

Canadian style returns for small-cap-value stocks, small-cap-growth stocks, large-cap-value stocks and

large-cap-growth stocks.7 For its Canadian indices, BARRA defines its large-cap universe as the largest

200 firms trading on the TSE. The next largest 300 TSE firms define the small-cap universe. These two

groups are each subdivided into growth and value portfolios. BARRA accomplishes this by calculating a

measure that gives two-thirds weight to the market-to-book ratio and one-third weight to dividend yield.

The small-cap and large-cap portfolios are sorted on this measure and split into two groups so that the

value and growth portfolios have the same total market capitalization. For the three-factor model above,

the book-to-market factor is defined as the average return for BARRA's two value portfolios (large-cap-

value and small-cap-value) minus the average return to BARRA's two growth portfolios (large-cap-

growth and small-cap-growth). This factor is labeled as the value minus growth portfolio, or vmg.


   7
     BARRA is a U.S.-based firm that provides software and information services to investment managers, pension
fund consultants, plans sponsors and others in the investment community. The style indices used in this study
were obtained from BARRA's Canadian internet site: www.barra.ca. Although not reported in this paper, we
examined the behavior of the three-factor model using BARRA style indices. Overall, the model appears to work well
in Canada.
                                                                                                                 9

Similarly, the size factor is obtained by taking the average return of BARRA's two small-cap portfolios

(small-cap, value and small-cap, growth) and subtracting the average return of BARRA's two large-cap

portfolios (large-cap-value and large-cap- growth). This factor is labeled as small minus large, or sml.

BARRA updates these style indices in January and July of each year. These series start in July of 1990.

Thus while we include repurchase programs announced during 1989 and the first half of 1990, we do not

begin measuring excess performance until July 1990. 8



4. The market reaction to open market share repurchase announcements

        Panel A of Table 1 reports summary statistics for our repurchase sample. Looking at all years

together, the 1,060 programs in our sample, if fully completed, amount to $35.6 billion. The mean program

is for 5.22% of shares outstanding, similar in magnitude to the typical open market repurchase program in

the U.S. The mean market reaction to open market programs in our sample is modest. The average

abnormal return relative to the TSE index in the month the program is announced is 0.93%.9 This is

somewhat less that the market reaction observed for U.S. announcements.

        Panel B reports the mean market reaction for various program sizes. A substantial number of

programs cluster right at 5% of shares outstanding. Thus, we report evidence for all programs announced

for between 4.5% and 5.5% of the share base. Those programs below 4.5% or above 5.5% are reported



   8
      To maximize the number of repurchase firms in our sample, we begin recording repurchase announcements in
January 1989, the first month for which copies of The Daily Record were available from the TSE archives. We begin
measuring performance in July 1990 when the BARRA style factors are available. Of course, an alternative to using
BARRA factors would be to construct our own factors, thus allowing us to measure performance for 18 more months
prior to July 1990. While possible, the portfolios would have less seasoning and, thus, be less populated and more
noisy. Moreover, for much of the 1990 to 1998 period, BARRA calculates and reports its style factors in real-time,
thus reducing concerns over potential biases.

   9
     As a check, we also calculated the market reaction adjusting for book-to-market and size effects. Using
Ibbotson's (1975) RATS technique, the market reaction is nearly the same as obtained using the simple market-
adjusted approach, 1.05%.
                                                                                                             10

in two separate groups. There is little apparent difference in the market reaction between large and small

programs. The mean abnormal return for programs between 0 and 4.5% of shares outstanding is 0.90%.

For the largest programs in our sample, those for more than 5.5% of shares outstanding, the mean market

reaction is slightly lower, 0.69%.

        In spite of managers' frequent claims of undervaluation when announcing a repurchase program,

the announcement return is small. This is consistent with managers either being overly optimistic relative

to the market about their firm's value or, alternatively, the market being wrong and thus underreacting to

the repurchase signal. An investigation of the long-term performance of repurchasing firms is a way to

sort out the two competing hypotheses.




5. The long-term performance of Canadian open market repurchasing firms

a. The general case

        In Table 2, we report performance of the repurchase strategy using both one-factor and three-

factor models. Assuming a three-year holding period, we observe abnormal performance using the one-

factor model of 0.62% per month (t = 2.70). Using a two-year holding period, our estimate of abnormal

performance is slightly higher, 0.70% per month (t = 2.90). Focusing on one-year holding periods,

abnormal performance is positive in each of the three years following the announcement.

        After controlling for both size and book-to-market using the three-factor model, the results are

generally the same. The three-year holding period strategy shows abnormal performance of 0.59% per

month (t = 4.11) or roughly 7% per year. In this study, the similarity between the one- and three-factor

models is not unexpected given the relatively small premiums associated with the additional two factors.
                                                                                                           11

The mean return on the vmg factor during our sample period was less than 1.5% per year while the mean

return to the sml factor was nearly zero, -0.25% per year. Given these modest premiums, alternative

approaches to adjust for size and value-growth should not substantially change the results.

        A calendar-time approach weighs each month equally in the analysis even though the number of

companies in the portfolio is not the same over time. Thus, in Table 3, we report evidence using an event-

time methodology where each announcement receives the same weight. Here, we apply Ibbotson's

Returns Across Time and Securities (RATS) procedure (1975) and, as before, measure abnormal

performance using a three-factor model. Using this procedure, we continue to observe evidence of

positive abnormal returns. After three years, the total cumulative abnormal return is 21.40% (t = 6.87).

This translates to an abnormal return of 0.59% per month, a result which exactly matches that obtained

using the calendar-time approach.

        To examine the robustness of our results, we performed additional tests in the context of the

calendar-time approach. We estimated abnormal performance using weighted least-squares to deal with

the problem of an uneven number of securities in the portfolio over time. We also calculated

performance using a value-weighted portfolio strategy. In both cases, the results were similar to our basic

approach.

b. Cross-sectional differences in long-run performance: value versus growth

        One way to sort out the different motivations managers have for repurchasing shares is to

consider the book-to-market ratio. Managers in growth firms, with relatively low book-to-market ratios,

may repurchase shares for a variety of reasons such as avoiding dilution of earnings. For value

companies where book-to-market ratios are relatively high, undervaluation may be a more important

motivating factor.

        Thus, in June of each year, we obtain book-to-market ratios (assuming a three-month reporting
                                                                                                                 12

delay following fiscal year-end for book-equity values) for all TSE-listed firms for which we have data.

This universe is sorted each year by book-to-market ratio. Those firms with above median book-to-

market ratios are called value stocks, while those with below average ratios are labeled growth stocks.

For each of these two groups, we estimate long-run performance using the calendar-time approach, the

results of which are reported in Table 4.

        Value companies announcing a repurchase program substantially outperform growth companies.

Assuming a three-year holding period, the abnormal return for value stocks using the three-factor model is

0.76% per month or 9% per year. For growth stocks, the comparable return is less than half this amount,

0.28% per month. This spread between value and growth firms in Canada announcing buybacks is

consistent with the pattern observed for U.S. firms (Ikenberry, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1995)).

        Prior to the announcement, we also see evidence consistent with the undervaluation story. 10

Although, value firms perform well subsequent to a program announcement, performance in the prior year

is poor; -0.91% per month (t=-3.80). Growth firms, on the other hand, perform well in the year prior to

the announcement with abnormal performance of 0.51% per month (t=2.19).



6. Actual share repurchase activity in Canada

a) The evolution of repurchase activity over time and completion rates

        Canadian law differs from the U.S. in that the progress of all authorized repurchase programs is

reported each month regardless of whether firms are buying shares or not. This information is

summarized in Table 5. Panel A reports the distribution of repurchase completion rates. The fraction of

shares actually repurchased is surprisingly low. At termination of the program, roughly a quarter of the



   10
      Similar evidence of negative abnormal returns prior to repurchase announcements is reported by Vermaelen
(1981) and Comment and Jarrell (1991).
                                                                                                                  13

firms did not repurchase any shares. Less than 5% of the firms fully complete their repurchase program.

Overall, the mean completion rate is 28.6%. For comparison, Stephens and Weisbach (1998) report one-

year completion rates ranging between 46% and 75% for a sample of U.S. programs announced between

1981 and 1995. 11

         Panel B reports cumulative repurchase activity at various points during the program. This is

reported for the overall sample and for various sub-samples. Slightly less than half of all repurchase

activity occurs during months 0 to 3. The completion rate in Canada has increased over time. In the first

two years, it was 21.4% whereas in the last two years it increased to 35.1%. Perhaps a more interesting

result relates to the difference in completion rates between value and growth stocks. Value stocks have a

higher completion rate, 30.9%, in comparison to growth stocks, 25.1%. Extreme value stocks, defined as

companies in the top book-to-market decile, have an even higher completion rate of 37.7%. On the other

hand, extreme growth stocks have an average completion rate of only 19.6%. The difference in

completion rates between value and growth firms, both overall as well as in extreme cases, is significant

at traditional confidence levels.

b) The determinants of completion rates and strategic trading

         Next, we consider in greater detail factors that influence repurchase completion rates. If

undervaluation is an important reason leading managers to repurchase stock, one would expect price

movements during the program to be an important consideration. A run-up in stock prices after a

repurchase announcement would seemingly diminish the attractiveness of buying shares. Conversely, a

drop in prices would provide an increased incentive to buy stock. Thus, the first factor we consider is the

excess stock return during the year of the program relative to the TSE index, which we label as Year 1



   11
       Because U.S. firms are not required to disclose repurchase activity directly, Stephens and Weisbach (1998) use
a variety of approaches to estimate completion rates for U.S. stocks.
                                                                                                             14

Excess Return.

        The next two variables considered are the firm's Book-to-Market Decile Rank and Size Decile

Rank compared to all TSE firms as of the previous June. Earlier, we observed that repurchasing firms

with high book-to-market ratios experienced higher post-announcement abnormal returns compared to

firms with lower ratios, a result consistent with undervaluation. If undervaluation is an important motive

for buybacks in value companies, we expect them to have higher completion rates compared to growth

stocks where the motives for buying stock are more complicated. We saw traces of this behavior earlier

in Table 5. The variable Size Decile Rank also relates to the undervaluation hypothesis. Evidence

suggests that smaller firms are less efficiently priced. Thus, one might expect to see higher completion

rates among smaller firms in comparison to larger, more efficiently priced firms.

        Two additional control variables are included in the regressions reported in Table 6. The dummy

variable, Repeat, is assigned a value of one if the company announced a repurchase within the past 15

months. Our sample contains quite a few firms with consecutive program announcements, including

Seagrams for example. It is possible that managers in these companies are behaving opportunistically

(Ikenberry and Vermaelen (1996)) and will attempt to buy shares only if prices fall. Thus, lower

completion rates are expected from such bargain-hunter like companies. A similar rationale exists for the

second control variable, Program Size, the percentage of outstanding shares authorized for repurchase, is

similar. Some firms may authorize program amounts than are greater than they initially intend to buy,

completing the full program only if prices fall. Thus, we expect to find lower completion rates for large

authorizations.

        The regression evidence reported in Table 6 is generally consistent with the undervaluation story.

The coefficient for Year 1 Excess Return is negative suggesting greater repurchase activity as prices fall.

The impact of book-to-market is positive as expected, even after controlling for other factors. Moreover,
                                                                                                                 15

given that the unconditional completion rate is 28.6%, the impact of book-to-market is material. For

example, a move from the lowest to the highest book-to-market decile changes the estimated completion

rate by 10.9% (0.0121 x 9). Similarly, size is also important; a move from the highest to lowest size decile

rank increases the expected completion rate by 6.0% (-0.0067 x -9). These results suggest that

completion rates depend on whether managers perceive their stock to be undervalued. The results also

suggest that companies with repeat announcements and those that authorized large programs end up

buying less.

        To further investigate the possibility of strategic repurchase behavior by managers, we focus on

month to month repurchase activity. Such data allow us to assess the extent to which managers trade in

response to price movements before, during and subsequent to a given month. Thus, we estimate

equation (3):



            Boughti,t = á + â 1 •Repeati + â 2 •Program Size i + â 3 •Size Ranki + â 4 •B/M Ranki +

                 â 5 •Excess Returni;t-1,t-k + â 6 •Excess Returni;t + â 7 •Excess Returni;t+1,t+k               (3)



where Boughti,t is the portion of the program firm i repurchased in month t. Our key variables of interest

are price changes in the current month t measured relative to the TSE index, Excess Returni;t , and

similarly, excess returns preceding and following month t, Excess Returni:t-1,t-k and Excess Returni:t+1,t+k ,

respectively. We consider three horizons for these leading and trailing windows: one month, three months

and six months. As in Table 6, we control for size, book-to-market, program size and repeat.12

Evidence is reported in Table 7 for all months in the program pooled together as well as for the first-half



   12
      Months where a firm had already purchased 90% or more of its authorized program are eliminated from this
analysis as these programs are essentially completed.
                                                                                                            16

and second-half of the program. Overall, managers trade strategically in response to market movements;

as prices fall, managers respond by buying more stock. This is true for price movements both in the

current month and in preceding months. In addition, these regression coefficients are highly significant.

Regression coefficients for each of the forward excess return horizons are essentially zero indicating the

difficulty in predicting future stock prices over relatively short horizons.

        Managers respond differently to stock price movements in the first half versus second half of the

program. Generally speaking, response coefficients for both concurrent and past excess returns in

months 7 to 12 are double that observed in months 0 to 6. Moreover, coefficient estimates from this later

period are quite material. For example, the expected increase in the monthly completion rate for a

company with an excess market return of -50% over the previous 3 months and a concurrent excess

monthly return of -20% is roughly 1%. Given that the unconditional repurchase rate in months 7 to 12 is

roughly 1.6% per month, such a move in stock prices translates to roughly a 65% increase in the rate of

repurchase activity. One reason for this increased sensitivity is because early in the program, the

possibility to postpone repurchases to later months exists. Later in the program, this option begins to

expire. As a result, repurchase activity becomes more sensitive to price movements.

        Overall, these results point to underpricing as a motivating factor for managers to repurchase

shares. If non-valuation reasons had a predominant effect on repurchase activity, one would not expect

to see such behavior. For example, if managers thought that the market efficiently priced their stock and

were using repurchases as means of returning capital to shareholders in lieu of a dividend, we would not

expect to see repurchase activity linked to market movements. However, this not the case. We see

rather substantial swings in repurchase levels associated with past and current market movements. These

results suggest that managers are indeed cognizant of market prices and execute trades accordingly.
                                                                                                            17

7. Long-term performance conditional on program completion

          In this section, we further investigate the role of undervaluation and the extent to which managers

strategically repurchase stock by examining performance using the three-factor model conditional on

completion rates. If managers are repurchasing strategically, we expect them to buy more shares as

prices decline. Similarly, we expect them to repurchases fewer shares as prices rise and mispricing

dissipates. Thus, in Table 8, we report evidence for three scenarios. First, we consider cases where

firms repurchased no shares at all after authorizing a program. The remaining programs are sorted into

two groups; those cases where managers bought less than 30% versus where they were more aggressive

and bought more than 30% of the authorized amount.

          Focusing on abnormal performance in year 1, noticeable differences are observed across the

three groups. For cases where no shares were repurchased, abnormal performance is 0.96% per month

(t = 2.99) or nearly 12% per year. Yet, abnormal performance in year 1 decreases as we move to cases

where firms were active buyers. For those completing more than 30% of their program, the abnormal

monthly return is 0.22% per month (t=1.07).

          Interestingly, after the programs have expired, there is no evidence of abnormal performance in

cases where no shares were repurchased. Yet, in cases where companies did repurchase shares,

substantial abnormal returns are observed in years 2 and 3 after the program is over. This pattern in

returns is consistent with evidence reported earlier and suggests that managers are sensitive to stock

prices.

          In Table 9, we provide one last piece of evidence of strategic trading behavior by focusing on

trading during the last-half of the repurchase program. We partition our sample into two groups:

companies that bought shares in the last six months of the program versus companies that had no
                                                                                                                  18

repurchase activity during this period. 13 For cases where firms were active buyers late in the program,

we expect to see relatively low return performance during months 7 to 12, followed by high abnormal

returns in years 2 to 3. Conversely for those cases where no shares were bought after month 6, we

expect to see higher abnormal performance in months 7 to 12 and comparatively modest returns in years

2 to 3.

          For both groups, abnormal returns during months 1 to 6 are similar; 0.47% per month in cases of

no further buying and 0.56% in cases of at least some further buying. However, abnormal performance

between the two groups diverges as expected in months 7 to 12. Firms that purchased no shares during

this period report abnormal performance of 1.14% per month(t=2.98). Yet firms which did buy shares

during this period have essentially no abnormal performance, -0.09% (t=-0.28). Moreover, if we look at

abnormal returns subsequent to the repurchase program in years 2 and 3, we see substantial excess

performance in cases where firms were buying in months 7 to 12 of 0.87% per month (t=3.89) compared

to cases where no further buying occurred, 0.26% (t=1.18).

          In short, the evidence suggests that managers do appear to repurchase shares in response to

undervaluation. Moreover, managers seem to execute their trades strategically and are sensitive to price

movements.



8. A robustness check: The long-term performance Canadian equity issuances

          As a final check, we examine cases where Canadian firms issued shares. A result consistent

with the repurchase evidence would show a downward drift in stock prices subsequent to an issuance of

shares. We look at firms that issued seasoned equity or issued shares to finance acquisitions. Several


   13
       Here, only companies which bought less than 15% of their total program by month 6 are included. This allows
us to focus on cases where the vast majority of the program remains available for repurchase during the last half of
the program. Sample sizes for the repurchase and no repurchase groups are 259 and 399, respectively.
                                                                                                                     19

studies using U.S. data report a downward drift following seasoned equity offerings, including Loughran

and Ritter (1995) and (1998) and Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995). Following acquisitions by U.S. firms,

papers such as Agrawal, Jaffe and Mandelker (1992) and Rau and Vermaelen (1998) also report a

deterioration in performance.

         Our sample was obtained from Securities Data Co. and covers the period 1989 to 1995. For both

offerings and acquisitions, we limit our sample to cases where the transaction involved at least $10 million.

Moreover, because of our focus on the issuance of equity, we remove acquisitions where stock comprised

less than one-third of the financing in the transaction. Over our sample period, there were 134 offerings

and 27 acquisitions for which we could obtain return data.14

         Table 10 reports long-run abnormal performance using the three-factor model for offerings and

stock acquisitions together as well as separately. For the two events combined, abnormal performance

during the three-year post-announcement period is -0.54% per month (t = -2.60). This is similar, though

opposite in sign, to those cases where managers are repurchasing shares (0.59% per month). Prior to the

announcement, we see positive and significant abnormal performance, 1.11% per month (t = 1.98). This

compares with negative abnormal performance prior to the announcement of a stock repurchase.

Looking at equity offerings and acquisitions separately, the results are consistent with the overall sample.

For equity offerings, the results are more dramatic. Prior to the announcement, abnormal returns are

higher in comparison to acquisitions. Following the announcement, abnormal performance is

comparatively lower.

         Overall, this evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that managers' decisions to expand or

contract the firm's equity base depend on the market valuation of the stock. In cases where prices



   14
      Securities Data reports many more acquisitions than included here. Nearly all of these deals were cash deals
or involved the acquisition of very small firms.
                                                                                                       20

appear to be cheap, managers tend to repurchase shares. Conversely, when prices are high, managers

tend to issue shares.



9. Conclusions

        Stock repurchases are an important corporate event and have been announced with increasing

frequency in recent years. In the U.S. between 1996 to 1998, companies announced nearly 4,000

repurchase programs amounting to $550 billion. This trend is apparent worldwide as many countries have

recently adopted new laws allowing firms to repurchase stock. Earlier research reports evidence of

abnormal returns following open market repurchase announcements made by U.S. firms in the 1980s,

suggesting underreaction by markets. In this paper, we provide out-of-sample evidence by focusing on

repurchases announced by Canadian firms during the 1990s.

        The Canadian experience is similar to the earlier evidence obtained for U.S. buybacks. The initial

market reaction to repurchase programs is small; the abnormal return is less than 1% in the

announcement month. The market, on average, seems to underestimate the information contained in

repurchase announcements. Using a three-factor model, abnormal performance over a three-year

holding period is about 7% per year. For comparison, we also examine cases where Canadian firms

issued shares. Consistent with well-documented findings in the U.S., long-run abnormal stock returns for

these cases are negative.

        Of course, undervaluation is not the only motive managers have for repurchasing stock. Other

considerations may also be at work. However, better long-run performance is expected from

repurchases that are driven more by undervaluation than by other motives. For example, one might

expect undervaluation to be a more important factor for value stocks choosing to buy back shares than for

growth stocks. Our results are consistent with this hypothesis. Companies with high book-to-market
                                                                                                             21

ratios that announced a repurchase program tend to experience higher post-announcement abnormal

returns than low book-to-market firms.

        Aside from providing out-of-sample evidence on stock returns, repurchases in Canada are

particularly interesting to study because of the legal requirement that firms report their trading activity on

a monthly basis. These unique data enable us to better understand what drives repurchases. If managers

believe that markets are efficient, we would not expect to see price changes impact trading activity.

However, the evidence suggests otherwise. Completion rates are higher in cases where undervaluation

may have been a primary motive for the repurchase, such as in value stocks and small-cap stocks, for

example. Moreover, monthly trading activity depends on price changes, suggesting that managers behave

strategically. When prices rise, managers tend to buy fewer shares whereas a drop in prices triggers an

increase in repurchase activity. This sensitivity to stock prices suggests that perceived undervaluation by

managers is an important consideration for buybacks.
                                            REFERENCES

Agrawal, Anup, Jeffrey F. Jaffe and Gershon N. Mandelker, 1992, The post-merger performance of
   acquiring firms in acquisitions: A re-examination of an anomaly, Journal of Finance 47, 1605-1621.

Comment, Robert and Gregg A. Jarrell, 1991, The relative signalling power of Dutch auction and fixed
   price tender offers and open market share repurchases, Journal of Finance 46, 1243-1271.

Cook, Douglas O. and Laurie Krigman and J. Chris Leach, 1997, Safe-harbor or smoke screen?
   Compliance and disclosure under SEC rule 10b-18, University of Colorado working paper.

Dann, Larry Y., 1983, Is your common stock really worth buying back?, Directors & Boards 7, no. 4,
   23-29.

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
   Financial Economics 49, 283-306.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
   Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Goldman Sachs Investment Research, Special Topic: Europe uses its balance sheet, Europe/UK
Portfolio Strategy, March 12, 1999.

Ibbotson, Roger G., 1975, Price performance of common stock new issues, Journal of Financial
    Economics 2, 235-272.

Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open market
    share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.

Ikenberry, David and Theo Vermaelen, 1996, The option to repurchase stock, Financial Management
    25, no. 4, (Winter), 9-24.

Lakonishok, Josef and Theo Vermaelen, 1990, Anomalous price behavior around repurchase tender
   offers, Journal of Finance 45, 455-477.

Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.

Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 1998, Uniformly least powerful tests of market efficiency, University of
   Florida working paper.

Merton, Robert, 1985, On the current state of stock market rationality hypothesis, unpublished working
   paper, #1717-85.

Mitchell, Mark L. and Erik Stafford, 1997, Managerial decisions and long-term stock price performance,
   University of Chicago working paper #453.

Rau, P. Raghavendra and Theo Vermaelen, 1998, Glamour, value and the post-acquisition performance of
   acquiring firms, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 223-253.

Spiess, D. Katherine and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock returns
    following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-267.

Stephens, Cliff and Weisbach, M., 1998, Actual share reacquisitions in open-market repurchase programs,
    Journal of Finance 53, 313-333.

Vermaelen, Theo, 1981, Common stock repurchases and market signalling, Journal of Financial
   Economics 9, 139-183.

Wansley, James W., William R. Lane and Salil Sarkar, 1989, Management's view of share repurchase
  and tender premiums, Financial Management 18, 97-110.

Womack, Kent, 1996, Do brokerage analysts' recommendations have investment value?, Journal of
  Finance 51, 137-167.
</ref_section>
                                                   Table 1

                                        Summary Information for
                                 Open Market Stock Repurchase Programs
                                      Announced by TSE-listed Firms


This table reports summary information for sample firms listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange that
announced an open market stock repurchase program (normal course issuer bid) during the period
1989 to 1997. Reported are the number of firms, the mean percentage of outstanding shares
announced for repurchase, the cumulative dollar amount (Canadian $ million), the mean abnormal
announcement return and its associated t-statistic. The mean abnormal announcement return is
the average total return for sample firms in the announcement month adjusted for the respective
TSE index total return. Panel A reports this summary information by year. Panel B reports it by
program size.


        Panel A: By Year                                           Mean
                                      Mean %                  Abnormal
                                     Announced               Announcement
                                      for Dollar     Return
        Year               n         Repurchase       Amount         (%)        t-stat

        1989               106          5.54          3,983.5         1.27      (1.60)
        1990               144          5.32          5,136.8         1.20      (1.16)
        1991                92          5.10          1,715.1         2.29      (1.33)
        1992                79          4.95          1,200.4         3.87      (2.85)
        1993                62          5.05          1,458.7         2.23      (1.29)
        1994               110          5.22          2,755.1        -1.71     (-1.41)
        1995               166          5.34          3,896.3         0.14      (0.15)
        1996               129          4.98          5,828.8         0.18      (0.22)
        1997               172          5.26          9,660.3         0.96      (0.78)

        All              1,060          5.22         35,635.0         0.93      (2.36)



        Panel B: By Program Size

        Less than 4.5%     194          2.58          8,864.5         0.90      (1.21)

        4.5 to 5.5%        603          4.98         15,662.1         1.05      (1.94)

        More than 5.5% 263              7.72         11,348.4         0.69      (0.83)


        All              1,060          5.22         35,635.0         0.93      (2.36)
                                                                                                    Table 2

                                                                    Long-run Performance of TSE-listed Firms
                                                               Announcing Open Market Stock Repurchase Programs


Portfolios are formed in calendar time for TSE-listed firms announcing an open market stock repurchase program. As time proceeds, firms are introduced to a
portfolio at various points relative to the announcement month. For example, for the portfolio labeled year 1, firms are included in the portfolio at the beginning of
the month following the announcement (month 1) and remain in the portfolio until month 12. Portfolios are also formed for year 2 (months 13 to 24), year 3
(months 25 to 36), years 1 to 2 (months 1 to 24), years 1 to 3 (months 1 to 36) and year -1 (months -12 to -1). Excess performance (in %) is measured using both a
one-factor CAPM approach and a three-factor model as suggested by Fama and French (1993):

                                                                                      rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + åt

                                                         rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

where rp,t - rf,t is the excess portfolio return in month t, (rm,t - rf,t) is the monthly excess return to the TSE. In the three-factor model, (rsmall,t - rlarge,t) and (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t)
are size and book-to-market factors respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and small-cap-growth style
indices defined by BARRA using 500 TSE-listed firms. The value minus growth factor is calculated by taking the difference between the average small-cap-value
and large-cap-value indices and the average small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus large factor is calculated by differencing
the average small-cap-value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-growth indices. Calendar-time portfolios are
constructed beginning July 1990 and ending December 1998. Months where the portfolios contained 6 or fewer stocks are ignored. t-statistics are provided in
parentheses and test the hypothesis that the parameter value is zero, except for â m where the hypothesis test value is 1.0.


                     Year -1                    Year 1              Year 2                   Year 3                    Years 1 to 2              Years 1 to 3

All                 á       -0.100    (-0.39)                     0.700 (2.98)                   0.693 (2.58)                    0.575 (2.03)                   0.695 (2.90)        0.616 (2.70)
Firms              âm         0.82    (-2.34)                      0.79 (-3.57)                   0.77 (-3.46)                    0.75 (-3.65)                   0.78 (-3.69)        0.78 (-3.98)
                   R2           .57                                  .65                            .58                             .55                            .64                 .66

                    á       -0.348 (-2.09)                        0.671 (4.25)                   0.671      (3.69)               0.498     (2.02)               0.669      (4.44)   0.587      (4.11)
                   âm         0.93 (-1.43)                         0.89 (-2.65)                   0.87     (-2.70)                0.85    (-2.27)                0.88     (-3.01)    0.88     (-3.35)
                 â vmg        0.01 (0.12)                          0.05 (0.68)                   -0.01     (-0.12)                0.08     (0.65)                0.02      (0.30)    0.05      (0.72)
                  â sml       0.77 (10.07)                         0.70 (10.53)                   0.78    (10.11)                 0.59     (5.33)                0.74    (11.66)     0.72    (11.94)
                    R2          .83                                  .84                            .81                             .66                            .86                 .86
                                                                       Table 3

                             Abnormal Performance for TSE-listed Repurchases
                                         Estimated Using RATS

Monthly returns (in %) for sample firms are aligned in event-time, where month 0 represents the announcement
month. Abnormal performance is measured monthly using Ibbotson's (1975) Returns Across Time and Securities, or
RATS, methodology and applying the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model:

                           ri,t - rf,t = á t + â t(rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg,t(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml,t(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

Here, ri,t - rf,t is the excess return to firm i in month t. For that same month, (rm,t - rf,t) is the excess return to the TSE,
(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) is the return for the size factor and (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) is the return to the book-to-market factor,
respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and small-cap-growth
indices defined by BARRA using the 500 firms included in the TSE index. The value minus growth factor is
calculated by taking the difference between the average small-cap-value and large-cap-value indices and the average
small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus large factor is calculated by differencing
the average small-cap-value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-growth
indices. Using this approach, á t is our estimate of abnormal return (AR) which is estimated each month and
cumulated over time (CAR).


                                  Month            AR     t-stat                       CAR           t-stat
                                     1               1.49        (2.32)                               1.49                (1.89)
                                     2               0.94        (1.80)                               2.43                (2.57)
                                     3               0.36        (0.76)                               2.79                (2.64)
                                     4               0.19        (0.47)                               2.98                (2.63)
                                     5               0.75        (1.85)                               3.73                (3.10)
                                     6              -0.14       (-0.33)                               3.59                (2.83)

                                         9             0.31              (0.65)                       5.37                (3.63)
                                        12             0.65              (1.59)                       7.27                (4.39)
                                        15             0.81              (1.78)                       9.09                (4.97)
                                        18             0.26              (0.55)                      10.81                (5.45)
                                        21             0.29              (0.63)                      13.20                (6.14)
                                        24             0.05              (0.11)                      14.91                (6.50)
                                        27             1.15              (1.26)                      17.91                (6.80)
                                        30            -0.49             (-1.00)                      18.59                (6.71)
                                        33             0.58              (1.16)                      19.48                (6.72)
                                        36            -0.01             (-0.01)                      21.40                (6.87)
                                                                                                    Table 4

                                                                            Abnormal Long-run Performance
                                                                     for Value versus Growth Repurchase Programs

Portfolios are formed in calendar time for TSE-listed firms that announce an open market stock repurchase program. In June of each year, value and growth cut-
off values are determined by sorting TSE-listed stocks into two groups on the basis of book-to-market. Those with relatively low book-to-market ratios are
labeled Growth Stocks while the rest are labeled Value Stocks. Excess performance (in %) is measured using a three-factor model:

                                                         rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

where rp,t - rf,t is the excess portfolio return in month t, (rm,t - rf,t) is the monthly excess return to the TSE. In the three-factor model, (rsmall,t - rlarge,t) and (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t)
are size and book-to-market factors, respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and small-cap-growth style
indices defined by BARRA using 500 TSE-listed firms. The value minus growth factor is calculated by taking the difference between the average small-cap-value
and large-cap-value indices and the small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus large factor is calculated by differencing the
average small-cap-value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-growth indices. Calendar-time portfolios are constructed
beginning July 1990 and ending December 1998. Months where the portfolios contained 6 or fewer stocks are ignored. t-statistics are provided in parentheses
and test the hypothesis that the parameter value is zero, except for â m where the hypothesis test value is 1.0.



                     Year -1                    Year 1              Year 2                   Year 3                    Years 1 to 2              Years 1 to 3

Value               á       -0.913    (-3.80)                     0.820 (3.42)                   0.894      (3.17)              0.661      (2.31)               0.810     (3.74)    0.762     (3.77)
Stocks             âm         0.80    (-2.66)                      0.81 (-3.09)                   0.80     (-2.70)               0.77     (-2.93)                0.82    (-3.35)     0.81    (-3.64)
                 â vmg        0.01     (0.02)                      0.18 (1.65)                   -0.10     (-0.74)               0.02      (0.15)                0.07     (0.65)     0.08     (0.83)
                  â sml       0.66     (6.06)                      0.65 (6.44)                    0.71      (5.92)               0.69      (5.37)                0.69     (7.58)     0.72     (8.44)
                                .64                                  .64                            .60                            .58                             .71                 .74


Growth              á        0.509     (2.19)                     0.349 (1.95)                   0.315      (1.69)              0.040      (0.19)               0.374      (2.59)   0.276      (2.13)
Stocks             âm         0.99    (-0.09)                      0.98 (-0.53)                   0.97     (-0.64)               0.90     (-1.79)                0.96     (-1.07)    0.95     (-1.53)
                 â vmg       -0.04    (-0.38)                     -0.10 (-1.18)                   0.10      (1.22)               0.05      (0.51)                0.00      (0.00)    0.03      (0.48)
                  â sml       0.63     (5.92)                      0.56 (7.33)                    0.69      (8.74)               0.42      (4.42)                0.64    (10.42)     0.58    (10.65)
                                .73                                  .83                            .82                            .76                             .88                 .90
                                                               Table 5

                                     Stock Repurchase Completion Rates in Canada

This table reports cumulative share purchase activity (in %) by month for sample firms. Normal course issuer bids are
defined to last exactly one year. Thus, months 0 and 12 are partial months. This table reports activity for all firms,
including those that departed the sample prior to one full year. Repurchase activity is reported overall, by year, by
program size, by market-capitalization and by whether the firm is ranked as value or growth. Market-cap is determined
using June cut-off values each year for all TSE-stocks. Firms below median market-cap in a given June are labeled as
Small-cap while those with above median market-cap are labeled Large-cap. Similarly, each June, all TSE-listed firms are
used to determine book-to-market cut-off values. Those repurchase firms whose book-to-market ratio is below median
are labeled Growth while those above median are labeled Value. Extreme value and Extreme growth are those firms
whose book-to-market ratio ranks them in the highest or lowest deciles respectively compared to all TSE-listed stocks in
a given June.


                                 Panel A: Completion rate (in %) after 12 months

                          Portion of
                          program completed             n                  Mean

                          No shares repurchased                236   (22.3%)                 0.0
                                          0 to 5%              149   (14.1%)                 2.1
                                        5 to 10%                90    (8.5%)                 7.4
                                       10 to 25%               161   (15.2%)                16.7
                                       25 to 50%               171   (16.1%)                35.4
                                       50 to 75%                99    (9.3%)                63.0
                                      75 to 100%               154   (14.5%)                93.4

                                           All firms         1,060 (100%)                   28.6


                         Panel B: Cumulative Trading Activity

                      Program                  % of Program Completed by Month                               Size (%)     0
                  1                   2                3      6        9       12
All
programs                            5.22               2.3           5.8        9.0      11.9      19.1       24.8      28.6

Years 1989-91                       5.33               1.8           4.3        6.7       8.9      14.3       18.7      21.4
Years 1992-93                       4.99               1.0           3.8        6.9       9.5      17.4       22.8      26.2
Years 1994-95                       5.29               3.4           7.4       10.7      14.3      22.2       28.0      31.8
Years 1996-97                       5.14               2.4           7.0***    10.9***   14.2***   22.5***    29.7***   35.1***

Programs less than 4.5%             2.58               2.7           7.0       10.3      14.6      25.0       32.5      37.9
Programs between 4.5 and 5.5%       4.98               2.1           5.3        8.2      10.8      17.4       22.4      25.8
Program greater than 5.5%           7.72               2.5           6.2        9.6      12.6      18.7***    24.6***   28.3***

Small-cap                           5.32               2.6           6.3        9.6      12.7      19.9       25.9      29.6
Large-cap                           5.05               1.8**         5.0        7.8      10.5      17.8       22.9      26.9

Growth                              5.06               2.3           5.3        8.1      10.2      17.0       21.8      25.1
Value                               5.31               2.2           6.3        9.5      12.8**    20.1       26.3**    30.9***

Extreme growth                     5.12            3.6        8.2      11.6     13.8             16.5      18.2       19.6
Extreme value                      5.33            3.2        7.4      11.6     16.1             25.9**    32.9***    37.7***
**    ***
   and denote significance at the .05 and .01 levels, respectively, for differences in completion rates between the top and
bottom rows of a given sub-panel.
                                                        Table 6

                                     Determinants of Program Completion Rates

This table reports coefficients for regressions of the program completion rate as a function of firm characteristics and stock
price performance. Year -1 Excess Return is the firm's total return during the program relative to the TSE index return. Book-
to-Market Decile and Size Decile Rank are determined in the prior June. Program size is the fraction of outstanding common
stock authorized for repurchase. Repeat is a dummy variable set to one when the program the firm has announced a program
within the past 15 months.

                                   Year 1         B/M                Size                  Program
                            á   Excess Return   Decile Rank       Decile Rank   Repeat       Size
                  (i)     .2921    -0.0366
                                   (-2.56)

                  (ii)    .2126                    0.0121
                                                   (2.95)

                  (iii)   .3174                                     -0.0067
                                                                    (-2.03)

                  (iv)    .2927                                                 -0.0138

                                                                                (-.68)


                  (v)     .3588                                                             -1.6270
                                                                                            (-3.04)

                  (vi)    .3566    -0.0332         0.0123           -0.0055     -0.0146      -2.0236
                                   (-2.12)         (2.93)           (-1.50)     (-0.66)      (-3.53)
                                                                                                     Table 7

                                                                  Determinants of Monthly Trading Activity during Stock Repurchases

This table reports regression results for the following model:
Bought i,t = á + â 1 •Repeat i + â 2 •Program Size i + â 3 •Size Decile Ranki + â 4 •B/M Decile Ranki + â 5 •Excess Return i;t-1,t-k + â 6 •Excess Return i;t + â 7 •Excess Return i;t+1,t+k
Where Bought i,t is the fraction (ranging between 0 and 1) firm i repurchased in month t relative to the total program authorization. The first four control variables are defined the same as in
Table 6. The last three terms relate to firm i's excess total return over a given period preceding, coincident and following month t. Excess return is measured relative to the TSE 300 index
over the same period. Months where firms have completed 90% or more of the program's stated amount are deleted. Panel A reports evidence for all months 0 through 12. Panel B report
evidence using only months 0 to 6 relative to the announcement. Panel C reports evidence for months 7 through 12. t-statistics are in parentheses.

                                                    â1            â2            â3           â4                       â5                  â6                  â7
                                         á         Repeat      Prog. Size   Size Decile   B/M Decile           Excess Return t-1,t-k Excess Return t   Excess Return t+1,t+k
              Panel A All Months
              k = 1 month.0265         -0.0016     -0.1515      -0.0003        0.0010       -0.0174                  -0.0155             -0.0083
                                                   (-1.51)      (-5.31)       (-1.19)        (4.72)                  (-3.97)             (-3.56)              (-1.91)
              k = 3 months             .0263       -0.0015      -0.1508       -0.0003       0.0010                   -0.0095             -0.0148              0.0006
                                                   (-1.34)      (-5.31)       (-3.30)       (4.80)                   (-4.00)             (-3.41)              (1.26)
              k = 6 months             .0266       -0.0015      -0.1652       -0.0002       0.0010                   -0.0057             -0.0168              -0.0004
                                                   (-1.38)      (-5.65)        (-0.94)      (4.76)                    (-3.49)             (-3.70)              (-0.23)
              Panel B Months 0 to 6
              k = 1 month.0344      -0.0043        -0.1912      -0.0003        0.0010       -0.0186                  -0.0118             -0.0041
                                                   (-2.63)      (-4.46)       (-1.05)        (3.32)                  (-2.92)             (-1.85)              (-0.63)
              k = 3 months             .0340       -0.0041      -0.1937        -.0003       0.0011                   -0.0077             -0.0112              -0.0008

                                                   (-2.50)      (-4.53)       (-0.96)       (3.40)                   (-2.32)             (-1.76)              (-0.74)
              k = 6 months             .0346       -0.0031      -0.1967       -0.0003       0.0010                   -0.0031             -0.0110              -0.0026

                                                   (-1.31)      (-4.55)       (-1.10)       (3.12)                   (-1.33)             (-1.71)              (-1.05)

              Panel C Months 7 to 12
              k = 1 month.0165       0.0019        -0.1018      -0.0001        0.0009       -0.0167                  -0.0225             -0.0145

                                                   (1.44)       (-2.93)       (-0.57)       (3.60)                   (-2.95)             (-4.06)              (-2.73)

              k = 3 months             .0165       0.0020       -0.0999       -0.0001       0.0009                   -0.0121             -0.0209              0.0004
                       (1.53)   (-2.89)   (-0.64)   (3.59)   (-3.81)   (-3.80)   (0.92)

k = 6 months   .0164   0.0018   -0.1260   0.0000    0.0010   -0.0078   -0.0284   0.0026

                       (1.34)   (-3.52)   (0.00)    (3.77)   (-3.80)   (-4.74)   (1.23)
                                                                                           Table 8

                                                       Long-run Performance Conditional on Completion Rate

Portfolios are formed in calendar time for TSE-listed firms that announced an open market stock repurchase program. Firms are sorted into three
portfolios: those that purchased no shares, those that repurchased less than 30% of the authorized amount and those that repurchased more than 30%
of the authorized amount. Excess performance (in %) is measured using a three-factor model:

                                                rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

where rp,t - rf,t is the excess portfolio return in month t, (rm,t - rf,t) is the monthly excess return to the TSE. In the three-factor model, (rsmall,t - rlarge,t) and
(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) are size and book-to-market factors, respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and
small-cap-growth style indices defined by BARRA using 500 TSE-listed firms. The value minus growth factor is calculated by taking the difference
between the average small-cap-value and large-cap-value indices and the small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus
large factor is calculated by differencing the average small-cap-value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-
growth indices. Calendar-time portfolios are constructed beginning July 1990 and ending December 1998. Months where the portfolios contained 6 or
fewer stocks are ignored. t-statistics are provided in parentheses and test the hypothesis that the parameter value is zero, except for â m where the
hypothesis test value is 1.0.

                            Year -1           Months 1-6                Months 7-12                   Year 1                       Years 2 to 3
          No shares           á -0.442 (-1.20)                       0.986 (2.07)                 0.762 (1.69)                     0.959 (2.99)         0.046 (0.20)
          repurchased        âm     0.98 (-0.21)                      1.11 (0.73)                  1.09 (0.82)                      1.08 (1.02)          0.97 (-0.52)

          during            â vmg    0.16    (0.91)                    0.00      (0.01)             0.03      (0.13)                 0.17      (1.09)     .24   (2.24)
          program            â sml   0.74    (4.44)                    0.92      (4.44)             0.90      (4.85)                 0.96      (7.07)     .74   (7.76)
                               R2     .49                               .47                          .53                              .67                 .74

          Bought up to          á -0.168 (-0.68)                     0.428 (1.25)                 0.977 (3.30)                     0.757 (3.47)         0.936 (4.24)
          30% of              âm    1.02 (0.25)                       0.91 (-0.89)                 0.92 (-1.71)                     0.89 (-1.89)         0.83 (2.99)
          authorized        â vmg   0.02 (0.18)                       0.03 (0.18)                  0.00 (0.00)                      0.02 (0.17)           -.14 (-1.37)
          program            â sml  0.93 (8.22)                       0.69 (4.44)                  0.80 (6.41)                      0.72 (7.77)            .75 (8.05)
          amount               R2     .74                               .49                          .63                              .74                  .73

          Bought more           á -0.477 (-2.07)                     0.162 (0.59)                 0.136 (0.49)                     0.222       (1.07)   0.573 (2.43)
          than 30% of         âm    0.77 (-3.23)                      0.77 (-2.70)                 0.82 (-2.38)                     0.81       (3.57)    0.80 (-3.24)
          authorized        â vmg -0.03 (-0.32)                       0.11 (0.83)                  0.04 (0.29)                      0.02       (0.25)    0.09 (0.81)
          program            â sml  0.55 (5.12)                       0.51 (4.12)                  0.55 (4.74)                      0.49       (5.58)    0.63 (6.31)
          amount               R2     .63                               .50                          .60                              .71                  .66
                                                                                                      Table 9

                                    Long-run Performance Conditional on Trading Activity in the Second-Half of the Repurchase Program

Firms where no more than 15% of the repurchase program was completed by the end of month 6 are sorted into two portfolios. The first group contains those firms
where no shares were purchased during months 7 through 12 and are labeled "no buying". The second group contains the balance of firms which repurchased at
least some stock during months 7 to 12 and are labeled "at least some buying." Portfolios are formed in calendar time for both portfolios and excess performance (in
%) is measured using a three-factor model:

                                                           rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

where rp,t - rf,t is the excess portfolio return in month t, (rm,t - rf,t) is the monthly excess return to the TSE. In the three-factor model, (rsmall,t - rlarge,t) and (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) are
size and book-to-market factors, respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and small-cap-growth style indices
defined by BARRA using 500 TSE-listed firms. The value minus growth factor is calculated by taking the difference between the average small-cap-value and large-
cap-value indices and the small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus large factor is calculated by differencing the average small-cap-
value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-growth indices. Calendar-time portfolios are constructed beginning July 1990 and
ending December 1998. Months where the portfolios contained 6 or fewer stocks are ignored. t-statistics are provided in parentheses and test the hypothesis that
the parameter value is zero, except for â m where the hypothesis test value is 1.0.

                                          Year -1          Months 1-6                     Months 7-12                   Year 1                       Years 2 to 3
                       No                   á -0.687 (-2.29)                           0.466 (1.42)                 1.140 (2.98)                     0.775 (3.12)         0.265 (1.18)
                       buying              âm     1.09 (0.97)                           1.11 (1.13)                  0.96 (-0.44)                     1.03 (0.48)          0.95 (-0.80)

                       after month 6      â vmg     0.03     (0.17)                     0.13       (0.77)             0.13      (0.74)                0.19       (1.65)    0.09   (0.89)
                                           â sml    0.98     (7.12)                     0.91       (6.17)             0.96      (5.98)                0.97       (9.24)    0.78   (8.20)
                                             R2      .68                                 .61                           .55                             .75                  .75


                       At least some         á     0.121 (0.43)                        0.562 (1.63)                -0.090 (-0.27)                    0.418 (1.73)         0.867 (3.89)
                       buying               âm      0.80 (-2.28)                        0.58 (-4.03)                 0.74 (-3.02)                     0.73 (-4.28)         0.82 (-3.08)
                       after month 6      â vmg    -0.18 (-1.29)                       -0.01 (-0.04)                -0.38 (-2.47)                    -0.21 (-1.84)        -0.04 (-0.38)
                                           â sml    0.56 (4.37)                         0.45 (2.92)                  0.27 (1.96)                      0.36 (3.50)          0.56 (5.94)
                                             R2       .58                                 .30                          .52                              .62                  .70
                                                                                            Table 10
                                                                              Long-run Performance of TSE-listed
                                                                   Seasoned Equity Offerings and Completed Stock Acquisitions


Equal-weighted portfolios are formed in calendar time for TSE-listed firms which made either a seasoned equity offering or completed a stock (or partial stock)
acquisition of another company. For acquisitions, only cases where common stock was used to finance at least one-third of the transaction are retained. Firms where
the market value of the offering or acquisition was less than $10 million are excluded. The resulting sample includes 134 offerings and 27 acquisitions. Excess
performance (in %) is measured using a three-factor model:

                                                          rp,t - rf,t = á + â m (rm,t - rf,t) + â vmg(rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) + â sml(rsmall,t - rlarge,t) + åt

where rp,t - rf,t is the excess portfolio return in month t, (rm,t - rf,t) is the monthly excess return to the TSE. In the three-factor model, (rsmall,t - rlarge,t) and (rvalue,t - rgrowth,t) are
size and book-to-market factors, respectively. Both factors are derived from large-cap-value, large-cap-growth, small-cap-value and small-cap-growth style indices
defined by BARRA using 500 TSE-listed firms. The value minus growth factor is calculated by taking the difference between the average small-cap-value and large-
cap-value indices and the small-cap-growth and large-cap-growth indices. Likewise, the small minus large factor is calculated by differencing the average small-cap-
value and small-cap-growth indices with the average large-cap-value and large-cap-growth indices. Calendar-time portfolios are constructed beginning July 1990 and
ending December 1998. Months where the portfolios contained 6 or fewer stocks are ignored. t-statistics are provided in parentheses and test the hypothesis that
the parameter value is zero, except for â m where the hypothesis test value is 1.0.


                 Year -1                        Year 1            Year 2                   Year 3               Years 1 to 2     Years 1 to 3
SEOs                 á       1.111     (1.98)                  -0.661 (-1.83)                -0.386      (-1.07)       -1.075 (-2.52)                           -0.352    (-1.29)   -1.088    (-3.38)
and                âm         1.38     (2.05)                    0.78 (-1.85)                  0.90      (-0.89)         0.98 (-0.20)                             0.81    (-2.30)       .91   (-1.02)
acquiring        â vmg       -0.42    (-1.51)                   -0.44 (-2.48)                  0.12       (0.70)         0.27 (1.38)                             -0.14    (-1.05)     0.25     (1.67)
firms             â sml       0.50     (2.00)                    0.35 (2.10)                   0.20       (1.19)         0.48 (2.68)                              0.20     (1.63)     0.53     (3.88)
together            R2          .51                                .46                           .43                       .53                                      .55                 .54


SEOs                á        1.469     (2.58)                  -0.981      (-2.51)            -0.798     (-1.25)             -1.897 (-3.38)                     -1.131    (-2.11)   -1.887    (-3.70)
only               âm         1.36     (1.89)                    0.78      (-1.56)              0.95     (-0.27)               1.07 (0.50)                        0.93    (-0.44)     0.98    (-0.15)
                 â vmg       -0.54    (-1.90)                   -0.45      (-2.09)             -0.02     (-0.08)               0.57 (2.11)                       -0.14    (-0.52)     0.25     (1.01)
                  â sml       0.56     (2.22)                    0.24       (1.11)              0.13      (0.45)               0.47 (1.85)                        0.22     (0.89)     0.50     (2.30)
                    R2          .51                                .45                            .25                            .41                                .28                 .35

Acquiring           á        0.439     (0.71)                  -0.385 (-0.62)                 -0.644 (-1.26)                 -0.011 (-0.02)                     -0.395 (-0.94)      -0.347 (-1.11)
firms              âm         1.02     (0.09)                    0.66 (-0.34)                   0.81 (-1.21)                   0.78 (-1.46)                       0.72 (-2.12)        0.72 (-3.42)
only             â vmg       -0.37    (-1.04)                   -0.42 (-1.40)                   0.28 (1.11)                    0.05 (0.16)                        0.00 (0.00)         0.08 (0.54)

                  â sml       0.23     (0.70)                     0.57 (2.02)                    0.42 (1.76)                    0.29     (1.09)                   0.46 (2.40)         0.43 (2.98)
                    R2         .38                                 .22                            .23                            .24                               .27                 .47
