                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE ECONOMICS OF RESIDENTIAL
                                 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

                                          Thomas C. Kinnaman
                                             Don Fullerton

                                           Working Paper 7326
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7326


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 1999




We are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation and for helpful comments from
Scott Callan, Elbert Dijkgraaf, Henk Folmer, Molly Macauley, Karen Palmer, Michael Podolsky, Janet
Thomas, and Tom Tietenberg. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Science Foundation or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Thomas C. Kinnaman and Don Fullerton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Economics of Residential Solid Waste Management
Thomas C. Kinnaman and Don Fullerton
NBER Working Paper No. 7326
August 1999
JEL No. H71, Q28

                                                ABSTRACT

        This paper provides a broad overview of recent trends in solid waste and recycling, related public

policy issues, and the economics literature devoted to these topics. Public attention to solid waste and

recycling has increased dramatically over the past decade both in the United States and in Europe. In

response, economists have developed models to help policy makers choose the efficient mix of policy

levers to regulate solid waste and recycling activities. Economists have also employed different kinds of

data to estimate the factors that contribute to the generation of residential solid waste and recycling and to

estimate the effectiveness of many of the policy options employed.


Thomas C. Kinnaman                                          Don Fullerton
Department of Economics                                             Department of Economics
Bucknell University                                                 University of Texas at Austin
Lewisburg, PA 17837                                         Austin, TX 78712
kinnaman@coral.bucknell.edu                                 and NBER
                                                                    dfullert@eco.utexas.edu
The Economics of Residential Solid Waste Management

1. Introduction
         The market for residential solid waste management and disposal has experienced
dramatic changes over the past 20 years. In the early to mid 1970’s, most towns used
local garbage dumps. Even though recycling was well known and utilized by the
commercial and industrial sectors of the economy, residential recycling was limited to
spontaneous collection drives by charitable organizations for old newspapers and aluminum
cans. Today, 46% of Americans have access to municipal curbside recycling programs,
many other Americans have local access to drop-off recycling facilities, and garbage is
often transported tens, hundreds, or even thousands of miles for disposal in a large regional
landfill. Recycling has also become more popular in Europe and in other parts of the
world.
         These market shifts have attracted the attention of economists who have devoted
significant attention to understanding the causes and impacts of these events. Economists
have also participated in discussions aimed at shaping efficient solid waste policy strategies.
This survey article summarizes the economic literature devoted to household solid waste
collection and disposal. The next section provides a brief historical introduction to these
markets. Section 3 surveys the theoretical literature devoted to suggesting the best way to
regulate garbage collection and disposal. Section 4 follows with a summary of solid waste
policies in place, and it surveys the empirical studies devoted to those policies. Since
household disposal choices determine garbage and recycling totals, Section 5 develops a
model of household behavior that generates hypotheses that are subsequently tested by the
empirical economics literature.

2. Recent Trends in Residential Solid Waste
          The editors of Biocycle Magazine (Glenn, 1998) began an annual survey of the 50
states in 1989. Included in these surveys were state estimates of the quantity of solid waste
landfilled, incinerated, and recycled in that state. Figure 1 summarizes the total use of these
three methods of waste removal over the past decade. Although the percentage of
household solid waste incinerated remained near 10% over the last decade, the percentage
disposed in a landfill decreased from roughly 85% in 1989 to just over 60% in 1997. This
decrease was associated primarily with the simultaneous increase in recycling. As
illustrated in Figure 1, the United States recycled nearly 30% of waste in 1997, up from
just 10% in 1989.
          How were the states able to increase the recycling rate so dramatically over this
time period? The Biocycle surveys also show that the number of curbside collection
programs in operation nationwide increased monotonically from just 1,000 programs in
1989 to nearly 9,000 programs in 1997. Local governments administer all of these
programs either by collecting the material directly or by contracting with a single private
firm. Growth in the number of programs has steadied of late.
          Economists have debated the extent to which the growth in curbside recycling can
be attributed to economic factors such as increases in disposal costs or non-economic
                                             -2-

factors. Although this debate is explored more thoroughly below, we now introduce two
important economic variables at play. Figure 2 presents average tipping fees in several
states, and Figure 3 presents average prices of recycled materials in the United States over
the past 10 years. Tipping fee data were obtained from Biocycle’s annual survey of the 50
states (Glenn, 1998). Rather than presenting the average for each state, Figure 2 illustrates
the past 10 years’ nominal tipping fee for one state from each region of the country. Two
lessons can be drawn from this figure. First, the overall trend for tipping fees is weakly
positive. But accounting for increases in the general price level, the real tipping fee may not
have changed much over the past decade. Therefore, attributing the national rise in
curbside recycling to increases in the tipping fee is difficult to support with such casual use
of data. However, tipping fees in the northeastern region (New Jersey) are greater than in
other regions of the country. And, indeed, curbside recycling programs have become
popular in the northeast. Perhaps, then, tipping fees have played an indirect role in
encouraging recycling.
          The second variable of interest to economists is the price paid for recycled
materials. The Bureau of Labor Statistics’ data on the prices of corrugated cardboard, old
newspaper waste, and scrap aluminum appear in Figure 3. Two lessons can also be
learned from Figure 3. First, when accounting for increases in the general price level, the
prices of recycled materials have remained rather constant over the past decade
(Ackerman, 1997). Second, prices of recycled materials are highly variable over time.
For old newspaper, six spikes have appeared over the past 30 years (not all are illustrated
in Figure 3). The most recent spike was in 1995 when the price for old newspaper (and
many other materials) hit all-time highs. This latest spike has been attributed to new
recycled-content laws passed by several state governments (Ackerman, 1997). But
overall, these trends do not appear to support the argument that economic forces are
responsible for the growth in curbside recycling. This debate is conducted more
systematically in economic papers reviewed below.
          The dramatic increase in the number of curbside recycling programs in operation in
the United States could instead be a function of non-economic influences such as changes
in voter tastes for the environment or purely political concerns. Misinformation may have
contributed to the public’s perception of a shortage of landfill space. This perception may
have emerged in 1987, when the barge "Mobro", loaded with Long Island garbage, was
unable to unload its cargo after repeated attempts (see Bailey, 1995 for a discussion of the
incident). A wave of state and local legislation encouraging or mandating recycling was
passed soon after this incident.
          Is the United States running out of landfill space? Available landfill capacity is
difficult to quantify, but the number of landfills in operation can be ascertained and
reported quite easily. Figure 4 illustrates the number of landfills (in thousands) operating
each year in the United States over the past decade. This number has been steadily
decreasing by about 500 landfills each year. Voters could have confused these data with a
national shortage in landfill space (Bailey, 1995). While the number of landfills has been
steadily decreasing over the past 10 years, the estimated capacity of remaining landfills has
been steadily rising. Based on state-reported estimates (also illustrated in Figure 4), the
remaining capacity of landfill space has doubled from roughly 10 years of remaining
capacity in 1988 to 20 years in 1997.
                                               -3-

          The reason for these dual trends has been the replacement of small local town
dumps with large regional sanitary landfills. This trend is due mostly to Subtitle D of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976. This law was designed to
reduce the negative externalities associated with garbage disposal. This law imposed
technology-based standards on the construction, operation, and closure of solid waste
landfills. Landfills are now required to install thick plastic linings along the base, collect and
treat leachate, monitor groundwater, and cover garbage within hours of disposal. Because
the fixed costs of constructing and operating a landfill have increased, cost-minimizing
landfill sizes increased and fewer landfills have been built. The trend towards large regional
landfills may also have been brought on by heightened public awareness over the siting of a
landfill in their “back yard”. Expanding an existing landfill could be politically more feasible
than constructing a new one.
          A final general development over the past decade has been the slight increase and
subsequent decline of incineration as a method of garbage disposal. Figure 5 illustrates the
number of incinerators in operation in the United States over the past decade. Incineration,
once considered a dual solution to the solid waste and energy crises, reached a peak in
1991 when 170 incinerators operated nationally. Since then, the number of incinerators in
operation has gradually decreased. This decline has been attributed to a number of factors,
but most notably the quantity of garbage available to incinerators became lower than
expected. If fixed costs are high, then average costs can be reduced with an increase in
garbage throughput. But incinerators could not lower tipping fees to levels necessary to
encourage more garbage without incurring financial losses. Therefore, many local
governments passed laws requiring all local garbage be brought to the incinerator,
effectively giving the incinerator monopsony power over local garbage. But the Supreme
Court struck down these laws, exposing the incineration industry to competition from
cheaper landfills. The Supreme Court dealt a second blow to the incineration industry
when it ruled that incinerator ash is toxic and must be disposed in an expensive toxic waste
landfill. The increased use of recycling in the early 1990’s further reduced the quantity of
garbage available to incinerators, adding to their financial dilemmas. Finally, policymakers
were not eager to rescue the industry once the public began to oppose the resulting air
pollution emitted by incinerators.
          Where land is scarce, however, incineration has become a more viable option.
The northeastern portion of the United States incinerates 40% of its waste. Incineration is
also popular in Japan and several European countries where population densities are large
and land values are high. Table 1 indicates the percentage of waste that is landfilled in
several European countries in the middle 1980’s (the remaining portion is incinerated).
Greece, Ireland, and the U.K. rely almost exclusively on landfills. But Switzerland,
Sweden, and Denmark rely on incineration to manage the bulk of their garbage. Facing
less competition from land-intensive landfills, incinerators in these countries as well as in the
Northeast region of the United States can capture the economies of scale necessary to
keep the average costs of incineration down (Halstead and Park, 1996). But even though
many countries rely heavily on incineration, Brisson (1997) finds the private and full
external costs of incineration exceed those associated with landfill disposal in most
European countries.
                                              -4-

3. The Optimal Policy in the Theoretical Literature
         This section reviews the economic literature devoted to designing solid waste
management policies to achieve the efficient quantity of garbage and recycling. A skeletal
model is developed here to frame discussion of optimal policy design. Notation developed
for this model will be used throughout this review.
         Assume that N identical households each maximizes utility that is defined over
consumption (c). Consumption produces waste that must either be disposed as garbage
for collection at the curb (g) or recycled (r). We use c = c(g, r) to represent the various
combinations of g and r that are consistent with any particular level of consumption.
Given prices paid for consumption (pc), and garbage collection (pg), and received for
recycled materials (pr), the household with income (y) will make disposal decisions to
maximize utility (u),

                                 u = u(c) = u[c(g, r)]

subject to the budget constraint,

                                 y = pcc(g, r) + pgg - prr.

        Producers in the model choose virgin (v) and recycled (r) inputs to produce c
according to the production function c = f(v, r). Given input prices pr and pv (for
recycled and virgin materials, respectively), the producer chooses inputs to maximize profit,

                                 π = pcf(v, r) - pvv - prr.

         Firms in this model would employ virgin and recycled materials so that the ratio of
input prices equals the ratio of marginal products. Households would choose between
garbage and recycling in a similar manner. In fact, it is easy to show that since agents in this
simple model internalize all of the costs and benefits of their choices, resources are
allocated efficiently and the optimal quantities of garbage and recycling are produced. But
the total amount of solid waste disposed (G = Ng) could emit foul odor, pollute
groundwater, create an eyesore, or contribute to climate change.1 Household utility could
be impacted by these effects, so assume now that u = u(c, G), where uG < 0. Under this
assumption, households fail to internalize the full social costs of their disposal decisions.
Too much garbage and too little recycling is produced by a decentralized economy.
         In order to internalize disposal costs, economists have suggested several tax and
subsidy schemes. This section will review the economic literature devoted to designing the
tax/subsidy policy that can achieve the efficient allocation of resources in the presence of
external costs from garbage disposal. Households could be taxed on each unit of garbage
disposed (at rate tg) or subsidized for their recycling effort (at rate shr). Households could



1
  An estimated 6% of the world’s emissions of methane (a greenhouse gas) are released
from landfills (Beede and Bloom, 1995).
                                              -5-

also be required to pay an advanced disposal fee at the time of purchase (tc). Under these
policy schemes, households maximizes utility,

                                 u = u[c(g, r), G]

subject to the amended budget constraint,

                        y = (pc+tc)c(g, r) + (pg+tg)g - (pr+shr)r.

The producer’s use of virgin material could be taxed (tv), or use of recycled materials could
be subsidized (sfr), resulting in the profit function,

                        π = pcf(v, r) - (pv+tv)v - (pr-sfr)r.

         Economic research reviewed below has found that various combinations of these
policies (tc, tg, shr, sfr, tv) can encourage a decentralized economy to achieve an efficient
allocation of resources. Command and control policies such as mandatory household
recycling ordinances and minimum recycled-content standards on producers can also
achieve efficient outcomes in theory. But economists rarely support such forms of policy
because the information required to achieve efficient outcomes is not likely to be available
to policymakers. The literature devoted to the study of command and control policies is
not rich.
         The most direct approach to internalizing the external costs of garbage disposal is
to tax each bag of garbage presented by the household (tg). Most households have
traditionally either paid for garbage removal with a flat monthly or quarterly fee, or through
local property or income taxes. Households that contribute large quantities of garbage
therefore pay the same as a household that contributes smaller quantities, so the cost per
bag (pg+tg) is zero, even though the social marginal cost of that extra bag is greater than
zero. The implementation of a tax (also called a user fee) on each bag of garbage can
require households to internalize the social marginal collection and disposal costs.
         Using a panel of twelve cities with direct pricing, Jenkins (1993) estimates that
pricing garbage according to its social marginal cost would reduce the quantity of garbage
produced by households and therefore improve social welfare by as much as $650 million
per year, roughly $3 per person per year. Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) use household
data and also estimate the potential benefits of marginal cost pricing to be in the
neighborhood of $3 per person per year. Podolsky and Spiegel (1998) study a cross-
section of towns in New Jersey and estimate the economic benefits of charging per unit of
garbage to be as great as $12.80 per person per year.
         One particular advantage of taxing garbage directly (employing a user fee) is that
other tax instruments discussed above are unnecessary for achieving the efficient allocation
of resources (Fullerton and Kinnaman, 1995, and Palmer and Walls, 1994). Households
may recycle, compost, or engage in source-reduction according to the private costs they
face. As long as households face the full social cost of their disposal decisions, they will
make those decisions efficiently. Any increase in recycling can reduce the price of recycled
materials, making these materials more attractive to manufacturers without a direct tax on
                                             -6-

virgin materials or subsidy to recycling. In fact, Dinan (1993) finds that a tax on virgin
materials (tv) in combination with a user fee would not be efficient, since the same material
is effectively taxed twice. Another advantage of taxing garbage directly is that the only
information needed by the local policy maker is the full social cost of each bag of garbage.
Repetto et al. (1992) estimate this cost to be $1.43-$1.83 per bag, depending on local
private and social disposal costs.2 Finally, Fullerton and Wu (1998) show that pricing
garbage according to its social marginal costs can also encourage firms to produce the
optimal amount of packaging per unit and to engage in the optimal amount of green design.3
         Perhaps in response to these arguments, an estimated 4000 communities in the
United States have started to price garbage directly (Miranda and Bynum, 1999). These
programs levy a fee on each bag of garbage collected from each household. Garbage
collectors can exclude non-payers by utilizing some method of identifying who has paid,
such as requiring households to purchase specially marked bags, tags, or stickers.
         Several arguments against the use of direct marginal cost pricing of garbage have
also appeared in the economics literature. First, taxing garbage may be problematic if illicit
or illegal dumping on the part of households is encouraged.4 Second, the administrative
costs of implementing the program may exceed the social benefits estimated above.
Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) estimate that the administrative costs of printing,
distributing, and accounting for garbage stickers in Charlottesville, Virginia could exceed
the $3 per person per year benefits mentioned above. Third, a uniform tax on all types of
garbage may be inefficient if materials within the waste stream produce different social
costs (Dinan, 1993). If, for example, the social cost of disposing flashlight batteries is
greater than that of old newspapers, then the disposal tax on flashlight batteries should
exceed that on old newspapers. But such a precise tax scheme is costly to administer.
         To respond to these problems, Dobbs (1991) and Fullerton and Kinnaman (1995)
develop models that suggest that if households have the option to litter or dump their
garbage, and if the external costs of littered garbage exceeds that of legally-disposed
garbage, then the optimal tax on legal garbage disposal (tg) could be negative. That is, legal
garbage disposal should be subsidized. In fact, if the administrative costs of levying a tax

2
  This estimate is comprised of private and external collection and disposal costs (including
a depletion allowance). The external costs are based somewhat on the work of Stone and
Ashford (1991) and the Tellus Institute (1991).
3
  Kennedy and Laplante (1994) also develop a model that suggests garbage should be
priced at its social marginal cost. But, if governments must balance the disposal portion of
their budget (and lump sum taxes are not available), then the optimal policy may change. In
particular, if the social marginal cost of waste disposal is greater than the household’s
marginal cost of dumping, then the user fee should be set just equal to the household’s
private marginal cost of dumping, and the subsidy for recycling should be lowered.
4
  Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) estimate that 28% of the reduction in garbage resulting
from pricing garbage at the curb may have been dumped. Jenkins (1993), Blume (1991),
and Miranda and Aldy (1998) also find evidence of increased dumping. A number of
other studies find minimal changes in dumping, including Podolsky and Spiegel (1998),
Strathman et al. (1995), Miranda et al. (1994), Miranda and Bauer (1996), and Nestor
and Podolsky (1998).
                                              -7-

on each bag of garbage are significant, then the optimal policy may involve subsidizing
garbage at its full price (set pg+tg=0). Policymakers can instead implement other policies
defined below to achieve efficient disposal choices.
          If taxing or even pricing garbage directly is problematic, economists have studied
whether the implementation of a tax on virgin materials (tv) can achieve the efficient
allocation of resources in a world where garbage disposal produces external costs. Such a
tax could increase producer’s demand for recycled inputs, drive up the price paid for
recycled materials, and thus increase the economic benefits to households that deliver
recyclable materials to secondary markets. Miedema (1983) finds that a tax on virgin
materials (tv) set equal to the social marginal cost of disposing any resulting waste material
produces welfare gains greater than would result from a subsidy on producer’s use of
recycled materials (sfr), a direct tax on household solid waste (tg), or an advanced disposal
fee (tc). The main advantage of virgin materials tax is that it both discourages the
economy’s use of virgin materials (resulting in less subsequent solid waste) and encourages
the development of the market for recycled materials.
          Others studies have questioned the use of a tax on virgin materials. Dinan (1993)
finds that although a tax on virgin materials encourages the use of recycled materials in
industries where the recycled input is a substitute for the taxed virgin input, other industries
that do not use the taxed virgin input will not increase demand for recycled materials. For
example, farmers could use old newspapers for animal bedding, but a tax on paper
manufacturer’s use of virgin wood pulp will not encourage this form of recycling. Dinan
(1993) also suggests that a domestic tax on virgin materials does not encourage exporters
to purchase recycled materials. Significant portions of recyclable paper are currently
exported.
          Palmer and Walls (1994) develop a model that suggests that although a tax on
virgin materials can encourage the efficient mix of inputs, it can discourage production and
consumption in the overall economy. The result is an inefficiently low quantity of garbage.
Therefore, the virgin materials tax is only efficient when combined with a subsidy on the
sales of final goods. Only for the special case where the marginal product of recycled
materials is exactly one (1) can a tax on virgin materials lead to the efficient input mix and
output level. Finally, both Fullerton and Kinnaman (1995) and Walls and Palmer (1997)
find that as long as other policy options are available (namely a deposit/refund system
discussed below), then a tax on virgin materials is only necessary to correct for any external
costs associated with cutting or extracting the virgin material. The tax is not needed to
correct for the external costs associated with garbage disposal.
          Palmer and Walls (1994) find that a recycling subsidy (shr or sfr) by itself can
indeed provide the efficient input mix (between virgin and recycled inputs), but it leads to
excess production, consumption and waste. Therefore, the subsidy to recycling must be
combined with a tax on consumption (tc). But the implementation of an advanced disposal
fee (tc) by itself only encourages source reduction, not recycling. Only the combination of
an advanced disposal fee and a subsidy to recycling encourages both source reduction at
the time of production and recycling at the time of disposal (Palmer et al., 1997). This
policy is essentially a deposit/refund system.5

5
    Palmer et al. (1997) find that a 10% reduction in solid waste can be achieved with a
                                            -8-

         Several economic studies have favored the use of deposit-refund systems to
correct for the external costs associated with garbage disposal, including Dinan (1993),
Dobbs (1991), Fullerton and Kinnaman (1995), Palmer and Walls (1994), Palmer et al.
(1997), Fullerton and Wu (1998), and Atri and Schellberg (1995). To achieve the efficient
allocation, the deposit is set equal to the social marginal cost of disposing the resulting
material, and the optimal refund is set equal to the difference between the marginal external
cost of garbage and the marginal external cost of recycling. If the external costs of
recycling are zero, then the refund matches the deposit. The deposit could be levied either
on the production or the sale of goods. As long as transaction costs are low, the refund
can be given either to the households that recycle the materials or to the producers that use
the recycled materials in production. If the refund is given to the households, then the
supply increase will drive down the price of recycled materials to firms. If the refund is
given to firms, firms will increase demand for recycled materials and drive up the price
received by households (Atri and Schellberg, 1995). In addition, Fullerton and Wu (1998)
find that the refund given under a deposit/refund system will encourage firms optimally to
engineer products that are easier to recycle. Households will demand such products in
order to recycle and receive the refund. This result is important since directly encouraging
the recyclability of product design can be administratively difficult.
         Economists have also discussed some implementation issues related to a
deposit/refund system. Palmer and Walls (1994) argue that a deposit/refund system would
be easier to implement than a tax on virgin materials with a subsidy to consumption (an
alternative policy combination that could also achieve the efficient outcome). Firms could
organize a strong defense against the implementation of a tax on virgin materials.
Households may lack this political organization. Furthermore, the subsidy to recycling may
earn the support of households with strong tastes for the environment. Also, less
information is necessary to implement the deposit/refund system efficiently. The policy
maker only needs to know the marginal social cost of waste disposal. The optimal deposit
and refund need only be set equal to this value. The application of a virgin materials tax on
the other hand requires information on each firm’s technical rate of substitution between
recycled and virgin inputs. This type of information is normally not available to the policy
maker (Palmer and Walls, 1994). If the administrative costs associated with operating the
deposit/refund programs are high, then Dinan (1993) suggests that policymakers could
single out products that comprise a large segment of the waste stream (newspaper) or that
involve very high social marginal disposal costs (batteries). Palmer and Walls (1999) argue
that a tax on produced intermediate goods combined with a subsidy paid to collectors of
recycling would preserve the efficiency effects of a deposit-refund system but would be
less costly to administer.

$45/ton deposit/refund system, an $85/ton advanced disposal fee by itself or a $98/ton
recycling subsidy by itself. The latter amounts are larger because these policies must
“work harder” to achieve the reduction in garbage since they do not encourage both
source reduction at time of production and recycling at the time of disposal. For example,
Starreveld and Van Ierland (1994) estimate that using only a disposal fee of $.30 per
kilogram (roughly $272 per ton) of plastic will result in the recycling of 25% of disposed
plastic in the Netherlands.
                                             -9-

         One “command and control” policy to receive the attention of environmental
economists is a recycled content standard; a law requiring firms to employ a minimum
portion of recycled materials in their products. Several states have passed such a law.
Palmer and Walls (1997) point out the problems associated with a recycled content
standard. First, recycled content standards can only achieve efficiency if carefully
implemented with other policies. If recyclable materials are highly productive at the margin,
but are not used because of their high price, then a recycled-content standard could
increase production and therefore solid waste. A tax on consumption is also necessary. If
recycled materials are unproductive on the margin, standards will decrease output (and
solid waste) and will therefore require a subsidy to consumption to achieve efficiency.
Their model also requires a tax on labor (the other input to production). Finally, the
efficient implementation of a recycled-content standard requires information not ordinarily
available to policy makers.
         This section provided an overview of the economic literature on the best policy
approaches to respond to the external costs of traditional garbage disposal. Although a
direct tax on garbage disposal (tg) and a tax on virgin materials (tv) have been supported by
some, the combination of an advanced disposal fee (tc) and a subsidy to recycling (sfr or shr)
is supported by the majority of studies. The next section provides a survey of the current
set of policies implemented by local, state, and the federal governments in the United States
and across the world, and it discusses empirical lessons from the vast array of policies
currently in place.

4. Solid Waste Policies - A Summary of Empirical Studies
         This section provides a broad review of the various solid waste management
policies implemented in the United States and abroad. The reader will quickly see that
actual approaches used by policymakers often differ from the theoretical policy
prescriptions detailed in the last section. The results of empirical economic papers related
to each policy are discussed where available.

A. Policy Directives in the United States

1. Federal Government
        The most influential disposal regulation passed by the Federal Government of the
United States was the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976.
Subtitle D of RCRA imposed technology-based standards on the construction, operation,
and closure of solid waste landfills. Prior to RCRA, most every town in the United States
had a local dump. These dumps were often formed near the edge of town, perhaps on a
flood plain near a river.
        Today’s regulated landfills are constructed with a base of several inches of various
grades of plastic lining to prevent leachate from seeping. Underground plumbing systems
capture and treat leachate, and local groundwater supplies are continuously monitored. In
terms of operation, garbage must be covered with soil within hours of disposal to reduce
foul odor, discourage pests, and reduce the risk of health hazards. Many landfills capture
and burn methane to produce electricity. Access roads must be watered several times
                                             -10-

each day to prevent dust from heavy truck traffic from rising. These regulations have
decreased substantially the external costs associated with garbage disposal, but have also
increased average disposal costs from an estimated $9 per ton to $20 per ton (Beede and
Bloom, 1995).
          Even with the recent advances in the technology of landfill construction and
operation, local environmental activist groups still often oppose the creation or expansion of
landfills in their region. Landfills depress property values. Housing values have been
estimated to rise by 6.2% for each mile (up to two miles) away from a landfill (Nelson et
al., 1992, as cited in Beede and Bloom, 1995). Roberts et al. (1991) interviewed 150
households in Tennessee and estimated households were willing to pay $227 per year to
avoid having a landfill nearby. Reported amounts increase with income, education, and
dependency on well water for water consumption.
          A second Federal Government initiative that has influenced the market for the
collection and disposal of household solid waste is the subsidy of virgin material extraction
in the United States. First, income earned by the timber industry has been taxed at the
capital gains rate instead of the corporate income tax rate. Second, the depletion of
minerals extracted can be deducted from earned income as a form of depreciation. Third,
mineral exploration has traditionally been encouraged on public lands. Fourth, freight rates
charged for recycled materials have often been higher than for their virgin counterparts.
These various forms of favorable tax treatments may have, on the margin, encouraged firms
to utilize virgin inputs over recycled inputs, perhaps resulting in the current
underdevelopment of the market for recycled materials.
          Through a variety of papers, economists have learned a great deal about the
market for recyclable materials. For example, Nestor (1992) reports that firms that could
purchase recyclable materials are often capital intensive. Most of the existing capital stock
is suitable for the use of virgin material in production. Re-tooling these industries to accept
recycled inputs could be expensive. She also estimates the paper industry’s price elasticity
of demand for old newspapers. The short-run price elasticity of demand is estimated at
only –0.0475. This elasticity increases to -0.0732 (1 year), -0.1009 (3 years), -0.1128 (5
years), and to –0.1216 in the “long run”. These estimates are inelastic because the
newsprint industry in many countries is equipped for the use of virgin fiber. The short-run
marginal cost to the firm of using substitute inputs is high. The implication of an inelastic
demand is that policies aimed at increasing the supply of old newspapers could indeed
reduce their price but will not effectively increase the quantity of newspapers recycled.
Furthermore, the elimination of existing tax subsidies on virgin inputs in the United States,
Nestor (1992) reports, will also have little impact on the quantity of old newspapers
recycled. The more effective approach would involve subsidizing the firm’s purchases of
capital equipment that would allow for the substitute use of both virgin and recycled inputs.
          Anderson and Spiegelman (1977) also find the price elasticity of demand for scrap
steel and old newspaper to be inelastic (-0.64 and –0.08, respectively). The elimination of
tax advantages for virgin inputs is estimated to increase newspaper recycling by only
                                              -11-

0.04% and scrap steel recycling by only 0.37%.6 Anderson and Spiegelman (1977) also
forecast that a subsidy to the suppliers of scrap iron (a 15% depletion deduction) would
decrease the price of scrap steel by 7.2% and increase its quantity demanded by 2.9%. A
similar subsidy to wastepaper suppliers (of 18%) would decrease the price of old
newspapers by 8.6% but increase the quantity recycled by only 0.57%. A $10 per ton
subsidy to the purchasers of old newspaper is forecasted to increase the quantity of
newspaper recycled by only 2.0%. The common theme found throughout these empirical
studies is the relative unresponsiveness of quantity demanded for recycled inputs to its
price. Policies designed to increase the supply of recycled materials may have little impact
on the quantity of recycled materials used in production.
         One explanation given for the resistance on the part of many firms to make capital
improvements to allow for the use of recycled materials has been the uncertainty over
obtaining a steady supply of recycled materials. Prior to the widespread use of municipal
recycling programs, the market’s supply of recycled materials was highly variable. To
determine whether tax or subsidy policies could stimulate the supply of recycled materials,
several economists have estimated the effect of price on the quantity supplied. Most of
these studies found the supply of recycled materials also to be inelastic. For example,
Bingham et al. (1983) estimate the price elasticity of supply of glass (0.165), steel (0.372),
and aluminum (0.730). Miedema (1976 - cited in Edwards and Pearce, 1978) also finds
the price elasticity of supply of wastepaper to be inelastic (0.09). Ir Vander Kuil (1976 -
cited in Edwards and Pearce, 1978) finds evidence that increases in the price of recycled
materials simply shifts the source of the supplied materials from municipalities to volunteer
scout groups.7 But now that municipal governments supply the industry with a steady and
predictable stream of recycled materials, firms may find the environment more conducive to
invest in capital equipment suitable for recycled inputs.

2. State Governments
         RCRA also assigned to the states the responsibility of regulating the market for
household solid waste collection and recycling. The logic behind this action was based on
the inherent differences in industry practices and environmental conditions across the states
(Callan and Thomas, 1997). Delegating disposal authority to the states has resulted in a
wide variety of policy approaches. Table 2 provides a glance at the policies enacted by
each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia to increase recycling. The most common
state action is to set a goal for recycling as a percentage of the solid waste stream. These
goals range from 20% in Maryland to 70% in Rhode Island. The laws are ceremonious,

6
  If, in the long run, virgin and recycled inputs are perfect substitutes, then the elimination of
tax advantages for virgin input would still only increase newspaper recycling by 1.68% and
scrap steel by 3.4%.
7
  Many of these empirical studies also uncover a negative relationship between a previous
period’s prices and current supply quantities. This relationship is explained by the use of
stockpiling. If prices of recycled materials were low in a previous period, then firms may
build up their inventories rather than sell at the low price. An increased inventory then
increases supply in the current period. The assumption that suppliers stockpile materials to
wait for higher prices has not been tested by the economics literature.
                                            -12-

for the most part, since they rarely state the consequences of falling short. In fact, the
strategy employed by many states facing a failure to achieve the goal is to delay the
deadline. Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) find no significant impact of these goals on
recycling quantities.
          States have also passed laws that set recycling guidelines for municipalities within
the state. The strongest law requires all municipalities to implement curbside recycling
programs and to pass local ordinances making household participation in the recycling
program mandatory. Seven states, including Pennsylvania and New Jersey, have passed
such laws. Seven other states have passed similar laws requiring municipalities to offer
recycling programs to households, but do not require the implementation of mandatory
ordinances. Finally, eight states have set recycling goals for each town or county to satisfy,
but allow each town or county to decide how to go about achieving the goal.
          In exchange for these various mandates, 34 states provide grants to localities to
help finance the costs of recycling expenses. For example, in Pennsylvania, each
municipality receives a state grant that is based on the total quantity of materials recycled.
Although economists have not devoted attention to estimating the incidence of these various
forms of state recycling mandates, anecdotal evidence indicates the laws are costly but
have had a dramatic impact on the number of municipal recycling programs operating
within these states.
          An approach taken by 23 states to regulate household solid waste is to prevent
yard waste from being disposed in landfills. Large composting facilities are usually
established to accommodate yard waste more cheaply than disposal in landfills. Several
other states have passed laws preventing materials such as automobile tires, batteries,
motor oil and old appliances from entering landfills (not presented in Table 2). In one
highly publicized example, the state of Maine banned the disposal of aseptic packaging
(drink boxes) in landfills. The ban was repealed after a Tellus Institute study found them to
be environmentally friendly relative to other drink containers (Ackerman, 1997).
          The oldest policy implemented at the state level is deposit-refund systems for
empty beverage containers. The state of Oregon was the first to pass this form of
legislation in 1983. Eight other states have followed suit, though no state has implemented
a new deposit-refund system since the early 1980’s.
          States quickly learned that their policies aimed at stimulating the supply of
recyclable materials produced a glut of recycled materials (see a review of economic
research on this topic above). To help balance the market, states began to implement
policies designed to stimulate the demand for recycled materials. Twenty-nine states
provide tax credits to encourage the production of new recycling plants, fifteen states
provide low-interest loans for the same, and 29 states require government offices and in
some cases private firms to purchase a minimum of their inputs from recycled products. As
mentioned above, Palmer and Walls (1997) find recycled-content standards to be a
difficult policy to implement and administer.
          A final area of state intervention involves the use of restrictions on shipments of
solid waste imported from other states. The transition from local dumps to regional landfills
also brought an increase in the amount of solid waste transported across state and national
boundaries. Today, an estimated 8% of all waste generated in the United States is
disposed in another state. A few states, especially Pennsylvania, Virginia, and those in the
                                             -13-

Midwest, have recently attempted to restrict the quantity of solid waste imported.
Repeated attempts by these states to restrict the importation of garbage were struck down
by the Supreme Court, which ruled that import restrictions violate the free flow of interstate
commerce.8 More recently, several governors have petitioned Congress to pass Federal
legislation imposing import restrictions on interstate garbage shipments. Congress has yet
to pass such legislation.
          The top importer of solid waste in the United States is Pennsylvania, followed by
Ohio, Virginia, Illinois and Indiana. In 1996, Pennsylvania received its waste from New
York (3,300,000 tons), New Jersey (3,100,000 tons), Maryland (819,000 tons),
Delaware (261,000 tons) and Connecticut (141,000 tons). Overall garbage imports to
Pennsylvania have increased from 3.8 million tons in 1993 to 7.9 million tons in 1996.
Similar growth rates have emerged in other importing states.
          One reason state governments are frustrated with imported garbage is that their
states have devoted significant public resources to reducing the quantity of solid waste
generated within the state. As discussed above, resources have been devoted to
implementing curbside recycling programs, banning certain materials from being disposed in
landfills, providing tax advantages and/or subsidized loans to commercial recycling
activities, and distributing grants to help run local recycling services. State officials may
wonder what the state has gained by these efforts if the saved landfill space is filled by
imports from other states. For example, in 1996 the state of Pennsylvania recycled 1.9
million tons of solid waste, but imported 7.9 million tons.
          Traditional economic theory suggests free trading of garbage is efficient since those
states with a comparative advantage in garbage disposal can specialize in garbage disposal.
Any policy that interferes with the free flow of garbage would therefore be socially costly.
Ley et al. (1997) estimate the loss in total surplus resulting from various restrictions on the
flow of garbage considered by Congress. First, a $1 per ton surcharge on imported
garbage would result in a 4% decrease in the quantity of garbage traded and a loss of total
surplus of only $0.02 per person. The implementation of caps on the quantity of garbage
traded across state lines (caps consistent with a Senate bill passed in 1995 that would
require a reduction in garbage imports to 65% of their 1993 levels after a prolonged
introductory phase) results in a surplus loss of $10 per person. Finally, a law that restricted
all trading of garbage would result in a $18 per person loss in surplus. This study assumes
that all external costs associated with garbage disposal are internalized through the tipping
fee.
          Other economic arguments can be made that flow controls improve welfare.
Copeland (1991) provides two arguments in favor of restrictions of garbage imports. First,
governments in some states (or countries) may not adequately regulate the industry to
ensure that the external costs of garbage disposal are internalized. Total welfare can
improve if exports from a highly-regulated country are prevented from entering a weakly-
regulated country. Since landfill regulations across the United States are uniform, this

8
  As an exception, U.S. courts have often applied the Market Participant doctrine that
allows local governments to restrict out-of-state garbage from government-owned disposal
sites. See Podolsky and Spiegel (1999) for a thorough review of the case law related to
interstate garbage shipments.
                                            -14-

rationale is probably more appropriate to inter-country shipments of solid waste. Second,
even if regulations are uniform across trading partners, Copeland argues that restricting
garbage trade can still improve welfare if evading the regulations is easier in one area than
another. Also, Macauley at al. (1993) explain that allowing landfills the option to practice
third-degree price discrimination (for example, charging a greater fee on imported garbage
relative to local garbage) can be welfare improving if these landfills operate in imperfectly
competitive markets. A landfill that can lower prices to local customers (with relatively
elastic demand curves for garbage disposal) without having to lower prices to importers
(with more inelastic demand curves) can make the local landfill and local residents better
off without making the rest of the world worse off.9
         Interestingly, while many state governments have attempted to restrict out-of-state
garbage, other local governments have attempted to prevent local garbage from being
exported from the area. As discussed above, such restrictions on garbage flow were
designed to help support local incinerators that levy tipping fees that often exceed those of
neighboring landfills. The Supreme Court recently struck down the use of such export
restrictions. Tawil (1999) estimated that this event did not impact the profit levels of the
participating incinerators or waste-hauling firms. Perhaps entry into the waste management
industry is easy, eroding any profits that could have followed the Supreme Court’s ruling.
Finally, Podolsky and Spiegel (1999) argue that the existence of economies of scale in
garbage disposal practices could in some cases merit restrictions on garbage exports. The
local reduction in average disposal costs attributed to the increase in garbage brought on by
the export restriction could exceed the increase in average disposal costs experienced by a
distant site.
         Public and academic attention devoted to the issue of flow controls may increase
when the Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island closes in 2002. New York City currently
disposes 13,000 tons per day (4.7 million tons per year) in the Fresh Kills Landfill, the
largest landfill in the country. Given the recent 38% cut in New York City’s recycling
budget, all signs indicate that New York City’s garbage will be exported to other states.

3. Local Governments
        Markets for household solid waste collection and disposal were once
decentralized. As cities began to develop, dumps often formed near the outskirts of each
town, and households were typically responsible for transporting their own waste to this
dump. To ensure that all garbage was removed from neighborhoods, and to help capture
economies of density, many communities designating a single collector for household solid
waste.
        In the United States, this intervention has typically taken one of two forms. First,
direct government provision meant that municipalities would purchase trucks, hire drivers,
and define collection routes. The costs of this local service was typically financed out of
general tax revenue or the issuing of monthly or quarterly bills to each household. Second,
the local government could regulate a single private collector. The town could contract
with a single firm to collect all garbage or it could award a franchise permission to collect

9
 This conclusion is an application of more general findings related to the efficiency of
Ramsey pricing.
                                            -15-

garbage to a single private garbage collector. The main difference between these two latter
forms is that under a franchise agreement the private collector bills the households rather
than the town.
          Town governments could also pass local ordinances requiring households to hire
their own company. Although such competitive garbage systems still operate today, the
single collector model is the norm. Dubin and Navarro (1988) estimate that 43% of
communities in the United States rely upon contract or franchise agreements, 26% of
municipalities operate municipal collection programs, and 30% rely on the competitive
market.10
          Economies of density suggest that a single collector could reduce the overall
collection costs. Dubin and Navarro (1988) find that an increase in the population density
by 100 persons per square mile decreases the average cost per ton of collected materials
by $1.62. Kemper and Quigly (1976) estimate that competitive markets are 25% to 36%
more expensive than a single collector, and that contract or franchise agreements reduce
costs over municipal collections by another 13 to 30% (depending on the level of service).
Stevens (1978) estimates that the contract or franchise agreements are 26% to 48%
cheaper than a competitive private market and 27 to 37% cheaper than municipal provision
(for cities over 50,000 population). Savas (1977) finds that municipal collection is 14%
more costly than that by a single private firm. Bohm et al (1999) estimates that
municipally-run curbside recycling programs are on average $82,000 more costly per year
than private recycling programs. Finally, McDavid (1985) finds in Canada that public
collection is 41% more costly than private collection. This difference is identified (by
McDavid) to arise from the fact that workers in private firms receive productivity bonuses
and private collectors are more likely to use larger trucks with smaller crew sizes.
          Why don’t all communities employ the most efficient contract or franchise method?
Dubin and Navarro (1988) find that the community’s choice of method depends upon the
power of rent-seeking interest groups (such as labor unions) and the ideological
preferences of the community. Conservative towns are more likely to rely on the free
market than liberal towns, but liberal towns are more likely to use municipal collection
rather than contract or franchise agreements.
          Beyond the mere collection of household garbage, local governments have also
attempted to influence the decisions of households to reduce the quantity of garbage
collected and disposed. Drop-off and curbside recycling programs, unit-based pricing
programs, and mandatory recycling ordinances have been passed. Although precise year-
to-year data are unavailable, recent estimates indicate that over 9000 curbside recycling
programs and 4000 unit-based pricing programs are currently in operation in the United
States. Economic studies of the impact of these policies are summarized in Section 5
below.
          At first, towns began to offer drop-off recycling services. Towns would usually
purchase (or rent) a few large trailers, and would leave those trailers on municipal property,

10
  In Canada, McDavid (1985) estimates that only 20.6% of cities with populations in
excess of 10,000 use municipal collection, though another 37.3% rely partly on the
municipality to collect household garbage at the curb and partly on private firms to compete
for collection from commercial establishments and apartment buildings.
                                           -16-

usually a parking lot or near the entrance of a park or other municipal property. Residents
would voluntarily transport certain materials (usually newspaper, aluminum cans, and
perhaps glass). Jakus et al. (1996) estimate that rural households devote an average of 90
seconds to recycle one unit of glass and one unit of old newspaper. Given the opportunity
cost of household time, households paid $1.29 to recycle one pound of each material.
Based on quantities recycled, Jakus et al. (1996) estimate that these households value local
access to drop-off facilities at $5.78 per month.
         As municipal governments gained expertise in the area of marketing recycled
products, they began to implement curbside recycling programs. Curbside recycling
programs decrease the household’s time and effort devoted to recycling. Households are
expected to respond by recycling more, while municipal governments collect more, save
disposal costs, and earn greater revenues from the sale of materials. The external costs of
garbage collection and disposal could also decrease. Powell et al. (1996) find that the
costs associated with vehicle emissions, traffic accidents, and road congestion are much
less for curbside programs (4.99 British pounds sterling per ton recycled) than for drop-off
programs (22.95 British pounds sterling per ton recycled). Direct estimates of the impact
of the implementation of curbside recycling programs on household disposal choices are
presented in Section 5 below, where the disposal choices of the household are carefully
modeled.
         Are economic or non-economic forces responsible for the recent increase in the
number of municipal curbside recycling programs? The answer is probably both. Tawil
(1995) and Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) estimate the probability of implementing a
curbside recycling program. Tawil (1995) employs a cross-sectional database of 80 towns
in Massachusetts to estimate that every $1000 that can be saved by curbside recycling
increases the probability of adoption by 11%. But Tawil (1995) also finds that a 1%
increase in the percentage of households belonging to an environmental interest group
increases the probability of adoption by 4%. Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) also uncover
economic reasons for implementing a recycling program. The likelihood increases by .78%
with a $1 increase in the tipping fee (from the average tipping fee of $26) and by .39% with
a 100-person increase per square mile (from the average density of 2,600) since average
collection costs could decrease with the population density (Bohm et al, 1999). However,
non-economic variables also partly explain the move towards recycling. A one-percent
increase in the percentage of the population with a college degree (from the average of
23.6%) increases the likelihood that a town implements curbside recycling by 0.77%.
         Several economic studies have estimated directly the benefits and costs of curbside
recycling programs. Most suggest that the costs of operating a curbside program exceed
the benefits resulting from the subsequent decrease in garbage disposal costs and sale of
collected materials. Franklin Associates (1994) use national cost averages to estimate that
recycling costs the municipality $9.52 to $16.53 per ton more than the cost of landfill
disposal. Other studies suggest recycling is much more costly. The Solid Waste
Association of North America (SWANA, 1995) estimates it costs an extra $74 per ton to
recycle in a sample of 6 communities. Kinnaman (1998) estimates that a recycling program
costs an extra $55.45 per ton recycled. This estimate includes costs to firms that are
required by local ordinance to recycle. Carroll (1997) uses cross-section data from
Wisconsin to estimate that recycling costs over $140 per ton, roughly $100 more than the
                                              -17-

cost of disposing the material. Only Hanley and Slark (1994) estimate recycling to be
economically beneficial for the recycling of newspaper in Scotland. Palmer et al. (1997)
estimate the benefits of recycling exceed the costs if the recycling rate is less than 7.5% of
total waste. Recycling beyond this threshold is costly.
         Kinnaman (1998) and Jakus et al. (1996) estimate the political/environmental
benefits of curbside recycling through use of contingent valuation surveys. In a survey of
100 households, Kinnaman (1998) finds that households are on average willing to pay
about $86 per year to keep curbside recycling of newspaper, glass, and aluminum. Jakus
et al. (1996) estimate that households are willing to pay $69.36 per year for curbside
collection of newspaper and glass. In addition, Tiller et al. (1997) estimate that suburban
households that classify themselves as recyclers are willing to pay $11.74 per month for
drop-off recycling facilities. If such preferences influence the decisions of local officials,
then some of the trend towards greater recycling may in fact be attributable to political or
environmental forces.
         Other studies have estimated the costs of curbside recycling programs. Judge and
Becker (1993) estimate that such costs increase with the addition of weekly collection (as
opposed to monthly) of commingled (rather than separated) material collected from the
porch of households (rather than the curb). Carroll (1997) uses self-reported cost figures
from 1,103 programs in the state of Wisconsin to estimate that the costs of curbside
recycling programs increase with the population, the tons recycled, and the number of
materials collected. Interestingly, Carroll does not find a relationship between population
density and collection costs. Bohm et al. (1999) estimate the costs of recycling with data
based on a national survey of 1,021 municipal recycling programs in the United States.
They find that the average costs of recycling decrease with the quantity collected, indicating
economies of scale in collection. The total costs of recycling are estimated to increase with
the cost of labor, the cost of capital, and if the municipality collects the material rather than
a private company. Butterfield and Kubursi (1993) also find that recycling is costly. Laws
that require or encourage recycling in Canada are found to decrease employment levels in
several industries.
         Huhtala (1997) and Brisson (1997) break down the private and external costs of
recycling by type of material. Huhtala develops a dynamic model of waste accumulation
with recycling as a backstop technology. The model is simulated using 1993 data from the
Helsinki region. Results show that the social benefits of recycling paper, cardboard, and
metal exceed the social costs. Glass and plastic do not pass the benefit/cost criterion.
Brisson (1997) finds that the recycling of aluminum produces the greatest social benefits,
followed by glass, ferrous metals, paper board, and rigid plastic.
         As described above, several states in America have implemented recycling goals.
England has also set a 50% recycling goal and the Netherlands set a goal for plastics of
42%. Palmer et al. (1997) and Huhtala (1997) estimate the optimal recycling rate. Using
the lowest cost policy to encourage recycling (a deposit-refund of $45 per ton), Palmer et
al. (1997) find that only 7% of solid waste should be recycled in the United States (where
the social marginal cost of garbage disposal is estimated to be $33 per ton). Huhtala
(1997) find the optimal recycling rate to be between 31% and 52% in Finland (where the
private marginal cost of garbage disposal is estimated at $101/ton). In addition, Huhtala
(1997) adds a contingent valuation estimate of the non-market benefits of recycling to the
                                            -18-

analysis. Such benefits include the value of less air pollution from solid waste incinerators
plus an estimate of the “environmental friendliness of recycling”.
         To ensure participation in the curbside recycling program, some local governments
have passed a local ordinance making it illegal to include recyclable waste with regular
garbage. As mentioned above, several states have passed laws requiring all towns to
implement such mandatory ordinances. Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) find mandatory
recycling ordinances have little significant impact on recycling or garbage quantities. A
plausible reason for this non-result is that municipalities do not adequately enforce their
mandatory ordinances. Garbage collectors rarely inspect household garbage carefully.
Any found violators usually just receive a written warning (Kinnaman, 1998). Duggal et al.
(1991) find that communities that enforce mandatory recycling laws with fines experience
no more recycling than towns without such enforcement.
         Four thousand local governments have also implemented unit-based pricing
programs. Most empirical papers devoted to user fees for garbage collection estimate the
impact of the programs on household garbage and recycling behavior. These studies are
discussed in Section 5 below. In addition to estimating the incidence of the programs, a
few studies have estimated the likelihood such programs are implemented, the change in
illegal dumping, and the benefits and costs of implementing a price-per-bag. Miranda and
Aldy (1998) provide an in-depth analysis of the experiences of nine communities in the
United States that implemented a price-per-bag.
         Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) and Callan and Thomas (1999) estimate the
likelihood that a community will implement a unit-based pricing program. Kinnaman and
Fullerton (1997) use data representing a national cross-section of 909 communities with
and without unit-based pricing programs. They find that the likelihood increases with the
local tipping fee, with the use of municipal (rather than private) resources to collect
garbage, and with the education level of the community. Callan and Thomas (1999) find
that the likelihood increases with household income, housing value, the age of the
population, and whether the regional landfill is due to close within the next two years. They
use data representing 317 communities in Massachusetts.
         Available data rarely allow for direct comparisons between illegal dumping
quantities before and after the implementation of unit pricing. Many economists have
requested town officials to provide their opinion over whether they believe illegal dumping
has increased. Many local officials have stated that it has, though many more have stated
otherwise. Reschovsky and Stone (1994) and Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) asked
individual households whether they observed any change. In the former study, 51% of
respondents reported an increase in dumping. The most popular method was household
use of commercial dumpsters. For the 20% who admitted to burning trash, the authors
were unable to confirm whether these burners did so in response to the program. Roughly
40% of the respondents to the Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) survey indicated that illegal
dumping had increased in response to the unit-pricing program. Many of these lived in the
more densely populated urban areas of the city. Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) also use
survey responses with direct household garbage observations to estimate that 28% of the
reduction of garbage observed at the curb was redirected to illicit forms of disposal. See
Footnote 4 for a list of other papers that study the dumping issue.
                                            -19-

         Two types of unit-based programs have been implemented in the United States.
Traditional bag or tag programs require households to pay for each additional bag of
garbage presented at the curb for collection. The second program type requires
households to pre-commit or “subscribe” to the collection of a specific number of
containers each week. The household pays for the subscribed number whether these
containers are filled with garbage or not. Many communities in California and Oregon have
utilized subscription programs since early in the century. One advantage of subscription
programs is that their direct billing systems may reduce administrative costs. Yet,
economists believe the first type of user fee more truly represents marginal cost pricing.
Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) use city-wide data from over 700 communities to estimate
that subscription programs have less of an impact than bag/tag programs on garbage and
recycling quantities. Miranda and Aldy (1998) find that subscription programs can be
effective if pricing applies to smaller trash containers. Nestor and Podolsky (1998) employ
self-reported household data to estimate that subscription programs are about as effective
as bag/tag programs at reducing garbage. Neither program is found to encourage source
reduction in the presence of a curbside recycling program, since such programs subsidize
recycling households' overall disposal practices.

B. Policy Directives in Europe
         Many of the approaches taken above in the United States have also been pursued,
to a greater or lesser extent, in other countries. For example, the United Kingdom has
established a 50% recycling goal to be achieved by 2000. The current recycling rate in the
UK is just 5% (Powell et al., 1996). To increase the recycling rate, the UK implemented
credits for recycling and has been considering a tax on the disposal of solid waste in
landfills. Seven other EC countries (Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Luxenbourg, and the Netherlands) have implemented some variation of user fees for
garbage collection. The UK rejected the idea of user fees due to the uncertainty of their
effects. Also, deposit-refund systems for beverage containers have been implemented in
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and Switzerland. Germany has also implemented
deposit-refund programs for detergent and paint containers.
         Germany implemented a unique policy in 1991 called the “Law on Waste
Management” that is designed to internalize the external costs of packaging choices by
industry. This law requires the original product manufacturers to pay to recycle the
packaging it produces even after the product is sold to retail firms or directly to consumers.
The law also set an original recycling target of 80%. That is, firms would be required to
recycle 80% of all packaging they produce. Amendments to the original legislation are
expected to ease these targets to 60-70%.
         Over 400 retail and packaging firms have combined with the large waste-hauling
firms to create the Duales System of Deutschland (DSD). The purpose of this syndicate is
to reduce the administrative costs associated with satisfying the minimum recycling
standards. Rather than requiring that each bottle be delivered back to its original
manufacturer, local waste management firms agree to collect for recycling all bottles of
member organizations in exchange for payment from the DSD. Participating manufacturers
identify their membership in the DSD by affixing a green dot on their packaging. In
                                             -20-

essence, the program becomes a national recycling effort operated by the DSD rather than
by independent municipal governments, as is common in the United States.11
         The collection, sorting, and marketing costs incurred by the waste management
firms are paid by the DSD. The DSD then charges manufacturers according to the quantity
and type of packaging used. For example, manufacturers pay the DSD $.82 for each
pound of plastic packaging produced, $.27 per pound for aluminum, and only $.04 for
each pound of glass. These charges represent the marginal cost to the DSD of collecting
and sorting each type of material. The cost of glass is low because consumers traditionally
separate and transport glass bottles themselves, these costs are paid by consumers and are
therefore not internalized by the DSD or product manufacturers. Fullerton and Wu (1998)
find that if the charges to manufacturers are set optimally, then the German Green Dot
program can encourage firms to produce the optimal amount and type of packaging. The
quantity of packaging consumed by households decreased by 4% following the
implementation of the Green Dot program (Rousso and Shah, 1994)
         The success of the Green Dot program in achieving the efficient quantities of
garbage and recycling rests on two critical issues (Fenton and Hanley, 1995). First,
households must be willing to separate materials for recycling. A mandatory deposit on
non-refillable beverage containers gives consumers the incentive to return these forms of
packaging. But lacking such incentives for other types of packaging, the household cannot
be expected to recycle efficiently. Second, private collectors must recycle the materials.
But in the absence of other regulations, the private collectors face private rather than social
disposal costs. Thus, the collectors of recyclable material may find disposal in other
countries cheaper than negotiating with a recycler to take the material.12 Palmer and Walls
(1999) argue that replacing Extended Producer Responsibility programs (like the Green
Dot program) with a combined tax on intermediate goods and a subsidy paid to the
collectors of recycled materials could alleviate these problems while preserving the more
desirable outcomes.
         Countries within the European Union have implemented other versions of producer
responsibility programs, but few have set recycling goals as lofty as Germany’s 60-70%
target. Austria, Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden have made
manufacturers at least partly responsible for the management of their packaging materials.
The European Union itself has set a recycling target of between 50% and 75% to be met
by the year 2000, and is watching the German experience carefully. The UK has dropped
its national eco-labeling program but is cooperating with all other EU policy guidelines.




11
   Michaelis (1995) and Roussa and Shah (1994) provide further background on
Germany’s green dot program.
12
   Such concerns arose after several packages with green dots were found in French
landfills. In response, the European Union recently banned the export of recyclable
materials headed for foreign landfills or incinerators. Reliable data are not available to
characterize the quantity of residential solid waste that is shipped between European
countries. Europe has been exporting solid waste to Africa.
                                             -21-

C. Developing Nations
        This paper is concerned predominantly with residential solid waste in industrialized
countries, but we discuss briefly some events in less developed countries. Solid waste
management is a different story in developing countries. First, only 50-70% of the solid
waste generated is actually collected (Cointreau-Levine, 1994). Second, the collection
that does take place is very labor intensive. Households bring garbage to transfer stations,
or collectors (scavengers) agree to carry garbage to a transfer station in exchange for any
recyclable material found in the garbage. The World Bank estimates that 7,000 such
workers operate in Manila, 8,000 in Jakarta, and 10,000 in Mexico City. In poorer
sections of Egypt, India, Indonesia, and the Philippines, individuals using handcarts collect
garbage door-to-door (Beede and Bloom, 1995).
        The experiences in developing countries have allowed economists to estimate the
relationship between per-capita income and garbage generation rates. Beede and Bloom
(1995) find that per-day garbage generation rates vary between 0.5 kilograms per-capita
in underdeveloped Mozambique to 1.9 kilograms per-capita in developed Australia.
These cross-national data are used to estimate that the income elasticity of supply of
garbage is 0.34, quite similar to estimates based on data sets gathered entirely within
developed countries (described below). On the policy front, Cyprus, Egypt, India,
Lebanon, and Syria have implemented deposit-refund systems for glass containers.

5. A Model of Household Behavior with Empirical Implications
        The household is at center stage in the market for solid waste collection and
disposal because the household chooses among various abatement options, including
whether to devote resources to the separation and storage of recyclable materials. Every
policy discussed above from a tax on virgin materials to a per-bag user fee on garbage
disposal or the German green dot program depend crucially on household behavior to
influence disposal quantities.
        The model of household disposal decisions developed in Section 3 derived
normative propositions about the optimal pricing of garbage, recycling, and virgin material.
The model developed in this section can be used to derive empirical propositions for testing
and estimation. This model is quite simple, but demonstrates the main forces influencing the
disposal decisions of households. Specific functional forms are assigned to the equations
above to simplify the interpretation of results. Some of the comparative statics generated
from the model are tested in the available economics literature.
        Assume the household consumes a single composite commodity good c that
generates waste material m, according to

(1)                             m = (1/α)c,

where 1/α is the portion of consumption that forms waste material. Assume (1/α) < 1.
Material m can either be presented at the curb for garbage collection (g) or recycled (r):

(2)                             m = g + r.
                                             -22-

Since these two equations imply that c = α(g + r), they are just a more restrictive version
of the expression c = c(g, r) given in Section 3 above.
        Household utility is a function of it’s own consumption of the composite commodity
good,

(3)                             u = u(c),

where uC > 0 and uCC < 0. The impact of aggregate garbage (G) on household utility is
suppressed here for ease of presentation. Households do not notice a change in aggregate
garbage attributable to their own disposal when making such choices.
        Instead of having fixed income as in Section 3 above, the household here is
endowed with k units of a resource such as time that can be exchanged in a labor market
km for a wage pk. Therefore, y = pkkm. The household resource can also be used to
prepare waste material for recycling (kr). The resource is fully employed (km + kr = k ).
        The amount of recycling generated by the household (r) is a function of the time
allocated to recycling (kr),

(4)                             r = r(kr),

where the marginal product of labor in recycling is positive (rk > 0) and labor devoted to
recycling experiences diminishing marginal returns (rkk < 0). Equation (4) can be solved for
kr to give the cost of recycling:

(5)                             kr = k(r),

where kr > 0 and krr > 0. For simplification, we specify

(6)                             k(r) = 0.5δr2

where the first derivative kr = δr and the second derivative krr = δ. Thus δ is the rate at
which the marginal cost rises with r. A decrease in the parameter δ implies less
household effort is required for recycling.
         Household income (pk k - pkkr) can either be used to purchase the composite
commodity good (for a price pc), or to pay for each bag of garbage (at cost pg) presented
at the curb for collection. Using (6) to substitute for kr in the above resource constraint,
the household’s budget constraint is:

(7)                             pk k - pk(0.5δr2) = pcc + pgg.

         Each household maximizes utility (3) subject to technological constraints (1) and
(2) and the budget constraint (7), by choosing the quantity of material to discard (g) and to
recycle (r). The Lagrange Function from this maximization problem is

(8)             L = u[α(g + r)] + λ[pk k - α(g + r)pc – pgg – pk(0.5δr2)].
                                             -23-


Assuming the existence of interior solutions for g and r, first-order conditions are

(9a)                             αuc/λ = [αpc + pg]
(9b)                             αuc/λ = [αpc + pkδr]
(9c)                             pk k - α(g + r)pc – pgg – pkk(r) = 0

where λ is the marginal utility of income. At the utility-maximizing choices, condition (9a)
requires the marginal benefit of acquiring an additional unit of material (measured in dollars)
to equal the purchase price of the material plus the price of discarding the material at the
curb. Condition (9b) has a similar interpretation, except the marginal cost of acquiring an
additional unit of material is comprised of the purchase price plus the resource cost of
recycling it (pkδr = pkkr). Solving conditions (9a) and (9b) provides the relationship pg =
pkδr at the utility-maximizing choices of g and r. The household increases recycling to
the point where the marginal cost of recycling another unit of the material (pkδr*) equals the
marginal cost of discarding the material (pg).
        Utility-maximizing solutions for the choice variables take the form:

(10a)                            g* = g*(α, k , pc, pg, pk, δ)
(10b)                            r* = r*(α, k , pc, pg, pk, δ)

Equations (1) and (2) can be used to solve for the utility-maximizing consumption level,

(11)                             c* = α(g* + r*).

         How would the equilibrium values of g* and r* be affected by an exogenous
change in the values of pg, δ, pk, or α? The comparative statics reported below are
obtained by first substituting the solutions (10) into the first-order conditions (9), then
differentiating with respect to the exogenous variable of interest, and finally solving the
system of differential equations for the comparative static terms (as in Silberberg, 1990,
page 323).13



13
   One implication of the model presented here is that if the price of garbage is zero, then
the household has no incentive to engage in recycling since garbage is free and recycling
requires scarce household resources. This result is clearly inconsistent with the available
data. In fact, Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) find that 73.3% of households recycled even
in the absence of any legal or economic incentive. Why do these households recycle?
Even if households value the quality of the environment (a public good) and their recycling
efforts improve the quality of the environment, households cannot be expected to provide
this public good at their own cost. Perhaps households simply enjoy recycling or feel a
civic duty to participate in the recycling program. Understanding why households have
been willing to participate in municipal recycling programs remains an interesting question to
economists and policy makers.
                                            -24-

A. A Change in the User Fee (pg)
         If the town has implemented a unit pricing program, the representative household in
the model is required to pay for each bag of garbage collection (pg). How will the
household respond to an increase in the per-bag fee? Comparative static analysis indicates
that the change in recycling attributable to a change in the value of the user fee is14

                                 ∂r *    1
(12)                                  ≡     >0
                                 ∂p g   pkδ

which is unambiguously positive. A household will respond to an increase in the user fee
by increasing recycling. This increase varies across households with different wage levels
(pk), and would be the greatest for households with the lowest wage. The increase also
varies across households with different recycling production functions (value of δ in
Equation 6). The change in recycling would be greater for a household that experiences
less-rapidly diminishing marginal product of time in recycling (a low value of δ). Proxies
for δ could include household size, age composition, and other demographic variables.
         An increase in the price per bag of garbage collection also changes the utility-
maximizing quantity of garbage discarded15:

                                 ∂ g*    ∂r *    g*
(13)                                  ≡−      −        <0
                                 ∂p g    ∂ p g αu c λ*

which is unambiguously negative. Households are predicted to respond to an increase in
the value of the user fee by decreasing the quantity of garbage presented at the curb. The
first component of the right-hand side might be called the “substitution” effect since it
represents the change in garbage directly attributable to the increase in recycling. The
second component of this comparative static might be called the “income” effect since it
represents the decrease in garbage brought about by the reduction in material generated
from less consumption. The increase in the price per bag reduces the amount of income
available to purchase other goods, decreasing the quantity of waste material. To see this
more formally, note that

                                 ∂ m* ∂ g * ∂ r *     g* 
(14)                                 ≡     +      ≡ −      *
                                                               <0
                                 ∂ pg ∂ pg ∂ pg      α uc λ 

Relative to the average household, this “income” effect is greatest for households that
generate more garbage (high g*), generate more waste material from consumption (low α),
exhibit a low marginal utility of consumption (low uc, perhaps because of a large c*), or
possess a high marginal utility of income (λ*) . The denominator of (14) is identical to the

14
   A simple way to see this result is to solve (9a) and (9b) to get r = pg/δpk and then
differentiate that with respect to pg.
15
   This result requires the use of all equations (9) and (10).
                                            -25-

left-hand side of the first-order condition in (9a). A household that experiences a low
marginal benefit of generating an additional unit of waste material (αuc/λ*) will react to the
user fee by reducing garbage more than other households.
         To see why the income effect only reduces g and not r in this simple model,
consider Figure 6. Total waste (g + r) on the horizontal axis is divided between r* and
g* at the point where the flat marginal cost of g (equal to pg) intersects the rising marginal
cost of r (equal to pkδr). When the income effect reduces consumption c (and thus the
sum g + r), the right vertical axis shifts to the left, reducing g but leaving r unchanged.
         Several economic papers have estimated these comparative static relationships. A
brief overview of some of these studies appears in Table 3. One element common to every
study mentioned in Table 3 is the use of original data. Data collection techniques include
interviews with local solid waste officials, direct phoning of households, and actual
measurement of household waste.
         Wertz (1976) was the first to derive the impact of a user fee on garbage quantities.
By simply comparing the average quantity of garbage collected in San Francisco, a town
with a user fee, with the average town in the United States, Wertz calculates a price
elasticity of demand equal to –0.15.
         Jenkins (1993) expanded the understanding of the impact of user fees on garbage
totals by gathering monthly data from 14 towns (10 with unit-pricing) over several years.
Jenkins also found inelastic demand for garbage collection services; a 1% increase in the
user fee is estimated to lead to a 0.12 percent decrease in the quantity of garbage.
         Two studies rely on self-reported garbage quantities from individual households
(rather than as reported by municipal governments). Hong et al. (1993) utilize data based
on 4,306 surveys. Households indicate whether they recycle and how much they pay for
garbage collection. Results indicate that a user fee increases the probability that a
household recycles, but does not appreciably affect the quantity of garbage produced at
the curb. Reschovsky and Stone (1994) mailed questionnaires to 3040 households and
received 1422 replies. Each household reported its recycling behavior and income and
demographic information. The price of garbage was estimated to have no significant
impact on the probability that a household recycles. When combined with a curbside
recycling program, recycling rates increase by 27 to 58%, depending on type of material.
         Miranda et al. (1994) gather data from 21 communities with unit-pricing programs
and compare the quantity of garbage and recycling over the year preceding the
implementation of unit-pricing with the year following it. Results indicate that these towns
reduce garbage by between 17% and 74% and increase recycling by 128%. These large
estimates cannot be attributed directly to pricing garbage, since in every program curbside
recycling programs were implemented during the same year as the unit-pricing program.
Callan and Thomas (1997) predict that the implementation of a user fee increases the
portion of waste recycled by 6.6 percentage points. This impact increases to 12.1% points
when the user fee is accompanied by a curbside recycling program.
         Only Fullerton and Kinnaman (1996) use household data that are not based on
self-reported surveys. The weight and volume of the garbage and recycling of 75
households were measured by hand over four weeks prior to, and following, the
implementation of a price-per-bag program in Charlottesville, VA. A curbside recycling
program had already been in operation for over one year. Results indicate that the weight
                                             -26-

of garbage decreased slightly, but the volume of garbage (number of bags or cans)
decreased by more. Indeed, the density of garbage increased from 15 pounds per bag to
just over 20 pounds per bag.
          Two studies expanded on the work of Jenkins (1993) by increasing the number of
communities in the sample. Podolsky and Spiegel (1998) employ a 1992 cross-section of
159 towns clustered in New Jersey, twelve with unit-based pricing programs. They
estimate the largest price elasticity of demand in the literature (-0.39). The authors attribute
this estimate to the fact that no towns in their sample had implemented subscription
programs (as was the case for Wertz and Jenkins) and had mature recycling programs in
place. Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) use a 1991 national cross- section of 959 towns,
114 that implemented user fees (none with subscription programs). The estimated demand
elasticities are also higher than Jenkins, but not as large as Podolsky and Spiegel (1998).
The Kinnaman and Fullerton estimates account for possible endogeneity of the policy
variables. They find that towns with high garbage totals and low recycling totals are more
likely to introduce a user fee. Previous estimates may have under-reported this elasticity by
assuming that these policy variables are exogenous.
          Strathman et al. (1995) employ data obtained by officials near Portland, OR, and
they find that a 10% increase in the tipping fee decreases garbage disposed at the landfill
by 1.1%.16 Seguino et al. (1995) find that the implementation of user fee programs in 29
towns in Maine decrease solid waste by 8.73 pounds per person per week (a 56%
decrease). Regarding illegal dumping, almost half of the towns reported initial increases in
roadside dumping, and over half reported increases in backyard burning (30% say it is a
continuing problem). Backyard burning is permitted in the state of Maine.
          Only Klein and Robison (1993) estimate the impact of disposal fees on commercial
behavior. Firms are estimated to reduce solid waste generation when faced with higher
disposal rates.
          What can be learned from all of these empirical studies? First, demand for garbage
collection services is inelastic. Substitutes are not readily available. Advocates of unit-
based pricing suggest demand may become more elastic in the long run as households learn
of available substitutes for garbage disposal. The empirical economics literature has yet to
address this point.

B. A Change in Ease of Recycling (δ      δ)
         Recall that household resources are required to recycle materials. According to
the cost function given in (6), the implementation of a curbside recycling can be modeled by
a decrease in the value of δ. Many expect the ease of curbside recycling to increase the
quantity of recycling chosen by the household. Comparative static results of the model
make a similar prediction,17

                                  ∂r * − r *
(15)                                  ≡      <0
                                  ∂δ    δ

16
   Nestor and Podolsky (1996) published a comment suggesting that the changes in tipping
fees may not have been passed on to households - the generators of garbage.
17
   From (9a,b) we get r = pg/δpk, so differentiation yields ∂r/∂δ = -pg/δ 2pk = -r/δ.
                                            -27-


         Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) confirm that this effect is positive. The
implementation of a curbside recycling program is estimated to increase the annual quantity
of recycling by 195 pounds per person (this estimate corrects for policy endogeneity).
Reschovsky and Stone (1994) also find that a recycling program, especially when
combined with a mandatory ordinance, increases recycling rates. Callan and Thomas
(1997) find that a curbside recycling program increases by 4.15% the ratio of material
recycled to all materials disposed. This impact increases to 9.67% when the curbside
recycling program is accompanied with a unit-based pricing program.
         The comparative static result in (15) predicts a greater than average increase in
recycling for households that already recycle (a high r*) and households that are very
efficient recyclers (have a low value of δ). Reschovsky and Stone (1994) find that
households reporting adequate storage space are much more likely to report that they
recycle (using self-reported data). Judge and Becker (1993) study the recycling habits of
1000 households in towns of Minnesota (with different program attributes). They estimate
that recycling totals are increased by allowing households to co-mingle recyclable materials,
offering weekly collections (rather than biweekly), and not requiring households to put
materials on the curb. They also find that special information about the recycling program
did not increase recycling when controlling for other factors. Once a curbside recycling
program has been implemented, Duggal et al. (1991) estimate that recycling totals increase
with the age of the program, the frequency of collection, and the number of items collected.
         The model does not provide a refutable hypothesis regarding the change in garbage
attributable to the implementation of a curbside recycling program,

                         ∂g * − ∂r * p k k ( r *)
(16)                         =      −             > or < 0
                         ∂δ    ∂δ       αu c 
                                      δ        
                                        λ 

        The implementation of a municipal recycling program diverts some material from
the garbage pile to the recycling pile (thus the first component of the comparative static is
positive), but it frees up additional household resources for consumption, which may result
in more material (the second term is negative). In order for the overall effect to be
negative, the first component must exceed the second in absolute value. Most
policymakers believe the direction of the comparative static in (16) to be positive. That is,
the implementation of a curbside recycling program (a decrease in δ) reduces garbage.
        The empirical evidence testing that assumption is inconclusive. Only Kinnaman and
Fullerton (1997) estimate the impact of curbside recycling on household garbage totals, but
they find the impact on garbage is not statistically significant.

C. A Change in the Wage (pk)
         Households may also change their utility-maximizing disposal choices with a change
in their wage. As the wage rises, households face a higher opportunity cost of recycling
and thus may recycle less. The comparative static result verifies this claim:
                                            -28-

                                 ∂ r*    r
(17)                                  ≡−    <0
                                 ∂p k    pk

Relative to the average household, this negative effect is greater for households that recycle
more (r) or earn low wages (pk). Thus, poorer households are expected to respond to an
increase in wage by decreasing recycling by a greater amount than richer households,
ceteris paribus.
         Hong et al. (1993) test the relationship in (17). They regress the probability of
recycling on the wage rate of the female member of the household and find that as the wage
rate increases, the probability of recycling decreases. Kinnaman (1994) also finds that
recycling decreases with the number of full-time workers in the household.
         A change in the wage is also predicted to affect the optimal quantity of garbage:

                                 ∂ g*   ∂ *       m
(18)                                  ≡− r + k * > 0
                                 ∂ pk   ∂ p k αu c λ

which is unambiguously positive. Again, this comparative static can be partitioned into an
“income” and “substitution” effect. Part of the increase in garbage is a direct result of the
decrease in recycling. The remaining portion arises from the fact that more material is being
generated by the household with the higher wage. In Figure 6, the marginal cost of
recycling (pkδr) would rotate upward with the increase in pk, so r falls. Garbage is
increased both by the decrease in recycling and by the rightward shift of the right vertical
axis. This can be expressed more formally by:

                                 ∂ m* ∂ g * ∂ r *    m
(19)                                 ≡      +     ≡ k * >0
                                 ∂ pk ∂ p k   pk α uc λ

The increase in total waste material is particularly high for households that devote more
time to working (high km) since these households will enjoy the greatest boost to income
for an increase in pk. Ceteris paribus, households that experience a low marginal benefit
of consumption (αuc/λ*) will generate more additional material than the average household
(following a boost in pk).
         Though Hong et al. (1993) find a positive relationship between garbage and the
wage rate, the estimate is statistically insignificant. Podolsky and Spiegel (1998) estimate
that an increase in the ratio of employees to household members increases garbage.
Kinnaman (1994) also finds that an increase in the portion of the household that are full-
time workers increases garbage.

D. A Change in α
       The portion of consumption that becomes waste material (1/α) is exogenous to the
household.18 This exogenous value of α could change if firms reduce the quantity of


18
     An extension of the model would allow α to be a choice variable. Households could
                                            -29-

material used to package their products.19 How would households respond to an
exogenous change in α? The comparative static results are20

                                  ∂ r*
(20)                                   ≡0
                                  ∂α

                                ∂ g*     pc m*
(21)                                 ≡−         <0
                                ∂α      αu c λ*

An increase in the value of α is interpreted as a decrease in the portion of consumption
that becomes waste material. Households respond to this increase by decreasing garbage,
but do not change recycling. The change in garbage is especially large for households that
discard a high amount of material (m*), face high prices for goods and services (pc), or
experience a low marginal benefit of acquiring an additional unit of material (αuc/λ*). No
empirical evidence has been found to test these predictions.

E. Other Considerations
         Many of the empirical studies mentioned above control for income and
demographic variables in the regression when estimating the quantity of garbage and
recycling produced by households. The estimated coefficients on these variables could
assist local governments to forecast future garbage disposal needs.
         A change in the wage rate, as modeled above, has both an income effect and a
price effect (on the cost of recycling). The pure income effect of a change in nonlabor
income on household garbage has been estimated in several empirical studies. This
relationship could be expected to be positive if additional income implies more
consumption and garbage. However, if increases in income are spent on dining out and
longer vacations, household garbage totals could decrease with income. The empirical
literature finds more evidence supporting the former prediction. In fact, Podolsky and
Spiegel (1998) find the strongest relationship between garbage quantities and income by
estimating the income elasticity of demand for garbage collection to be 0.55. Other studies
also find a positive but weaker relationship between income and garbage. Jenkins (1993)
estimates an income elasticity of demand equal to 0.41, Wertz (1976) at 0.279 and 0.272
using two sets of data, Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) at 0.262, Richardson and Havlicek
(1978) at 0.242, 0.22 by Reschovsky and Stone (1994), 0.2 by Petrovic and Jaffee
(1978), and finally 0.049 by Hong et al. (1993). Strathman et al. (1995) find that garbage
disposed at landfill decreases with the average manufacturing income of the city.
         The effect of nonlabor income on recycling is not as well understood. (The simple
model in Figure 6 would predict no effect.) Callan and Thomas (1997) and Duggal et al.


choose the mix of consumption goods to include less waste-intensive goods. Additional
constraints would have to be imposed on the current model, or households here would
simply choose α to be 0.
19
   See Fullerton and Wu (1998) for a further discussion of the packaging decisions of firms.
20
   Again, the first result follows directly from differentiating r = pg/δpk.
                                            -30-

(1991) find that income increases household recycling quantities, but Hong et al. (1993)
find income does not impact self-reported recycling participation. Jakus et al. (1996) find
income increases the recycling of paper but not glass. Saltzman et al. (1993) find that
additional income increases the recycling of newspaper but decreases the recycling of
glass.
         Economists have also estimated the relationship between education and household
garbage totals. Educated households could be more aware of recycling opportunities.
Educated households may also have greater tastes for the environment. Indeed, Hong et
al. (1993), Callan and Thomas (1997), Judge and Becker (1993), Reschovsky and Stone
(1994), and Duggal et al. (1991) find education increases recycling. Using household data,
Kinnaman (1994) estimates that educated households produce less garbage. Using a
cross-section of 959 communities, Kinnaman and Fullerton (1997) find a similar result.
Though Judge and Becker (1993) find no impact from publicity efforts to increase the
awareness of municipal recycling opportunities, Callan and Thomas (1997) find that an
extra dollar spent per household on such efforts increases the recycling rate by 2.55%.
         The effects of other demographic variables have also been estimated. Jenkins
(1993), Kinnaman (1994), and Podolsky and Spiegel (1998) find that increases in the size
of the household decrease the per-capita quantity of garbage disposed. Larger families
could share meals in a way that produces less waste than the same number of people eating
separately. Hong et al. (1993) find that larger households also are more likely to report
participation in recycling. Regarding the age of the household and its impact on garbage
totals, Podolsky and Spiegel (1998) find that an increase in median age decreases garbage.
Jenkins (1993) finds that an increase in the portion of population between 18 and 49
increases garbage. Jakus et al. (1996) find that older individuals are more likely to recycle
glass. Kinnaman (1994) estimates that households with married couples produce less per-
capita garbage and recycling. Reschovsky and Stone (1994) find that married households
produce more total recycling (not controlling for household size). Finally, Kinnaman
(1994) estimates that homeowners produce more garbage and recycling than renters do.

6. Conclusion
         The solid waste collection and disposal industry has undergone dramatic changes
over the past two decades. First, the structure of landfills has changed from local town
dumps to large regional landfills equipped to reduce the negative externalities associated
with garbage disposal. Second, Japan, much of Europe, and the northeast regions of the
United States have turned to incineration to manage residential solid waste since the
1970’s. Financially, incineration has been most successful where land is scarce (and hence
the costs of landfills are high). Some still question the environmental benefits of
incineration. Third, the portion of solid waste that is recycled has risen sharply over the
past decade. This growth has been facilitated by greater government involvement designed
to encourage households to separate waste. The growth in the supply of recycled materials
has resulted in a short-run glut of materials, and governments have been active in finding
markets for these materials. Several states in the U.S. have passed an assortment of
policies with this goal in mind. Finally, roughly 4000 local communities in the U.S. have
begun to price garbage by the bag. These local programs have helped to pay the rising
                                           -31-

costs of disposal in some areas, and they provide an incentive for households to recycle
more. The extent to which these programs produce positive net benefits is still debated in
the economics literature.
         As residential solid waste became a more important issue to policy makers,
intellectual attention from economists increased. The number of economic papers devoted
to residential solid waste and recycling has risen sharply over the past 10 years. The bulk
of these papers provide empirical estimates of the effects of government policies on
household disposal behavior. Another portion is devoted to prescribing the efficient policy
approach. Most models support the use of some form of a “deposit-refund” system. The
deposit or advanced disposal fee could be applied at either the point of production or
purchase. The refund or subsidy to recycling could be given to households that recycle or
to firms that purchase recycled materials. Other economic models support a tax on virgin
material or a direct tax on the household’s disposal choices.
         Even though the economic literature has reached some consensus over the choice
of policy directives, very few of these recommendations have been pursued explicitly by
the policy-making community. Advanced disposal fees exist only for some products in
some countries. Explicit recycling subsidies are also few and far between. Deposit-refund
systems have been implemented only for beverage containers and have only been
implemented in some countries. Perhaps additional work could design structures for these
policies to help minimize the administrative costs. Palmer and Walls (1999) have begun
work in this area. On the other hand, many jurisdictions already have implicit deposit-
refund systems on all goods, to the extent that they impose a general sales tax on all
purchases and use some of the money to pay for free curbside recycling collection.
         Many economic predictions have been confirmed by empirical work: a higher price
per bag of garbage is found to reduce demand for garbage collection, and higher incomes
are found to increase waste for disposal. Other behaviors are not yet well understood,
however, such as observed amounts of recycling even when households have no incentive
to recycle.
                                -32-



                          Figure 1: Disposal Trends (%)
                           Source:BiocycleMagazine
      90
      80
      70
      60
      50
      40
      30
      20
      10
       0
           1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997


                 % Landfiled        %Recycled               % Incinerated




                           Figure 2: Tipping Fees ($/ton)
                            Source: Biocycle Magazine
90
80
70
60                                                                          New Jersey
50
                                                                            North Carolina
40
                                                                            Ohio
30
                                                                            Texas
20
                                                                            Colorado
10
                                                                            California
0
     1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
                                         -33-




                         Figure 3: Price Index of Recyclable Materials
                         Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (1982=100)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
 50
  0
      1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998


                         Aluminum           Cardboard          Newspaper




                                    Figure 4: Landfill Crisis?
                                   Source:BiocycleMagazine

25

20

15

10

 5

 0
       1988     1989    1990     1991     1992      1993     1994        1995    1996   1997


                          Capacity(inyears)              Landfils (in 1,000's)
                                  -34-



                           Figure 5: Number of Incinerators
                              Source: Biocycle Magazine


200

150

100

50

 0
      1988   1989   1990     1991     1992     1993       1994   1995   1996   1997


                                           Incinerators
                                                   -35-


                     Figure 6: The Choice of Garbage (g) and Recycling (r)



$/unit
                                                                pkδr = mc of r




             pg = mc of g


                                            S.E.                                                I.E.




                                       r*
              r                                                                                    g


         0                                                                                      g + r = c/α

         An increase in pg raises the flat marginal cost of garbage disposal (mc of g). It thus moves
         r* to the right by a substitution effect (S.E.), and it moves the right-hand origin (c/α) to the
         left by an income effect (I.E.). Both effects reduce garbage g.
                                 -36-

TABLE 1: USE OF LANDFILLS FOR WASTE DISPOSAL IN EUROPE


  COUNTRY                               PERCENT LANDFILLED
                                        (NET OF RECYCLING)

  Denmark                               44

  France                                54

  Greece                                100

  Ireland                               100

  Italy                                 85

  Netherlands                           56-61

  Sweden                                35-49

  Switzerland                           22-25

  United Kingdom                        90

  United States                         90

  West Germany                          66-74




Source: Jenkins (1993), based on data gathered by: US Congress, Office of
Technology Assessment (1989).
                                             -37-

    TABLE 2: U.S. STATE POLICIES DESIGNED TO INCREASE RECYCLING


                                                                      NUMBER OF STATES
POLICY                                                                  IMPLEMENTED

Pass a recycling goal                                                        45

Require all municipalities to implement curbside recycling
programs and pass a local ordinances making household and                    7
commercial recycling mandatory

Require all municipalities to implement curbside or drop-off
recycling programs but not a mandatory ordinance                             7

Require all municipalities and counties to satisfy a minimum
recycling quota without designating the method to achieve it                 8

Provide grants to municipalities to help finance recycling programs
                                                                             34

Ban yard waste from being disposed in landfills                              23

Implement a deposit/refund system for beverage containers                    9

Provide tax credits for new recycling facilities                             29

Provide low-interest loans for new recycling facilities                      15

Require all state government offices to purchase recycled
materials                                                                    29


Source: Glenn (1998).
                                            -38-

    TABLE 3: EMPIRICAL ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT OF UNIT-PRICING

                                                                Change in     Change in
  Study            Data                            Model        Garbage       Recycling
  Wertz            Compares subscription           Comparison   ε = -0.15
  (1976)           program in San Francisco        of Means
                   with flat fees imposed by
                   “all urban areas”
  Jenkins          Panel of 14 cities (10 with                  ε = -0.12
  (1993)           user fees) over 1980-88
  Hong et al.      1990 survey of 4,306            Ordered      No           Unspecified
  (1993)           households in and around        Probit and   significant  positive
                   Portland, Oregon.               2SLS         impact       relationship
  Reschovsky       1992 mail survey of 1,422       Probit                    No
  and Stone        households in and around                                  significant
  (1994)           Ithaca, NY.                                               impact
  Miranda et       Panel of 21 cities over 18      Comparison   17%-74% Average
  al. (1994)       months beginning in 1990        of Means     reduction in increase of
                                                                garbage      128%
  Callan and       1994 cross-section of 324                                 6.6%-
  Thomas           towns in MA, 55 with unit-      OLS                       12.1%
  (1997)           pricing programs                                          increase
  Fullerton and    Two-period panel of 75          OLS          ε = -0.076 Cross-price
  Kinnaman         households in 1992                           (weight)     elasticity is
  (1996)                                                        ε = -0.226 0.073
                                                                (volume)
  Podolsky         1992 cross-section of 159       OLS          ε = -0.39
  and Spiegel      municipalities in NJ, 12
  (1998)           with unit-pricing
  Kinnaman         1991 cross-section of 959       OLS          ε = -0.19     ε = 0.23
  and Fullerton    towns across the U. S.,
  (1997)           114 with unit-pricing           2SLS         ε = -0.28     ε = 0.22
  Strathman et     Seven year (1984-1991)          OLS          ε = -0.11
  al. (1995)       time series in Portland, OR
  Seguino et al.   1993-1994 cross section         Comparison   56%
  (1995)           of 60 towns in Maine, 29        of Means     decrease
                   with unit-pricing

ε = price elasticity of demand, OLS = ordinary least squares, 2SLS = two stage least
squares.
