NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE QUALITY OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS
Mark McClellan
Douglas Staiger
Working Paper 7327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7327

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1999

We thank Haruko Noguchi, Dhara Shah, and Yu-Chu Shen for outstanding assistance with data management
and analysis, and seminar participants at the NBER and various universities for helpful comments. The
National Institute on Aging, the Health Care Financing Administration, and the Olin Foundation provided
financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Mark McClellan and Douglas Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Quality of Health Care Providers
Mark McClellan and Douglas Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 7327
August 1999
JEL No. I10, L15, C33
ABSTRACT
Obtaining better information on the quality of health care providers is one of the most pressing
issues in health policy today. In this paper we (1) develop a new method for measuring quality of care that
overcomes the key limitations of available quality measures, and (2) apply this method to estimating the
quality of hospital care for elderly patients with heart disease. Our approach optimally combines
information from all available current and past quality indicators in order to more accurately estimate and
forecast each provider’s quality level. For patients with heart disease, the method is able to predict and
forecast differences in patient outcomes across hospitals remarkably well - far better than existing methods.
Our approach also provides an empirical basis for choosing among potential quality indicators. In
particular, we find that differences across hospitals in short-term mortality rates following a heart attack,
adjusted for patient demographics, are excellent indicators of quality of care: They vary dramatically across
hospitals, are persistent over time, are highly correlated with alternative quality indicators, and are highly
correlated with mortality rates that adjust more extensively for patient severity. Thus, comparing quality
of care across providers may be far more feasible than many now believe.
Mark McClellan
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94305
and NBER
markmc@texas.stanford.edu

Douglas Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
doug.staiger@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
The lack of good information on performance or quality is a core problem in many areas
of public policy and evaluation today. The difficulty of developing reliable information on the
quality of health care providers for guiding public policies and individual choices is perhaps the
most striking example. Many reforms in medical financing and health plan choice have focused
on improving competition and efficiency in health care delivery. While these reforms have
clearly affected medical prices and expenditures, they have also led to heightened concerns
about the quality of medical care.

Are managed care plans reducing costs by avoiding

providers and services that are more expensive yet worthwhile? How can health plans and
providers compete effectively in quality if potential enrollees and patients have little reliable
information on quality to use as a basis of their choices? How can providers hope to improve
quality if they also have little reliable information?
The reason that these questions are so difficult results from the limited availability of
useful information on the quality of health care providers. The quality information problem has
many sources. First, measurement is a problem because it is difficult to collect timely and
relevant data (often on long-term patient outcomes) for evaluating providers. Even with good
data, multidimensionality is a problem. Quality of medical care has many dimensions -outcomes, processes of care, and others – all of which would ideally be integrated in a quality
evaluation. A third obstacle is the noise inherent in any health care quality measure, due to the
small sample of patients and large number of factors other than provider quality that influence
quality measures for any individual provider. Finally, bias is a problem to the extent that
variation in patient treatment or outcomes across providers is the result of systematic differences

1

in patient mix rather than differences in care. All of these problems have limited the value of
explicit information on health care quality, particularly for important health outcomes.
In this paper, we describe and apply a framework for addressing all of these issues in
the provision of quality information. We develop measures of major health outcomes for
patients treated by different hospitals for their heart disease over time. Our analysis considers a
range of serious health outcome measures, including mortality and serious complications that
have implications for quality of life, for which the quality evaluation problems are most salient.
We adapt vector autoregression (VAR) methods for panel data to estimate the systematic
relationship across outcomes and over time, and then use this information to forecast future
outcomes and to filter out much of the noise in the observed outcome measures. The basic idea
is simple. Any single outcome measure for a health care provider will be a noisy (often very
noisy) indicator of that provider’s quality. But all of the dimensions of quality that we consider –
multiple quality measures, and multiple time periods – are likely to be related to each other, and
so can aid the extraction of the signal from any particular measure.
This framework provides the basis for addressing all of the four major problems which
have impeded the development and use of quality measures. Our method is computationally
feasible even for large datasets with many outcomes and many years. More importantly, this
method results in prediction accuracy that is much greater than is possible using existing
statistical methods for addressing the signal extraction problem. In addition, it provides a
quantitative basis for integrating a large number of dimensions of provider quality, and for
limiting the often-substantial costs of data collection efforts to monitor quality. Our method
estimates how highly correlated the signals are from alternative quality measures, thereby

2

providing information on whether some quality measures contain redundant information. For
example, we find that outcomes measures based on the limited information in patient claims are
highly correlated with measures that control for far more extensive information on patient mix
available from patient charts. This result provides an empirical basis for determining whether the
collection of additional, potentially expensive information on patient characteristics is worthwhile
.
Our application involves heart disease in elderly Americans. Heart disease is the leading
cause of death in the United States, and is clearly a condition for which the quality of medical
care provided may have a substantial impact on an individual’s health. Between 1970 and
1995, the death rate from heart disease has fallen by more than half, and a number of studies
have documented that much of this improvement can be attributed to changes in medical
treatment (Goldman, 1984; Hunink et al., 1997; Heidenreich and McClellan, 1998).
The issues we address here are by no means unique to the health care industry. The
same problems of measuring quality arise in fields as diverse as airline safety, school test scores,
and mutual fund performance.

Our approach to addressing the problem of profiling

performance is applicable to all of these contexts. In addition, the estimation and forecasting
methods we use are in principle applicable in many other settings, from forecasting local area
unemployment and wage growth based on survey data to estimating betas for individual stocks
based on weekly price data.
In Section 2, we review the issues and previous studies relevant to our analysis. In
Section 3, we describe our empirical methods. Section 4 describes the data on heart disease.
Section 5 presents our results, and Section 6 concludes.

3

2. Background
Information on provider quality in any industry is useful for two broad purposes:
forecasts and evaluations. Forecast applications are forward-looking, to guide choices about
providers that may influence future outcomes. Which hospitals would be the best choices as
contractors for a managed care plan? If I have a heart attack, which hospital should I choose?
Information on past performance can guide these decisions, but perhaps in a complex way.
Relying simply on a provider’s performance in the previous year may lead to worse decisions
than considering patterns in performance over several years.

Evaluation applications are

backward-looking, to provide insights into the consequences of alternative policy options or
practices in the past. What is the effect of hospital volume or experience on outcomes? What
are the consequences of changes in hospital ownership? Do hospitals with greater adherence to
standards of care have better outcomes? Policy and practice evaluations generally do not occur
at the level of specific providers. But understanding how variations across providers may
contribute to the outcome differences resulting from differences in policies or practices may lead
to more appropriate inferences about their effects.
Many obstacles hamper the development of reliable forecasts and evaluations. We
group these obstacles into four general categories. First, measurement is an obstacle: it may
be difficult or costly to collect relevant data for evaluating providers in a timely way. For
example, the relevant time period for measuring outcomes such as survival after a heart attack
may be weeks or longer; until this time has passed, the relevant outcome measures are simply
not available. Moreover, obtaining the relevant data may be expensive. For example, collecting

4

information on survival requires matching an individual’s hospitalization records to death
records, and collecting information on patient satisfaction requires locating and surveying
patients.
Second, the multidimensionality of quality magnifies the problems associated with
collecting data on any particular measure. Patients are likely to care most about outcomes of
care, and relevant outcomes include not only survival but also the occurrence of various
complications and functional impairments. Many other factors, such as the processes of care,
may also contribute to patients’ judgments about their satisfaction with the quality of care
received. In addition, the processes of care themselves may be of some interest in evaluating
provider quality. For example, the extent to which hospitals apply treatments that have been
demonstrated as effective may be useful indicators of quality. Patients and especially health
plans may also be interested in resource use and costs of alternative providers. Many clinical
reasons suggest that these outcomes are related to each other, but the nature and magnitude of
the relationships is generally not obvious. For example, hospitals that perform better in terms of
heart attack survival may also do better in avoiding complications. But it is also possible that
increased survival is associated with a greater rate of quality of life impairments.
To date, few systematic approaches have been developed to integrate all of these
quality measures. Existing provider “report cards” are either ad hoc, or rely on clinical
considerations rather than empirical relationships to describe “clusters” of quality measures.
Similarly, the empirical literature in this area generally focuses on either single measures chosen
on a priori grounds, or ad hoc aggregates across measures or years.

5

A third obstacle is the substantial amount of noise associated with virtually all important
measures of provider quality. Most serious health problems, such as heart attacks, are relatively
infrequent; many hospitals may treat only a few dozen patients or fewer over an entire year.
And most major outcomes, such as long-term mortality, will be influenced by an enormous
number of factors other than the quality of the provider. As a result, it is unlikely to be feasible
to assess any single outcome measure for a particular provider with a useful degree of precision.
In response to this concern, the National Center for Quality Assurance (NCQA), one
of the leading organizations in the development of quality assessment measures, has focused on
the development of measures for which 411 cases per provider can reasonably be collected in a
specific time period (e.g., six months or a year). As a result, current NCQA measures focus
primarily on preventive care, for which the relevant denominator is the entire population treated
by a provider or plan, or on outcomes for very common (and less serious) illnesses. None of the
current or proposed NCQA quality measures involve outcomes for conditions serious enough
to require hospital care.
A second response to the noise problem has been the development of hierarchichal
Bayesian models of patient outcomes. The goal of this approach is to estimate posterior
distributions for key provider-specific parameters that influence patient outcomes.
Unfortunately, the complexity of this approach has limited its application to single outcomes and
fairly small samples (see for example Normand, Glickman and Gatsonis, 1997). As we discuss
in section 3, our approach is closely related to these empirical Bayes methods but represents a
substantial departure in how we manage the complexity of the estimation problem so as to
incorporate more outcomes and larger samples.

6

The final obstacle to measuring provider quality is the possibility of bias due to
systematic differences across providers in the patients they treat (case-mix). The debate over
the bias of claims-based measured has been extensive, but the empirical evidence for the
existence of a bias is mixed (Landon et. al, 1996; Krakauer et. al, 1992; Park et. al, 1990).
One response to this problem has been to collect more detailed information on patient condition
at the time of admission from patient charts. However chart review is costly enough that it is
unclear whether this is a feasible long-term solution. For example, HCFA collected chart
information on all Medicare hospital admissions for cardiac conditions in 1994-95 but the cost
was around $100 per case.1 To the extent that such chart data provides the best case-mix
adjustment possible, outcome measures based on such data provide a “gold standard” to which
other measures may be compared. In section 5, we provide new evidence on the relationship
between such chart-based measures and the more commonly available claims-based measures.

1

Jeffrey Newman, personal communication.

7

3. Empirical Methods
We now describe our method for multivariate signal extraction using multiple measures
of hospital quality, including information from multiple years, multiple diagnoses, and multiple
outcomes. We begin by providing some notation, and laying out the basic goals of our empirical
work. We then describe our estimation method, first for the case in which we only use quality
measures to form predictions, and then in the more general case where we also use other
hospital characteristics. Finally, we discuss how our estimator is related to empirical Bayes
estimators.

A. Notation and Model
Suppose we observe data for a sample of hospitals (j=1,...N) on multiple dimensions of
quality (k=1,...,K) over many years (t=1,...,T). For simplicity of notation we will assume that
each hospital has data for all years, and within each year has data on all outcomes, although the
methods can easily be extended to cases of missing observations. We are interested in the
hospital-specific effect µ from a patient-level equation of the form:
(1)

Ykijt = µkjt + Xijt Π kt + ωkijt ,

where Y is the quality measure (e.g. death within 30 days of admission), X is a set of patient
characteristics (e.g. age, gender and comorbidities), ω is the error term, and i indexes the
individual patient. Thus, µkjt measures the true quality difference in dimension k across hospitals
j in year t, controlling for patient characteristics X.
We do not observe the true hospital-specific effects directly, but rather observe
estimates of these hospital-specific effects from a patient level regression run separately by year

8

for each quality measure. In other words, for each hospital we observe a vector of K noisy
hospital quality measures for T years. Let Mj be a 1xTK vector of observed quality measures
for hospital j, adjusted for differences in X using patient-level regressions.2 Then
(2)

Mj = µj + ε j

where µj is a 1xTK vector of the true hospital effects for hospital j, and ε j is the estimation error
(which is mean zero and uncorrelated with µj). Note that the variance of ε j can be estimated
from the patient-level regressions, since this is simply the variance of the regression estimates
Mj. In particular, E(ε jt′ε jt)=Ω jt and E(ε jt′ε js)=0 for t≠s, where Ω jt is the covariance matrix of
the effect estimates for hospital j in year t.
Our problem is how to use Mj to predict µj. More specifically, we wish to create a
linear combination of each hospital’s observed measures in such a way that it minimizes the
mean squared error of our predictions. In other words, we would like to run the following
hypothetical regressions:
(3)

µkjt = Mj β kjt + ν kjt

but cannot do this directly, since µ is unobserved and the optimal β will vary by hospital and
year.
Equation 3 highlights the key problem in predicting hospital quality. The problem is
analogous to classical measurement error: the regressor Mkjt is a noisy estimate of the
dependent variable, and therefore should not have a coefficient of one in this hypothetical
regression. In other words, the estimated hospital-specific intercepts are not optimal predictors
2

That is, M j is the estimated hospital effect from a regression of Y on X with hospital fixed effects included.
Since we are only interested in relative rankings, and not the absolute level of the intercept, we construct M
so that it is mean zero in each year.

9

of the true hospital-specific intercepts in terms of minimizing mean squared error. As is usually
the case with measurement error, we can improve the predictions in equation 3 by attenuating
the coefficient towards zero, and this attenuation should be greatest for hospitals with
imprecisely-estimated effects. This is the basic shrinkage or “smoothing” technique that has
been applied in the empirical Bayes literature (e.g., Morris, 1983). Moreover, if the true
hospital-specific effects from other quality equations (other years, other types of patients) are
correlated with the effect we are trying to predict, then using their estimated values can further
improve prediction.

B. Estimation
While we cannot estimate equation (3) directly, it is possible to estimate the parameters
for this hypothetical regression. The minimum mean squared error linear predictor is given by
E(µj| Mj) = Mj β , where β = [E(Mj'Mj)]-1E(Mj'µj). This best linear predictor depends on
two moment matrices:
(4.1)

E(Mj'Mj) = E(µj'µj) + E(ε j'ε j)

(4.2)

E(Mj'µj) = E(µj'µj)

We can estimate these required moment matrices directly as follows:
1) We estimate E(ε j'ε j) using the patient-level OLS estimate of the covariance matrix for the
parameter estimates Mj. Call this estimate Sj. Note that Sj varies across hospitals.
2) We estimate E(µj'µj) by noting that E(Mj'Mj - Sj) = E(µj'µj). If we assume that E(µj'µj) is
the same for all hospitals, then it can be estimated by the sample average of Mj'Mj - Sj. It is

10

easy to relax the assumption that E(µj'µj) is the same for all hospitals by calculating Mj'Mj –
Sj for subgroups of hospitals.
With estimates of E(µj'µj) and E(ε j'ε j), we can form least squares estimates of the
parameters in equation 3 which minimize the mean squared error. Analogous to simple
regression, our prediction of a hospital’s true effect is given by:
(5)

µ$ j = Mj E(Mj'Mj)-1 E(Mj'µj) = Mj [E(µj'µj) + E(ε j'ε j)]-1 E(µj'µj)

where we use estimates of E(µj'µj) and E(ε j'ε j) in place of their true values. We can use the
estimated moments to calculate other statistics of interest as well, such as the standard error of
the prediction and the R-squared for equation 3, based on the usual least squares formulas.
Equation 5 in combination with estimates of the required moment matrices provides the
basis for our estimates of hospital quality. Such estimates of hospital quality have a number of
attractive properties. First, they incorporate information in a systematic way from many
outcome measures and many years into the predictions of any one outcome. Moreover, our
estimates of hospital quality are optimal linear predictors for a mean squared error criterion.
Finally, these estimates are far simpler to construct than those derived from existing Bayesian
approaches (e.g Normand, Glickman and Gatsonis, 1997). The patient-level regressions are
somewhat computationally intensive, but can be performed with standard software for
estimating fixed effect models, and the required moment matrices for the hospital-level estimates
can be estimated in seconds even for large samples of hospitals. We will refer to estimates
based on equation (5) as “filtered” estimates, since the key advantage of such estimates is that
they optimally filter out the estimation error in the observed quality measures.

11

In practice, there are a number of reasons to impose more structure on E(µj'µj). First,
in order to provide out-of-sample forecasts of these quality measures in future years, some
structure on the time-series behavior of these measures is required. Moreover, if the assumed
time-series structure is correct, it will improve the precision of the estimated moments (and thus
of the estimated effects) by limiting the number of parameters that need to be estimated. Finally,
the correlation in quality measures over time and across outcomes is of direct interest, and will
be easier to interpret to the extent it can be adequately summarized by a simple time-series
model.
Therefore, we assume that each hospital’s quality measures change over time according
to a vector autoregressive (VAR) model. The VAR model has been applied successfully in
other time series and panel data contexts, when the goal is to create a flexible model for
forecasting and summarizing the data (Watson, 1994; Holtz-Eakin, Newey and Rosen, 1988).
The VAR model is a generalization of the usual autoregressive model, and assumes that each
hospital’s quality measures in a given year depend on the hospital’s quality measures in past
years plus a contemporaneous shock that may be correlated across quality measures. In most
of what follows, we assume a non-stationary first-order VAR for µjt (1xK), where:
(6)

µjt = µj,t-1Φ + ujt , with V(ujt) = Σ and V(µj1) = Γ .

Thus, we need estimates of the lag coefficients (Φ), the variance matrix of the innovations (Σ)
and the initial variance conditions (Γ), where Σ and Γ are symmetric KxK matrices of
parameters and Φ is a general KxK matrix of parameters.
The VAR structure implies that E(Mj'Mj - Sj) = E(µj'µj) = f(Φ,Σ,Γ). Thus, the VAR
parameters can be estimated by Optimal Minimum Distance (OMD) methods (Chamberlain,

12

1984), i.e. by choosing the VAR parameters so that the theoretical moment matrix, f(Φ,Σ,Γ), is
as close as possible to the corresponding sample moments from the sample average of Mj'Mj Sj. More specifically, let dj be a vector of the non-redundant (lower triangular) elements of
Mj'Mj - Sj, and let δ be a vector of the corresponding moments from the true moment matrix,
so that δ=g(Φ,Σ,Γ). Then the OMD estimates of (Φ,Σ,Γ) minimize the following OMD
objective function:
(7)

[

] [

]

′
q = N d − g (Φ , Σ , Γ) V −1 d − g (Φ, Σ, Γ )

where V is the sample covariance matrix for dj, and d is the sample mean of dj. If the VAR
model is correct, the value of the objective function, q, will be distributed χ2 (p) where p is the
degree of over-identification (the difference between the number of elements in d and the
number of parameters being estimated). Thus, q provides a goodness of fit statistic that
indicates how well the VAR model fits the actual covariances in the data.

C. Incorporating known hospital characteristics into the estimates
Thus far, we have assumed that the only data available are quality measures based on
patient outcomes. More generally, one would expect that easily observable provider
characteristics, such as patient volume or teaching status, might provide additional information
about quality. For example, if low patient volume is associated with poor patient outcomes,
then small hospitals would be expected to have poor outcomes even when there is little
information in their observed outcomes measures. Our approach is easily extended to allow for
such a systematic relationship between hospital characteristics and patient outcomes.

13

Suppose that for each hospital we have a set of hospital characteristics Zj, where Zj is
1xL. Note that Zj may include time-specific characteristics (e.g. patient volume in year t) as
individual elements. Then equation 2 can be generalized so that hospital-specific quality is a
linear function of observable hospital characteristics and a random effect:
(2′)

Mj = µ*j + ε j , where µ*j = Zj α + µj and E(Zj′µj) = 0.

As the sample of hospitals grows, the parameter α can be consistently estimated with a
weighted least squares regression of M on Z (using estimates of the estimation error in M to
form weights), so the conditional mean of the hospital-specific effects (Zjα) is known
asymptotically. Our approach can be used to generate estimates of the remaining random effect
by replacing Mj with (Mj - Zjα) in the proceeding discussion. The estimated random effect is
then added to the conditional mean (Zjα) to form the final estimate for each hospital.

D. Relationship to empirical Bayes estimators and Kalman filters
Our approach is closely related to the literature on empirical Bayes estimation (see
Morris, 1983). The relationship is seen most clearly by assuming normality and rewriting
equations 2′ and 6 in terms of the distributions for M and µ:
(8)

Mj | µj ~ N(µj, Sj)

(9)

µj | α, Φ, Σ, Γ ~ N(Zjα, f(Φ,Σ,Γ) )

We take Sj as known, and estimate the parameters (α, Φ, Σ, Γ) from the marginal distribution:
(10)

Mj | α, Φ, Σ, Γ ~ N(Zjα, Sj + f(Φ,Σ,Γ) )
With normality assumptions for the distributions of (8) through (10), our OMD

estimates of the parameters are asymptotically equivalent to quasi-maximum likelihood estimates

14

(Chamberlain, 1984), but are computationally much more efficient. Our proposed estimator for
µ is equivalent to the posterior mean of µ, i.e. µ$ j = E(µj | Mj, α, Φ, Σ, Γ), where we replace
the unknown parameters with consistent estimates. If the normality assumptions are correct,
and if the parameters were known, then this Bayes estimator would be the optimal choice for
any symmetric loss function (Morris, 1983). Moreover, the posterior distribution for µ would
also be normal so that the estimate ( µ$ j ) along with its standard error could be used to form
posterior probabilities, for example to calculate the probability that a hospital’s effect lies above
some value.
Formally, equations (8)-(10) are similar to the statistical assumptions used by Normand,
Glickman and Gatsonis (1997) with three key differences. First, Normand, Glickman, and
Gatsonis allow for a hospital-specific slope parameter, which multiplies a univariate index of a
patient’s risk.

Thus, the hospital-specific component of patient mortality may vary

unidimensionally by type of patient, rather than being a simple intercept shift as in our model.
Second, they estimate a much simpler structure for (9), in that they do not allow for multiple
quality measures that are correlated. Finally, they work with patient level distributions and
thereby avoid making a normality assumption in (8). Since equation (8) is characterizing the
distribution for regression intercepts that typically involve a large number of patients, the
normality assumption does not seem unreasonable as an approximation. Thus, our model
appears to maintain many of the attractive aspects of the hierarchical Bayes approach, while
dramatically simplifying the complexity of the estimation.

15

Finally, note that Equations 2′ and 6 are a linear state-space representation for M. The
predictions and forecasts we propose are similar to those used in the time-series literature on
state-space models using the Kalman filter (see Hamilton, 1994). We are able to exploit panel
data for a large number of health care providers and quality measures to estimate the model’s
parameters, and therefore avoid many of the technical and computational issues that are at the
heart of time-series literature.

4. Data
Our application of these methods involves the quality of care for heart disease in the
elderly. We consider two broad types of heart disease patients: patients with heart attack
(acute myocardial infarction, AMI) or with ischemic heart disease (IHD). A heart attack is an
acute blockage of an artery that provides blood to the heart muscle; it is a major health event
that almost always results in hospitalization. Ischemic heart disease hospitalizations involve
similar symptoms but somewhat less severe illness, characterized by inadequate blood flow to
the heart that does not actually cause death of heart muscle. For this condition, the hospital
treatment is intended to assure that a heart attack has not occurred, and especially to try to
improve blood flow and reduce heart workload to prevent future heart attacks and recurrent
symptoms such as chest pain or breathing problems.
We used longitudinal Medicare claims data to identify approximately 220,000 elderly
beneficiaries per year with new occurrences of AMI and approximately 360,000 patients per
year with new occurrences of IHD. We also used hospital claims, merged with death records,
to develop one-year outcome information on mortality and heart-related complications

16

(rehospitalizations for heart failure, and recurrent AMI or IHD) for all U.S. elderly patients
hospitalized with new occurrences of each of these conditions between 1984 and 1994.
Mortality outcomes are based on whether a patient died within a given time (e.g. 30 days) of the
initial admission. Complication outcomes are based on whether a patient was rehospitalized
between 30 and 365 days following the initial admission. Rehospitalizations within 30 days are
not counted because they are likely to reflect continuing treatment of the initial event, rather than
treatment of complications. The construction and content of these outcome data are described
in more detail elsewhere (e.g., McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse, 1994; Kessler and
McClellan; McClellan and Newhouse, 1997; McClellan and Noguchi, 1998a,b). To construct
hospital-specific quality measures using these outcome data, we grouped patients according to
their hospital of initial admission for heart disease treatment.3
Our sample is based on data from 1984 to 1994, and includes 3954 U.S. hospitals that
had at least three admissions for AMI and IHD in all years of the 1984-1994 period. Table 1
provides some summary statistics on elderly heart disease patients in the first and last year of
this sample. Mortality is substantial for both conditions – one-year AMI mortality is 28 percent
and one-year IHD mortality is 11 percent in 1984 – and improved markedly over time.
Similarly, complications occurred in many cases, and also declined to some extent over time
(heart failure has increased slightly over time; IHD and AMI recurrences have declined over
time). Despite the large number of patients, most hospitals treated relatively few cases. The

3

Many patients are transferred or readmitted for care at other hospitals following their initial admission; for
some patients, such transfers may even occur on the same day. Thus, the bulk of care actually received by
some patients may have taken place at a hospital other than the hospital of their original admission. From
the standpoint of guiding provider choices, however, quality assessment from the perspective of the initial
hospital choice seems most appropriate. It is also least subject to selection biases.

17

average hospital in this population provided the initial care for 50-60 AMI patients per year,
and for approximately 80 IHD patients per year in 1984 and 95 IHD patients per year in 1994.
This relatively small sample size, coupled with the large number of factors that may influence
heart disease mortality, illustrates why signal extraction for particular quality measures is a
difficult problem.
We used these patient-level data to construct hospital-level fixed effect measures Mj for
each outcome in each year, by estimating patient-level linear regressions for each outcome that
included fully-interacted demographic covariates (five-year age groups, gender, black or
nonblack race, urban or rural residence) and hospital effects. These adjusted Mj estimates
provide the basis for the VAR analyses described in the next section. It is worth noting that the
claims data do not include reliable information on comorbidity and severity, so that our
adjustment methods will not remove biases in “case mix” that are not correlated with patient
demographics. Because these forms of heart disease are urgent health problems, patients are
highly likely to go quickly to nearby facilities for care, so that the magnitude of selection biases
will be relatively small. We provide further evidence on the bias question in our results and
discussion below, through detailed analysis of the relationships among outcome measures as
well as integration of detailed chart-review data into our estimation methods.

5. Results
In this section we report the results of applying the methodology described in Section 2
to Medicare patient outcomes data. The results are divided into two sub-sections. The first
sub-section presents estimates of the VAR parameters for various models using 9 years of data

18

from 1984 to 1992. These parameter estimates are of direct interest because they provide
insight into fundamental relationships among the multiple dimensions of hospital quality: how
strongly are hospital outcomes correlated over time and across different measures? The second
sub-section presents evidence on the properties of the filtered estimates of hospital-specific
quality. The key issue is whether these filtered estimates extract enough of the signal in hospitalspecific outcomes measures to be of practical use. That is, are the measures precise enough to
allow informative comparisons across individual hospitals, and do they provide accurate
forecasts of hospital outcomes in 1993 and 1994?

A. Vector Autoregression (VAR) estimates
Table 2 illustrates our approach with estimates of the VAR parameters for two basic
models. Each column reports parameter estimates for a separate bivariate VAR(1) model (see
equation 6), estimated by OMD (see section 3) for two different sets of quality measures for
each hospital. The first column contains estimates for a model with 30-day AMI mortality
effects (DTH30) and 365-day AMI complication effects (CMP365). The next column is for a
model of 30-day AMI mortality and 90-day IHD mortality (IHD_DTH90). We use 90-day
mortality for IHD because 30-day mortality is quite low in IHD and very noisy (see Table 1 and
further discussion below). Each column reports the initial variance and correlation of the effects
in 1984 (Γ), the variance and correlation for the innovations to each effect (Σ), and the lag
coefficients (Φ). Recall that each effect depends on lags of both effects, so that for the model in
column one, we have:
30
E[ µt DTH 30 ] = Φ 11 µt DTH
+ Φ 21,
−1

CMP 365
t −1

30
365
and E[ µtCMP 365 ] = Φ 22 µt DTH
+ Φ 12 µtCMP
.
−1
−1

19

The parameter estimates for the model of DTH30 and CMP365 suggest that both
dimensions of hospital quality are quite persistent, with coefficients on their own lags of 0.887
for DTH30 and 0.973 for CMP365. There is much more true (signal) variation in hospital
quality for 30-day AMI mortality. The variance of DTH30 in 1984 is .00175 and the variance
of the innovation to DTH30 is 0.00036; this corresponds to a standard deviation in 30-day
AMI mortality rates across hospitals of over 4 percentage points, and a standard deviation for
the annual innovations of nearly 2 percentage points. The variation in CMP365 is smaller,
corresponding to a standard deviation of just over two-and-a-half percentage points in 1984
and a standard deviation of innovations under 1 percentage point.
A further notable result from the VAR model of DTH30 and CMP365 is that the two
measures are negatively correlated. A priori, a positive correlation might be expected, because
higher values represent worse outcomes. The negative correlation probably reflects the fact that
the “marginal” patients who survive if treated by higher quality hospitals are likely to have
relatively poor heart function. Thus, hospitals that have worse mortality performance have
better rates of subsequent complications, since fewer severely-ill patients survive to develop
complications. This negative correlation and the fact that there is very little variation in CMP365
to begin with suggest that CMP365 may be a poor measure of hospital quality, at least when
considered in isolation. The negative correlation also suggests that true quality differences and
not patient selection are responsible for most of the variation in our hospital quality measures. If
healthier heart patients led to low mortality at a hospital, we would also expect complication
rates at the hospital to be lower, not higher.

20

Results from a model of 30-day mortality for AMI and 90-day mortality for IHD
admissions are reported in the second column of Table 2. Compared to AMI outcomes at
hospitals, 90-day mortality for IHD is not very persistent, with a coefficient on its own lag of
only 0.606. As was the case with CMP365, the true variation in IHD 90-day mortality across
hospitals is much lower than for AMI, both in 1984 and in terms of the innovations. In contrast
to the CMP365 results, however, we estimate a positive correlation in the AMI and IHD
mortality rates both in 1984 and in the innovations. Thus, hospitals with low AMI mortality also
have low IHD mortality -- as would be expected if high-quality hospitals tend to produce
superior outcomes across many patient groups.
In the bottom panel of Table 2, we report p-values for a set of specification tests. The
first row reports the general goodness-of-fit test, which tests whether the VAR model provides
an adequate fit of the data. Both models fit the data reasonably well, with p-values from the
GMM goodness-of-fit test of around 3%. If the two measures in the VAR are not independent,
then combining information from both measures will improve prediction. As seen in the second
row of the bottom panel of Table 2, independence of the two measures is strongly rejected.4
Finally, in the last row of Table 2, we test for the presence of a second lag in the VAR model (a
VAR(2)).

We can formally reject the VAR(1) specification in favor of the VAR(2)

specification in one of the models (AMI and IHD mortality), and in this specification the
VAR(2) model also performs better on the goodness-of-fit test (p-value=0.24 for the VAR(2)).
Nevertheless, we will continue to focus on the VAR(1) specification because this specification is

4

The test of independence is a Wald test (4 d. f.) of the joint hypothesis that the correlation in 1984 is zero,
the correlation in the innovations is zero, and the cross lag terms (Φ12,Φ21) are zero.

21

more parsimonious, easier to interpret, and fits the data reasonably well. Below, we compare
the VAR(1) and VAR(2) specifications in terms of their forecasting ability.
The length of follow-up on the mortality measures used in Table 2 (30-day for AMI and
90-day for IHD) was chosen on a priori grounds; most studies of AMI outcomes focus on 30day mortality. However, the optimal length of follow-up is an empirical question: is there a time
(e.g. 30 days) after which there is no substantial change in true mortality differences across
hospitals, that is, just added noise in outcomes? In Table 3, we explore this question for both
AMI (the first two columns) and IHD (the second two columns). Each column of the table
reports estimates of bivariate VAR parameters from models of a short-term and a long-term
mortality measure. To make the estimates easier to interpret, we report the VAR coefficients in
terms of (1) the effect for short-term mortality, and (2) the difference between the effects for
long-term and short-term mortality. In this way, the parameter estimates for the second
outcome refer directly to the changes in hospital-associated mortality between the short-term
and the long-term. For AMI, we report estimates for models of 7-day mortality with the
change from 7-day to 30-day mortality, and for models of 30-day mortality with the change
from 30-day to 365-day mortality. For IHD, we report similar estimates using 90-day mortality
as the intermediate measure.
For AMI, the estimates in Table 3 imply that essentially all of the variation in outcomes
across hospitals arises in short-term mortality. We estimate that the variance in 7-day mortality
effects in 1984 is 0.00153, while the variance in the change from 7-day to 30-day is only
0.00005 (first column). Similarly, much more variation arises in the first 30 days than between
day 30 and 365 (second column). The variance in the innovations is much larger for 7-day

22

mortality than for the changes in mortality after 7-days. To the extent there are changes in
mortality after 30 days, they appear to be negatively correlated with 30-day mortality. Thus,
nearly all of the differences across hospitals in terms of AMI mortality appear within the first
week, and over long horizons these differences may shrink. These estimates suggest that
hospital performance in the first week of AMI care is the principal determinant of long-term
outcome differences. From a clinical standpoint, this empirical finding seems to reflect the fact
that many of the critical medical interventions in AMI care take place within the first days of
care, and have their impact on survival at that time. From an evaluation standpoint, the
empirical finding suggests that assessing outcomes soon after AMI is sufficient for detecting the
vast majority of mortality-related quality differences across hospitals.
Mortality for IHD exhibits a different pattern. For IHD, there is very little mortality
variation at 7 days, with much of the variation emerging in both the 7 to 90 day and 90 to 360
day periods. In 1984, 7-day mortality was positively correlated with 7-90 day mortality
(0.792) and 90-day mortality was positively correlated with 90-365 day mortality (0.135).
Thus, hospitals with low initial mortality tended to have low mortality in subsequent months,
although this pattern is diminished by the negative correlation in the innovations after 90 days.
Once again, our empirical findings reflect the clinical care for ischemic heart disease. While IHD
symptoms are an urgent problem, the treatments for IHD have more of a long-term focus on
preventing the progression of blockages and avoiding future heart attacks.

Thus, hospital

quality may have little impact on short-term outcomes, yet still substantially influence longer-term
complications and death.

23

The findings in Table 3 have important policy implications for at least two reasons.
First, they suggest that the first few days of treatment for AMI patients is the key period in
determining outcome differences across hospitals, but not for IHD patients. Thus, attempts to
improve patient outcomes should focus on treatment decisions in the first days after AMI,
whereas decisions with a longer-term focus and later treatment decisions are more important for
providing high-quality IHD care. A second implication is that a mortality-based quality measure
for AMI (but not IHD) should involve short-term mortality rather than longer-term mortality,
since short-term mortality rates capture nearly all of the signal variation present in longer term
AMI mortality but tend to have less noise.
A practical advantage of our VAR method is that it provides a systematic basis for
choosing among outcome measures that may be equally valid on a priori grounds. In particular,
the VAR parameters provide estimates of how much signal variance there is in the original
hospital effect data. We can use these estimates of the signal variance, in combination with
estimates of the amount of estimation error in each measure (Sj), to examine the signal-to-noise
ratio for any quality measure.
Figure 1 plots estimates of the ratio of signal variance to total (signal plus noise) variance
in the original (observed) hospital effects against the number of admissions on which the
measure was based. The signal ratio rises with sample size, as the variance of the estimation
error declines. The estimates shown are for 1992, and are based on the VAR models from
Tables 2 and 3. Not surprisingly, AMI mortality measures perform the best in terms of signal
ratios because of the relatively large variance across hospitals in the true effects. For AMI, the
signal ratio for 7-day mortality is higher than for 30-day mortality, and much higher than for

24

365-day mortality. All three measures have roughly the same signal, but 7-day mortality has
less estimation error because the overall mortality rate is lower at 7 days; longer-term outcomes
largely add pure noise. The signal ratio for IHD mortality shows the opposite pattern, with 7day IHD mortality having the lowest signal ratio and 365-day IHD mortality having the highest
signal ratio – but still well below AMI mortality measures. Thus, it appears that short-term
mortality measures are most useful for AMI, while long-term mortality measures are more useful
for IHD. Finally, the signal ratios for AMI complications are comparable to 1-year IHD
mortality, and roughly half as large as the signal ratio in 7-day AMI mortality for a hospital with
100 admissions.
Figure 1 also highlights how little signal there is in outcome measures for most hospitals.
In 1992 over half the hospitals in our sample admitted fewer than 40 AMI patients, and for
these hospitals the signal ratio even in their AMI mortality measures is under one-third. Thus,
for the majority of hospitals, individual patient outcome measures for a single year provide
information on quality that is crude at best.
The dynamics of patient outcomes differ substantially between small and large hospitals.
Table 4 contains VAR estimates from models of mortality for AMI and IHD, estimated on the
whole sample and then separately for low- and high-volume groups. We split the sample
roughly in half, with “high volume” hospitals having at least 25 AMI admissions in every year,
and “low volume” hospitals having at least one year with less than 25 AMI admissions. The
most striking difference between these two groups is that there is much greater variance in
mortality effects in the small hospitals. The variance of both AMI and IHD mortality is 2-3
times larger in the small hospitals, and the innovation variance (the variance of year-to-year

25

changes in mortality) is more than 3 times larger in the small hospitals. These results are
consistent with the notion that there is less discipline on product quality when quality is difficult
to observe. In particular, given the difficulty in observing a small hospital’s true effect from the
patient outcomes data, small hospitals with high mortality might continue to attract patients (and,
therefore, survive) and might find it more difficult to detect and correct quality problems as they
occur. It is also consistent with quality at small hospitals being more dependent on idiosyncratic
changes in heart disease treatment, such as the arrival or departure of an individual physicians or
other specific innovation, that would be expected to have relatively smaller effects at larger
hospitals.
An important question is whether these patterns which we observe in the VAR
estimates are the result of quality differences that vary across providers, or differences in patient
mix which persist and are correlated across outcomes. Table 5 presents evidence on this
question. The table reports estimates of the correlation between the AMI outcome measures
used in the previous tables, which are based on claims data and adjusted for demographic
differences across hospitals, and alternative measures of the same outcomes, which are based
on detailed medical chart-review data and adjusted for a far more extensive list of patient
comorbidities and severity. The data for this comparison come from HCFA’s CCP project,
which collected information from patient charts for all Medicare patients admitted for AMI
during an 8-month period in 1994-95 measures (see the McClellan and Noguchi, 1998b, for
more details on the data and variables).
The comparison of claim- and chart-based data suggests that there is very little bias in
the claims-based measures. In the first column of table 5, we report the correlation of the chart-

26

based and claims-based measures. For all of the measures, we estimate a correlation of chartand claims-based measures of over 0.8, while the correlation for the complications measure and
for short term mortality are over 0.95. The second column of table 5 shows the estimated slope
parameters from the hypothetical regressions µchart = βµclaim,5 which suggest that the claimbased measures introduce some measurement error relative to the chart-based measures. The
parameter estimates are below one for all outcome measures, indicating that the claims-based
measures tend to overstate differences among providers. Together, these results suggest that
some hospitals would be less likely to appear as “outliers” in terms of absolute deviations from
a mortality standard.

However, the claims-based measures are conveying very similar

information about provider quality to that obtained using chart-based data, particularly for the
AMI outcome measures that provide the most accurate signals about quality variations.
Overall, five substantive findings emerge from the VAR estimates contained in Tables 25. First, there is a substantial amount of correlation in outcomes over time and across measures.
Outcomes for AMI are particularly persistent over time, while mortality outcomes appear to be
positively correlated between AMI and IHD. In addition, we find that there is a substantial
amount of variation across hospitals (especially small hospitals) in outcomes, particularly for
AMI mortality. Nevertheless, commonly used risk-adjusted outcome measures have quite low
signal ratios for most hospitals. A third substantive finding is that most of the differences across
hospitals in AMI mortality emerge within the first week following admission, while differences
emerge more gradually for IHD mortality. A fourth finding is that there is little evidence of
substantial bias in our claims-based outcome measures. Finally, the VAR model performs
5

With only one period of chart-review data, we cannot estimate a VAR.
27

reasonably well in fitting and summarizing key features of the data. We provide further evidence
on this issue in the sub-sections that follow.

B. Properties of the filtered estimates
A main goal of this paper is to develop outcomes-based measures of quality of care that
are of practical use at the level of individual providers. In this sub-section, we present evidence
on the performance of our filtered estimates as indicators of hospital quality. We begin with
simple plots comparing the filtered measures to more conventional outcomes-based estimates of
hospital quality. We then turn to a more systematic evaluation of the filtered estimates ability to
predict (in sample) and forecast (out of sample) variation in the true effects.
Figure 2 plots the observed (unfiltered) data for four hospitals: a small hospital (upper
left), a large hospital (lower right), and two midsize hospitals. These hospitals are not a random
sample, but rather chosen to represent a wide range of possibilities. Each panel in the figure
plots data for a single hospital from 1984 through 1992. Each line plots the estimated hospitalspecific effect from a linear probability model (estimated separately by year) that controls for
age, race, gender and urban status. A value of 0.04 means that the hospital's mortality was 4
percentage points above the average hospital in that year, with negative values indicating lower
mortality than average. Note that these are absolute mortality differences: if the national
average is 19%, an estimate of 0.04 indicates mortality of 23%. The solid line in each panel
plots the observed effects for death within 30 days of admission for AMI admissions. The
dashed line is for 90-day mortality among IHD admissions. Estimates such as these are
commonly referred to as standardized, or risk-adjusted, mortality rates.

28

There are two striking features of Figure 2. First, there is considerable variation in
hospital outcome estimates both across hospitals and over time, particularly for AMI. For
example, the 30-day AMI estimates range from over 15 percentage points below average (in
the bottom two panels) to more than 20 percentage points above average (the upper right
panel), with one hospital's mortality dropping over 30 percentage points between 1984 and
1990. These differences are particularly large considering that the average hospital's 30-day
AMI mortality was 19 percent in 1984. A second striking feature of Figure 2 is the large yearto-year variation, with jumps of 5-10 percentage points not unusual.
Both of these features of figure 2 may reflect the fact that these hospital effects are not
very precisely estimated. Figures 3a and 3b plot the AMI and IHD effects separately and add
95% confidence intervals around these estimates. For both AMI and IHD, the confidence
intervals on these estimates are quite large. For example, the confidence interval on AMI
mortality for the midsize hospital in the lower left panel of figure 3a almost always includes 0 (the
national average), despite the fact that its estimated mortality ranges from 4 to 15 percentage
points below average. Thus, a clear limitation of these standardized mortality rates is their lack
of precision.
Filtered estimates are meant to address this lack of precision. Figures 4a and 4b
overlay the filtered estimates (long dashes) and 95% confidence intervals (short dashes) on the
plot of the unfiltered estimates (solid line).

The filtered estimates in these figures are based on

equation (5), incorporating all of each hospital’s data from 1984 through 1992 into each years
estimate. Estimates of E(µ′µ) are derived from the VAR parameter estimates for AMI and
IHD mortality reported in Table 2.

29

It is immediately apparent that the confidence intervals for the filtered estimates are
much tighter. The intervals range from +/- 4% at the largest hospital to +/- 6% at the smallest
hospital for AMI mortality and about half that for IHD mortality. The tighter intervals are of
practical importance in allowing us to interpret these estimates. For example, the midsize
hospital in the lower left panel of Figure 4a has AMI mortality that is clearly better than average
based on filtered estimates. Another feature of the filtered data is that the estimates move
smoothly from year to year. Thus, although it is still a large decline, the decline in AMI mortality
for the midsize hospital in the upper right panel of Figure 4a is estimated to be less than half as
large with filtered estimates as compared to unfiltered estimates. Finally, one can see the clear
tendency of the filtered estimates to “shrink” towards average for the smallest hospital, with the
filtered AMI estimates tending on average to be closer to zero than the unfiltered estimates.
Table 6 provides a more systematic evaluation of the ability of the filtered estimates to
predict variation in the true hospital effects. The goal of the filtered estimates is to minimize the
mean square error of this prediction. If true effects (µ) were observed, a natural metric for
evaluating these predictions would be the sample R-squared:

(11)

 N 
R 2 = 1 −  ∑ u$ 2j 
 j= 1 

 N 2
 ∑ µj  ,
 j =1 

where u$ = µ − µ$ is the prediction error. Since µ is not observed, we must construct an
estimate of this R-squared. For in-sample predictions, we construct an estimate using our
′


estimate of E(µj′µj) for the denominator, and our estimate of E  µj − µ$ j µj − µ$ j  for the



(

)(

)

terms in the numerator (where this can be estimated from the estimated moment matrices in

30

equations 4.1-4.2). Finally, we report a weighted R-squared (weighting by the number of
admissions in each hospital). Without weighting, the R-squared of our predictions tend to be
smaller, but not dramatically so.
The expected R-squared of in-sample predictions is reported in Table 6 for selected
years and outcomes. Each panel in the table reports the results based on different pairs of
outcomes. The first panel provides the prediction results based on a VAR model of 30-day
AMI mortality and 365-day AMI complications. The remaining panel reports results for a
model of 30-day AMI and 90-day IHD mortality. We report the prediction R-squared for
each outcome in two representative years, 1988 and 1992. Each column reports the Rsquared for predictions using different amounts of data. Predictions in the first column use all
years of data for both outcomes and therefore should be most accurate. The second column
forms predictions with all years but does not use data on the other outcome. The next two
columns form predictions using only the three most recent years of data. The final two columns
form predictions using only data for the given year – so that the last column, which does not use
data on the other outcome, is a simple shrinkage estimator based on a single year of data.
The filtered estimates are able to predict remarkably well. When we use all the data to
form predictions (column one), the prediction R-squared ranges from a low of 0.51 for 90-day
IHD mortality in 1988 to a high of 0.73 for 30-day AMI mortality in 1988. In other words, in
1988 the filtered estimates capture 73% of the true variation across hospitals in 30-day AMI
mortality. Not surprisingly, the filtered estimates’ ability to predict is directly related to the signal
ratio in the original data, with AMI mortality being predicted most accurately. In general, the

31

prediction accuracy declines somewhat in 1992 because there is less data in the surrounding
years to rely on for prediction.
The remaining columns of Table 6 report the impact on prediction accuracy from using a
limited set of outcome measures in forming the filtered estimate; nine years of data are unlikely
to be available in many applications. Provided at least several years of data are available,
prediction accuracy is not much affected when prediction is based only on data observed for the
same outcome (e.g. only use the 30-day AMI mortality data to predict the 30-day AMI
mortality effects). With many years of data on a 30-day AMI mortality, there is not much to be
learned about this outcome from other outcomes. Prediction accuracy remains high (R-squared
of at least 0.45) with 3 years of data, as seen in columns 3 and 4 of table 6. In particular,
prediction accuracy in 1992 (the last year of data being used) is not much reduced: Even with
all 9 years of data, the 1992 estimates cannot use future years and so already rely heavily on the
most recent years of data. However, when prediction relies only on data from a single year, the
prediction R-squared falls considerably, especially when only using data on a single outcome.
Thus, the ability of the filtered estimates to incorporate information from many years, or from
many outcomes in a single year, is very important in terms of improving prediction accuracy.
A second advantage of the filtered estimates is that the VAR structure allows for
forecasting out of sample. To evaluate the performance of these out of sample forecasts, we
estimated models using the 1984-1992 data and construct 1-year (1993) and 2-year (1994)
ahead forecasts. The accuracy of these forecasts can be predicted as was done in Table 6, and
compared to the actual performance of the forecasts against the observed outcome measures in
1993 and 1994. Since much of the observed variance in outcome measures in 1993-1994 is

32

estimation error, we construct a modified R-squared of the forecast that estimates the fraction of
the systematic (true) hospital variation in the outcome measure (M) that was explained, i.e.:

(12)

 N 2

R = 1 −  ∑ u$ j − S j 
 j= 1

2

(

)

 N

 ∑ M 2j − S j  ,
 j =1


(

)

where u$ = M − µ$ is the forecast error, and Sj is the OLS estimate of the variance of the
estimate Mj. This modified R-squared estimates the amount of variance in the true hospital
effects that has been forecasted. Note that because these are out-of-sample forecasts, the Rsquared can be negative: the forecast can perform worse than a naive forecast in which quality
is assumed to be equal to the national average at all hospitals.
Table 7 contains the results of this forecasting exercise. As in Table 6, each panel
contains the forecast R-squareds for a different pair of outcomes. For each forecast, we report
two R-squared values: the modified R-squared based on evaluating the actual performance
(equation 12), and the expected R-squared of the forecast. The expected R-squared of the
forecast was constructed using data from 1984-1992 only, and is the prediction from the VAR
models of what the actual modified R-squared of the forecast should be. In each column we
report the results for a different forecasting method. The first two columns report the results
using forecasts based on filtered estimates from a VAR(1) specification and constructed from
(1) data on both outcomes, and (2) data on only the same outcome as being forecasted. The
next two columns report analogous results for a VAR(2) specification. The remaining three
columns consider alternative forecast methods. The fifth column uses the shrinkage estimator
from 1992 as a forecast for 1993 and 1994. The sixth column uses the observed effect in 1992

33

as a forecast. The final column uses the average effect observed between 1984 and 1992 as a
forecast.
Forecasts based on filtered estimates perform relatively well across a variety of
measures. For example, in the first column, we are able to forecast over 40% of the variation in
30-day AMI mortality effects in 1993 and 1994 based on joint models of 30-day AMI
mortality with either 365-day AMI complications or 90-day IHD mortality.

The worst

forecasting performance is for 90-day IHD mortality, presumably because the IHD effects were
not estimated to be very persistent. In each case, the expected R-squared of the forecast is
quite close to the actual values, suggesting that these expected R-squared values are an accurate
prediction of out-of-sample performance.
In general, forecasts using both outcomes (column one) and using only the same
outcome (column two) yield similar results. Data on 30-day AMI mortality seem to improve
forecasts slightly for 90-day IHD mortality. This may reflect the lack of persistence in the IHD
mortality effects, which makes past values of other outcomes more useful in forecasting.
Similarly, forecasts using VAR(2) specifications yield almost identical results to those using
VAR(1) specification. Thus, forecast performance does not appear to be sensitive to the lag
choice in the VAR.
The alternative forecast methods reported in the last three columns of Table 7 do
uniformly worse than the VAR methods in terms of the actual forecast R-squared. Again, this
was predicted by our model’s estimates of the expected R-squared for these alternative
forecasts. In particular, using the 1992 measured effect as a forecast always results in a
negative forecast R-squared. The shrinkage (standard Bayesian) estimator from 1992 and the

34

average outcome from 1984 through 1992 perform similarly. Both generally forecast less than
half the variation being forecast by the filtered estimates, and both do particularly poorly at
forecasting effects that are not so persistent (e.g. 90-day IHD mortality).
The evidence in Tables 6 and 7 suggests that the filtered estimates are quite accurate,
and dominate other forecast methods in terms of prediction accuracy. The accuracy of the
filtered estimates may be improved still further by incorporating additional information into the
predictions, as discussed in Section 3.

The volume of patients treated is one hospital

characteristic that has a well-documented association with patient outcomes (e.g., Luft et al.,
1990). It is clear in our data that higher volume hospitals have lower mortality. Figure 5
illustrates this relationship by plotting unfiltered and filtered hospital effects for 30-day AMI
mortality in 1992 against the number of AMI admissions in 1992. There is a significant (but
small) negative association between mortality and volume in each plot, although the relationship
is most easily seen using the filtered effects. Thus, information on patient volume should be
useful in predicting mortality. Understanding the volume-outcome relationship more precisely
may have important policy implications as well.
Table 8 contains estimates of prediction accuracy for 1988, after incorporating the
effect of patient volume into the predictions. More specifically, we allow the hospital effect for
each outcome in each year to depend linearly on patient volume for that outcome in that year.
We assume that the coefficient on patient volume does not change over time. The layout of
Table 8 is analogous to that of Table 6, except that now for each outcome we report the
prediction R-squared based on predictions including hospital volume.

35

The prediction R-

squared without volume (from Table 6) is also included for comparison. The last column of the
table reports the estimated coefficient on patient volume for each outcome.
In general, using patient volume leads to only a slight improvement in prediction
accuracy despite the fact that there is a very significant relationship between volume and each
outcome. For example, for forecasts that use all years of the same or both outcomes,
incorporating volume improves the prediction R-squared by no more than 0.01 in any case.
For these forecasts, the hospital-specific effects are being predicted so accurately from the
outcomes data that volume adds little new information. For 365-day AMI complications and
90-day IHD mortality, the volume coefficient is too small to contribute much to prediction
accuracy: an increase of 100 admissions is associated with a change in these outcomes of less
than 0.25 percentage points. Only for AMI mortality, where volume has a relatively large
coefficient, does volume meaningfully improve prediction accuracy for some of the weaker
forecasts.
These results further emphasize how well the filtered estimates are able to predict.
Patient volume has little impact on prediction accuracy because it can only explain a small
fraction of the total variation in the true hospital effects. The success of the filtered estimates in
predicting the true effects, especially any part that persists over time, is likely to swamp the
contribution of other observed hospital characteristics. Thus, the results in Table 8 highlight the
value added of the filtered estimates over simply evaluating hospital quality based on hospital
characteristics.

6. Conclusion

36

We have developed and applied a flexible, general, and systematic approach for
assessing hospital quality, for use in both evaluation and forecasting. Compared to existing
methods for assessing the quality of medical providers, our approach appears to have a number
of advantages. It limits measurement costs: the method provides a foundation for identifying
particular combinations of quality measures, out of the countless possible measures, that provide
a true independent “signal” of important aspects of quality at a hospital. For this reason, it also
avoids multidimensionality problems: rather than relying on ad hoc or possibly incorrect a priori
considerations, it provides a firm empirical basis for the systematic integration of information on
quality. Moreover, our method is far less computationally intensive than recently-published
Bayesian approaches.
In addition, our method performs far better than alternative approaches for eliminating
the noise problem that has plagued research on provider quality in health care. We demonstrate
this using outcomes for serious illnesses, including mortality and major disease complications,
that should complement the quality measures based on processes of care and less serious
outcomes that are under development in many health plans and provider groups today. Our
methods are able to extract 40 to 70 percent of the signal variance, and forecast 20 to 50
percent of signal variance one or two years ahead. The methods perform particularly well for
AMI outcomes, where the quality of acute hospital care clearly has an important impact on
long-term outcomes. We thus demonstrate that it is feasible to collect and integrate outcome
information for relatively infrequent conditions, and thereby to evaluate explicitly the quality of
care provided for many types of serious illness.

37

Finally, our results suggest that measures which use much more detailed medical data to
account for differences in patient disease severity and comorbidity lead to quite similar
predictions regarding provider quality, at least for patients with AMI. However, even if further
research demonstrates that better “risk adjustment” does have substantial effects on quality
measures, our methods will remain applicable. The “first stage” patient-level regressions to
obtain the adjusted hospital measures would require use of more costly, detailed data, but the
same VAR framework can be applied. Indeed, our methods can be used to identify when
further risk adjustment has a substantial impact on evaluating and forecasting “risk-adjusted”
quality, and how measures based on detailed clinical reviews can be integrated optimally with
measures based on lower-cost, less-detailed records. Taken together, our research suggests
that making reliable, precise predictions about provider quality in health care – and perhaps in
many other industries -- may be far more feasible than many now believe.

38

References
Chamberlain, Gary, "Panel Data" Chapter 22 in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. II, Eds.
Z. Griliches and M.D. Intriligator, Elsevier Science, New York, 1984, 1247-1318.
Goldman, Lee, and E.F. Cook, "The decline in ischemic heart disease mortality rates. An
analysis of the comparative effects of medical interventions and changes in lifestyle.
Annals of Internal Medicine. 1984; 101 (6):825-36.
Hamilton, James, "State-Space Models," Chapter 50 in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol.
IV, Eds. R.F. Engle and D.L. McFadden, Elsevier Science, New York, 1994, 3039-3080.
Heidenreich, Paul, and McClellan, Mark, "The Benefits of Technological Change in
Heart Attack Care: A Literature Review and Synthesis," Stanford University mimeo,
1998.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey and Harvey Rosen, "Estimating Vector
Autoregressions with Panel Data," Econometrica, 56(6), 1988, 137 1-95.
Hunink, Maria, Lee Goldman, A.N. Tosteson, et al. The recent decline in mortality from
coronary heart disease, 1980-1990. The effect of secular trends in risk factors and
treatment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 277(7), 1997, 53 5-42.
Kessler, Daniel, and Mark McClellan, "Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1996.
Krakauer, H., RC Bailey, KJ Skellan, et al., "Evaluation of the HCFA model for the
analysis of mortality following hospitalization," Health Services Research, 27(3), 1992,
3 17-335.

Landon, B., LI lezzoni, AS Ash, et al., "Judging hospitals by severity-adjusted mortality
rates: the case of CABG surgely," Inquiry, 33(2), 1996, 155-166.
Luft, Harold S., Deborah W. Garnick, D.H. Mark, et al., 1990, Hospital Volume,
Physician Volume, and Patient Outcomes: Assessing the Evidence, Ann Arbor, MI:
Health Administration Press, 1994.

McClellan , Mark, Barbara McNeil, and Joseph Newhouse, "Does More Intensive
Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction Reduce Mortality?" Journal of the American
Medical Association, Sept. 1994.
McClellan, Mark, and Joseph Newhouse, "The Marginal Costs and Benefits ofMedical
Technology," Journal of Econometrics, Spring 1997.

39

McClellan, Mark and Haruko Noguchi, “Does High-Tech Mean Low Value? Technological
Change in Heart Attack Care,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May
1998a.
McClellan, Mark and Haruko Noguchi, “Validity and interpretation of treatment effect
estimates using observational data: treatment of heart attacks in the elderly,” manuscript,
Stanford University, February 1998b.
Morris, Carl, “Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications,” JASA,
78(381), 1983, 47-55.
Normand, Sharon-Lise T., Mark E. Glickman and Constantine A. Gatsonis, “Statistical
methods for profiling providers of medical care: issues and applications,” JASA, 92(439), 1997,
803-814.
Park, RE, RH Brook, J Kosecoff, et al., “Explaining variations in hospital death rates:
Randomness, severity of illness, quality of care,” JAMA, 264(4), 1990,484-90.
Watson, Mark, “Vector Autoregressions and Cointegration,” Chapter 47 in Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. IV, Eds. R.F. Engle and D.L. McFadden, Elsevier Science, New York,
1994, 2843-2915.
</ref_section>

40

Table 1
Summary statistics for selected years
Means and standard deviations (in parentheses)

AMI Patients
1984
Number of
Admits

53.6
(45.2)

IHD Patients
1994

58.5
(56.2)

1984
82.0
(78.8)

1994
95.4
(119.4)

7-day
mortality

0.131
(0.085)

0.083
(0.079)

0.010
(0.020)

0.006
(0.019)

30-day
mortality

0.187
(0.094)

0.124
(0.095)

0.028
(0.032)

0.016
(0.034)

90-day
mortality

0.220
(0.096)

0.149
(0.099)

0.049
(0.044)

0.031
(0.044)

365-day
mortality

0.281
(0.099)

0.210
(0.107)

0.108
(0.061)

0.080
(0.065)

365-day
complications

0.226
(0.081)

0.182
(0.082)

0.202
(0.077)

0.165
(0.079)

Unweighted means and standard deviations computed from a sample of 3954 hospitals with at
least 3 admissions in each year for each diagnosis.
Mortality and complications variables are estimated intercepts from patient-level regressions run
separately by year and diagnosis, controlling for age, gender, race, MSA, and rural location.
Control variables were demeaned, so that the mean values reported in table represent the average
hospital’s mortality and complication rates and are not affected by the inclusion of control
variables.

41

Table 2
Estimates of bivariate VAR(1) parameters for hospital-specific effects.
(Standard errors of estimates in parentheses).
Bivariate VAR(1) of DTH30 and:
CMP365
IHD_DTH90
Parameter estimates:
Lag coefficients
DTH30:
Φ 11

0.887
(0.012)

0.920
(0.014)

Φ 21

-0.017
(0.022)

-0.177
(0.066)

Φ 22

0.973
(0.020)

0.606
(0.044)

Φ 12

0.038
(0.009)

0.020
(0.007)

0.00036
(0.00004)

0.00034
(0.00004)

Variance of 2nd innovation

0.00009
(0.00003)

0.00012
(0.00002)

Correlation of the innovations

-0.589
(0.104)

0.384
(0.086)

0.00175
(0.00012)

0.00176
(0.00012)

Variance of 2nd outcome in 1984

0.00067
(0.00007)

0.00024
(0.00004)

Correlation in 1984

-0.483
(0.047)

0.341
(0.063)

0.035

0.029

2nd outcome:

Innovations
Variance of DTH30 innovation

Initial conditions
Variance of DTH30 in 1984

Specification Tests:
P-value for GMM goodness-of-fit test

P-value for test of independence of
0.000
0.000
nd
DTH30 and 2 outcome
P-value for test of restrictions from
0.341
<0.001
VAR(2) to VAR(1)
DTH30 are the intercepts for mortality within 30 days among AMI admissions.
CMP365 are the intercepts for readmission with complication between 30 and 365 days among
AMI admissions.
IHD_DTH90 are the intercepts for mortality within 90 days among IHD admissions.

42

Table 3
Estimates of bivariate VAR(1) parameters for hospital-specific effects.
(Standard errors of estimates in parentheses).
Bivariate VAR(1) using:
1 st
outcome:
2 nd outcome:

AMI
DTH7

AMI
DTH30

IHD
DTH7

IHD
DTH90

AMI
DTH7-30

AMI
DTH30-365

IHD
DTH7-90

IHD
DTH90-365

0.813
(0.022)

0.898
(0.011)

0.856
(0.056)

0.578
(0.047)

Φ 21

0.434
(0.146)

0.137
(0.057)

-0.013
(0.024)

0.187
(0.038)

Φ 22

0.966
(0.082)

0.944
(0.043)

0.351
(0.065)

0.342
(0.049)

Φ 12

0.009
(0.011)

0.023
(0.006)

0.416
(0.156)

0.430
(0.062)

0.00039
(0.00005)

0.00040
(0.00005)

0.00000
(0.00000)

0.00011
(0.00002)

Variance of 2nd innovation

0.00001
(0.00001)

0.00004
(0.00002)

0.00015
(0.00002)

0.00024
(0.00003)

Correlation of the innovations

-0.302
(0.202)

-0.779
(0.147)

0.295
(0.204)

0.00153
(0.00014)

0.00173
(0.00013)

0.00002
(0.00000)

0.00021
(0.00004)

Variance of 2nd outcome in 1984

0.00005
(0.00002)

0.00020
(0.00004)

0.00008
(0.00005)

0.00028
(0.00005)

Correlation in 1984

0.332
(0.165)

-0.299
(0.082)

0.792
(0.286)

0.135
(0.129)

0.056

0.008

0.020

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Parameter estimates:
Lag coefficients
1st outcome:
Φ 11

2nd outcome:

Innovations
Variance of 1st innovation

Initial conditions
Variance of 1st outcome in 1984

Specification Tests:
P-value for GMM goodness-of-fit
test
P-value for test of independence
of the two outcomes

-0.361
(0.073)

DTH7, DTH30 and DTH90 are the intercepts for mortality within 7, 30 and 90 days.
DTH7-30 (DTH7-90) are the change in the mortality intercepts between 7 and 30 (90) days.
DTH30-365 (DTH90-365) are the change in mortality intercepts between 30 (90) and 365 days.

43

Table 4
Comparison of VAR parameters in low and high volume hospitals.
Bivariate VAR(1) for AMI 30-day and IHD 90-day mortality.
(Standard errors of estimates in parentheses).
Full Sample

Low Volume:
<25 admits in
at least 1 year

0.920
(0.014)

0.911
(0.020)

0.912
(0.014)

Φ 21

-0.177
(0.066)

-0.325
(0.095)

-0.055
(0.056)

IHD_DTH90: Φ 22

0.606
(0.044)

0.531
(0.061)

0.813
(0.028)

Φ 12

0.020
(0.007)

0.013
(0.010)

0.005
(0.006)

0.00034
(0.00004)

0.00057
(0.00008)

0.00016
(0.00002)

Var. of IHD_DTH90 innovation

0.00012
(0.00002)

0.00022
(0.00004)

0.00003
(0.00000)

Correlation of the innovations

0.384
(0.086)

0.476
(0.101)

0.555
(0.098)

0.00176
(0.00012)

0.00235
(0.00024)

0.00109
(0.00008)

Var. of IHD_DTH90 in 1984

0.00024
(0.00004)

0.00035
(0.00009)

0.00013
(0.00002)

Correlation in 1984

0.341
(0.063)

0.330
(0.087)

0.464
(0.063)

Parameter estimates:
Lag coefficients
AMI_DTH30: Φ 11

Innovations
Var. of AMI_DTH30 innovation

Initial conditions
Var. of AMI_DTH30 in 1984

High Volume:
≥25 admits in
all years

Specification Tests:
P-value for GMM goodness-of-fit
0.029
0.033
<0.001
test
P-value for test of independence of
0.000
0.000
0.000
AMI_DTH30 and IHD_DTH90
Sample size:
3954
1943
2011
AMI_DTH30 are the intercepts for mortality within 30 days among AMI admissions.
IHD_DTH90 are the intercepts for mortality within 90 days among IHD admissions.

44

Table 5
Comparison of claims-based outcomes measures to chart-based outcomes measures.
All comparisons based on data for AMI admissions from the CCP Project, 1994-95.
(Standard errors of estimates in parentheses).

Correlation of
claims-based outcome
with
chart-based outcome

Estimate of
slope coefficient for

DTH7

0.95
(0.01)

0.81
(0.03)

DTH30

0.91
(0.01)

0.77
(0.03)

DTH365

0.80
(0.04)

0.69
(0.06)

CMP365

0.96
(0.02)

0.91
(0.04)

µ chart = βµclaim

Estimates computed from a sample of 3622 hospitals.
DTH7 are intercepts for mortality within 7 days.
DTH30 are intercepts for mortality within 30 days.
DTH365 are intercepts for mortality within 365 days.
CMP365 are intercepts for readmission with complication between 30 and 365 days.

45

Table 6
Summary of estimated prediction accuracy using alternative methods of signal extraction.
All estimates based on VAR(1) models from Table 2.
Expected R-squared of prediction based on:
All nine years of data for:
Three most recent years of data
Concurrent year of data only for:
for:
Both outcomes
Same outcome
Both outcomes
Same outcome
Both outcomes
Same outcome
A. Based on model of AMI DTH30 and AMI CMP365
For AMI DTH30:
1988

0.71

0.71

0.58

0.58

0.42

0.34

1992

0.66

0.66

0.63

0.63

0.48

0.40

1988

0.65

0.64

0.46

0.45

0.28

0.20

1992

0.60

0.58

0.51

0.50

0.33

0.23

For AMI CMP365:

B. Based on model of AMI DTH30 and IHD DTH90
For AMI DTH30:
1988

0.73

0.72

0.60

0.59

0.44

0.35

1992

0.68

0.67

0.64

0.64

0.51

0.40

1988

0.51

0.50

0.46

0.45

0.38

0.27

1992

0.52

0.51

0.52

0.51

0.47

0.32

For IHD DTH90:

All expected R-squared values refer to a weighted R-squared, with weights proportional to the number of admissions at each hospital.
AMI DTH30 are the intercepts for mortality within 30 days among AMI admissions.
AMI CMP365 are the intercepts for complication within 365 days among AMI admissions.
IHD DTH90 are the intercepts for mortality within 90 days among IHD admissions.
46

Table 7
Summary of forecast accuracy using alternative forecasting models.
Forecasting 1993 and 1994 values using data from 1984 to 1992.
Modified R-squared of forecast based on:
VAR(1), forecasting with:
VAR(2), forecasting with:
Alternative forecast methods
Both
Same
Both
Same
Shrinkage
Outcome in
Average
outcomes,
outcome,
outcomes,
Outcome,
estimator,
1992
outcome,
84-92 data
84-92 data
84-92 data
84-92 data
1992 data
84-92 data
A. Based on model of AMI_DTH30 and AMI_CMP365
For AMI_DTH30:
1993 actual
0.46
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.19
<0
0.30
expected
0.52
0.52
0.51
0.50
0.31
<0
0.22
1994 actual
0.40
0.41
0.40
0.41
0.15
<0
0.21
expected
0.42
0.41
0.41
0.40
0.23
<0
0.10
For AMI_CMP365:
1993 actual
0.64
0.63
0.64
0.63
0.27
<0
0.31
expected
0.53
0.52
0.54
0.52
0.20
<0
0.24
1994 actual
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.25
<0
0.21
expected
0.47
0.46
0.49
0.47
0.18
<0
0.17
C. Based on model of AMI DTH30 and IHD DTH90
For AMI DTH30:
1993 actual
0.47
0.47
0.48
0.48
0.19
<0
0.30
expected
0.55
0.55
0.52
0.52
0.32
<0
0.28
1994 actual
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.15
<0
0.21
expected
0.45
0.45
0.44
0.44
0.25
<0
0.17
For IHD DTH90:
1993 actual
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.19
<0
<0
<0
expected
0.21
0.20
0.15
0.14
0.08
<0
<0
1994 actual
0.19
0.18
0.21
0.20
<0
<0
<0
expected
0.09
0.08
0.11
0.10
<0
<0
<0
See notes to Table 6.

47

Table 8
Comparison of estimated prediction accuracy with and without controlling for patient volume.
All estimates based on VAR(1) models.
Expected R-squared of prediction based on:
All nine years of data for:
Concurrent year of data only for:
Both outcomes
Same outcome
Both outcomes
Same outcome

Coefficient for
volume/100
(s.e.)

A. Based on model of AMI DTH30 and AMI CMP365
For AMI DTH30, 1988:
covariates: None
Volume

0.71

0.71

0.42

0.34

0.72

0.72

0.50

0.39

0.65

0.64

0.28

0.20

0.65

0.64

0.28

0.21

0.73

0.72

0.44

0.35

0.74

0.73

0.51

0.40

0.51

0.50

0.38

0.27

0.52

0.51

0.39

0.30

-0.0188
(0.0005)

For AMI CMP365, 1988:
covariates: None
Volume

0.0024
(0.0002)

B. Based on model of AMI DTH30 and IHD DTH90
For AMI DTH30, 1988:
covariates: None
Volume

-0.0188
(0.0005)

For IHD DTH90, 1988:
covariates: None
Volume

See notes to Table 6.

48

-0.0013
(0.0001)

0

C
MM DTH7

CD

U)

6

SAMI DTh30

0
C

-I-

a

SAMI Dm365

C

C

A]cIi CMP365
Co

-t

-t1{DDTh365

0

— llm DTH9O
0J

C)

0
b
mD DT}{7

u-i

d
9
0

0

20

40

60

100

120

1 4fli

160

)nn
UU

Nurn.ber of odmisslois
Figure 1. Estimate of signal to noise ratio (signal variance as a percent of total variance) for various outcome measures.

HpitI. <50 klI Ad!ft & SO— 100 IHD Ad,]k

Midsi Hcs;lo'. 50—t50 Ad! kti Sotr!CcLeo(!

0
E

E

I
88

SC

00

02

1s

85

aa

BC

92

SO

ye

iiI. 50—I 5D Ats H 6l- CeQo,es

/

Lge H

H O Ac iti,, Both

/N

—

N

N

-/
56

b•7

SB

I

V

B5

87

112

90

e3r

Figure 2. Trends in standardized 30-day mortality rates for AMI (solid line) and 90-day mortality for IHD (dashed line)
for four selected hospitals. Rates are based on all Medicare admissions.

91

5II H©p•L!,

& 53 lOG 'HO Ad!t

M4!

kAdsize OspLI• 50—ISO A-::t k' 8lh

0
E

I
65

86

92

BC

a::

diz !lpitoI. 50—150 Ae!,!i in Both

/
/

I•Qq Hosoit - "50 A!1!-:ts

-

—

/N—
•N•
87

•\

•

-

90

yeo

91

02

Botr!ew -s

Ed
-

/

/
•

/

—

91

-

/

/

90

/
02

-

-

N

-

-:-

_____

1 H4

/

/

-

———

N

•_/

/
90

61

91

ye o --

Figure 3a. Trends for AMI admissions : standardized 30-day mortality rates (solid line) and 95% confidence interval (dashed line)
for four selected hospitals. Rates are based on all Medicare admissions.

MiJSi II!thI. 50. ISO Ad!t i ©th

$,II Hpi:d. <50 AM' Ad!t & 50—mo 'HO Ad,!:
N

N

/

l

\

/
8'

85

86

/

N

t 6'

SO

59

87

H©[ft.. 5O—15D 4d,].u• Beth C(g©!.

SO

91

02

1es pkI. >15 O,'! i! in 30th cIeoies

Q

E

E

p

84

55

BG

57

Ba

yr

92

84

85

be

B?

SB

P.

90

91

01

Figure 3b. Trends for IHD admissions : standardized 90-day mortality rates (solid line) and 95% confidence interval (dashed line)
for four selected hospitals. Rates are based on all Medicare admissions.

M!d!: H()!ts 50—t50 AcI,its n 6• Cotegi

• (5r,%F: Ad & 50—100 IHD Ac"•I

0
0
E

E

V

RE

• 92

a,

84

85

BC

87

_u -ThtpithI. >lS) !,!t i frth

3 Ad

0
E

0

85

87

HI

BQ

90

QI

92

54

CS

Ba

OS

Figure 4a. Trends for AMI admissions : Actual values (solid line), predicted values (long dashes) and
95% confidence interval (short dashes) for standardized 30-day mortality rates. Rates based on all Medicare admissions.

42

0.11
O-O

0.11
O.Oa

0.00

a04

0.04
0.00

—0.&B

O.C

0.04

—0.11

I
0.12

3

0

w

O
C.

ly
L'.L)4

0.00

ddid

0.OB
—0.12

•C..o

stonda,thze mrtaIity

—0.oe
—0.11

D.lZ

D.D
0.04

1Qd0Iity

0.00
—004
—O•fl
—0.12

Figure 4b. Trends for IHD admissions : Actual values (solid line), predicted values (long dashes) and
95% confidence interval (short dashes) for standardized 90-day mortality rates. Rates based on all Medicare admissions.

Figure 5. Plots of actual and filtered hospital-specific intercepts against patient volume.
Based on 30-day mortality for Medicare AMI admits, 1992.

