                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  EVIDENCE ON LEARNING AND
                                NETWORK EXTERNALITIES IN THE
                                DIFFUSION OF HOME COMPUTERS

                                              Austan Goolsbee
                                              Peter J. Klenow

                                            Working Paper 7329
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7329


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 1999




We thank Severin Borenstein, Anne Case, Judy Chevalier, Leora Friedberg, Shane Greenstein, Tom Holmes,
Boyan Jovanovic, Anil Kashyap, Lawrence Katz, Steven Levitt, Peter Pashigian, Alwyn Young, and
workshop participants at Berkeley, Chicago, Iowa, Stanford, Wharton, the Minneapolis Fed, and the NBER
IO Group, for helpful comments, and the American Bar Foundation and the University of Chicago GSB for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Austan Goolsbee and Peter J. Klenow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Evidence on Learning and Network
Externalities in the Diffusion of Home Computers
Austan Goolsbee and Peter J. Klenow
NBER Working Paper No. 7329
September 1999
JEL No. L6

                                               ABSTRACT

        In this paper we examine the importance of local spillovers such as network externalities and
learning from others in the diffusion of home computers using data on 110,000 U.S. households in 1997.
Controlling for many individual characteristics, we find that people are more likely to buy their first home
computer in areas where a high fraction of households already own computers or when a large share of
their friends and family own computers. Further results suggest that these patterns are unlikely to be
explained by city-specific unobserved traits. Looked at in more detail, the spillovers appear to come from
experienced and intensive computer users. They are not associated with the use of any particular type of
software but do seem to be highly tied to the use of e-mail and the Internet, consistent with computers being
part of a local information and communications network.


Austan Goolsbee                                           Peter J. Klenow
Graduate School of Business                               Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                      University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street                                       1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                         Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                  and NBER
goolsbee@gsb.uchicago.edu                                 pete.klenow@gsb.uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        In this paper we empirically examine the importance of local spillovers • such as

network externalities and learning from others • in the diffusion of home computers.

Technology diffusion plays a central role in many theories of development and economic

growth.1 Some recent studies have singled out the diffusion of computers as an engine of

growth and as a potential source of fundamental labor market changes.2 And network

externalities are of recurring interest in industrial organization and public economics.3

        We employ a database on the computer ownership and purchase decisions of more than

110,000 U.S. households.4 Our notion is that people without computers may learn about the

technology from their computer-owning friends and neighbors, or benefit from the size of the

local computer "network", say because they can share software or communicate with one

another. If so, there may be positive spillovers of existing computer owners on people

considering adoption.

        Because of the possibility of unobserved common traits across households, establishing

the existence of local spillovers is difficult. People who live in places where a high share of

people already own computers may have a greater affinity for technology, even if they do not

already own a computer, and therefore may be more likely to adopt. This problem of common

traits pervades empirical work on local effects. Thus, we will employ several strategies to test

whether unobserved common traits, or still other alternatives to network or learning benefits,

can explain our findings.


1 Examples are Grossman and Helpman (1991), Parente and Prescott (1994), and Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1997).
2 Discussions of computers as engines of growth or General Purpose Technologies can be found in Bresnahan
and Trajtenberg (1995), Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997), Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998), and Andolfatto
and MacDonald (1998). The debate over the role of computers in the transformation of the labor market
includes Krueger (1993), DiNardo and Pischke (1997), and Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1997). Friedberg (1997)
examines the impact of computers on the retirement decisions of elderly workers.
3 Farrell and Saloner (1985) and Katz and Shapiro (1986) provide early analyses of network externalities.
Economides (1996) surveys the more recent literature. Dybvig and Spatt (1983) give an overview of the
implications for public economics.
4 For investigation into the adoption of computers by firms, see Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996) and
Bresnahan, Stern, and Trajtenberg (1997).

                                                    1
        The existence of learning or network externalities in computer adoption could have

important policy implications. Learning externalities could mean that the rate of adoption is

too slow and possibly justify subsidies to computer and Internet adoption.5 An important

caveat, however, is that evidence of learning and network spillovers is not the same as evidence

of learning and network externalities. The recipients of spillover benefits may compensate the

providers (e.g., "I'll take you to lunch if you will show me how to use this computer"). In

keeping with the existing literature, we will refer to learning and network externalities, but the

distinction between externalities and spillovers matters for any policy discussion.

        In the empirical results that follow, we find evidence consistent with local spillovers in

home computer adoption. Using instruments, additional control variables, and a variety of tests

and sample periods we find little evidence that the effects are the result of unobserved common

traits within cities, local industry composition, availability of computer retailers, or peer

pressure ("keeping up with the Joneses").

        The data do suggest that the spillovers are concentrated in local areas and among family

and friends. The spillovers appear to be greatest from experienced and intensive computer

users. The spillovers do not appear to be tied to the use of any particular type of software

(spreadsheets, word processors, graphics, games, family budgeting) but are highly tied to the

use of e-mail and the Internet. This is consistent with the idea that the computer serves as a

part of a local information or communication network.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section II we describe previous work in

related areas. In section III we describe the dataset. In section IV we outline our empirical

specification and present basic results on local spillovers. In section V we consider the




5 See Hausman (1998) for a description and evaluation of the existing $2.25 billion annual U.S. federal subsidy
for public school and library Internet access financed by a special tax on phone service. There have been more
ambitious (albeit geographically concentrated) subsidies as well, including the Blackburg Electronic Village
program in Virginia and the Information Age Town program in Ennis, Ireland. In these cities attempts were
made to put a computer in every household and school and to connect everyone to the Internet (for descriptions
of these programs see Yaukey, 1997 and MacCarthaigh, 1997).

                                                       2
evidence about unobserved common traits. In section VI we investigate the nature of the

spillovers try to identify the source of the network benefits. In section VII we conclude.


II. Related Literature

A. Learning and Network Externalities
        The issues raised in this paper about learning from others and about network

externalities are certainly not new. Network externalities can affect the diffusion of technology.

The literature in this area is voluminous (see the survey by Economides, 1996). As shown in

early work by Farrell and Saloner (1985) and Katz and Shapiro (1986), network externalities

can lead to suboptimally slow adoption, suboptimally fast adoption, or even adoption of an

inferior technology.6 Examples of empirical work examining such issues includes Gandal

(1994), Saloner and Shepard (1995), Berndt and Pindyck (1998), and Gowrisankaran and

Stavins (1999).

        Similar to network benefits, learning from others can also influence the spread of

technology as argued in Young (1991), Chari and Hopenhayn (1991), Lucas (1993), Jovanovic

and MacDonald (1994), and Andolfatto and MacDonald (1998). In his classic study of the

diffusion of hybrid corn in the U.S., Griliches (1957) found evidence consistent with late-

adopters learning from early-adopters. More recent micro-level empirical studies of learning

from others include Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1991), Irwin and Klenow (1994),

Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), and Besley and Case (1997).



B. Local Conditions and Peer Groups

        In the empirical work we will examine how local conditions affect the rate of computer

adoption to test learning and network hypotheses. This is similar to the literature examining

peer group effects on social outcomes such as crime and teen pregnancy. The presence of local


6 The literature on herding and learning from the behavior of others, recently surveyed by Bikhchandani et al.
(1998), contains similarities to both the learning and network literatures discussed here.

                                                       3
spillovers has been investigated in various settings and using various methods by Case and Katz

(1991), Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992), Case, Hines, and Rosen (1993), Borjas (1995),

Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman (1996), and O'Regan and Quigley (1996).

       This literature has generally found that local effects are important but has also stressed

that unobserved heterogeneity may bias empirical work toward finding local effects.

Individuals may be more likely to do something when those around them are doing it because

they share unobserved common traits. Evans et al. (1992), for example, show that

instrumenting for selection into schools removes the entire estimated impact of peer groups for

teen pregnancy. The problem of unobserved common traits and sorting is also known as

Tiebout bias in the spirit of Tiebout (1956). We will deploy instruments and controls to

address the potential bias from unobserved common traits problem.


III. Data

       The data we use come from a proprietary December 1997 mail survey of Forrester

research called Technographics 98. Forrester is a marketing research company specializing in

the information economy. The fieldwork for the survey was conducted by the NPD Group. In

it, they interviewed more than 110,000 American households to determine their ownership

patterns for computers and other electronic goods. The detail in the survey exceeds that in

government surveys that include computer information, such as the CPS or the Consumer

Expenditure Survey. The sampling methodology is proprietary but is meant to ensure a

nationally representative sample. More details on the Technographics program can be found in

Bernhoff, et al. (1998). Its purpose is to provide technology, communications, and consumer

marketing companies with information for evaluating the consumer segments for their products.

The Forrester data is widely respected in the industry and private sector companies pay

significant amounts of money to get access to it.

       For each respondent the dataset contains demographic information, including gender,

race, income, education, age, marital status, whether they have children under 18, whether they

                                                4
use a computer at work, whether they run a business from home, and their state and broadly

defined metropolitan area of residence.7 The dataset also contains information on how much

they watch television, their ownership of various electronic goods, and even some attitude

variables such as ratings from one to ten of how much they "like technology". All of this

information is gathered in December of 1997.

        For anyone with a computer in 1997, the survey also contains information on how many

computers they have, how many they have ever had, when they bought their first computer,

when they bought their (up to) three most recent computers, how often they use their computer

and whether they have Internet access. For those without computers, the survey includes (self-

reported) information on how likely they are to buy a computer in the next year and what share

of their friends and family use computers.

        Using this information we are able to calculate what fraction of people in a city had a

computer last year (assuming no one moved) and what share of 1996 non-owners bought their

first computer in 1997. We can also keep aging the data backward. We cannot get a true

panel, however, because household information such as family composition is given only at the

time of the survey.8

        Table 1 provides summary statistics for computer ownership. The data show that

ownership varies within the population in predictable ways. Owners are better educated,

richer, and so on. The computer ownership rate in the Forrester data matches well to rates

independently published by the Consumer Electronics Manufacturing Association. We also

found only modest differences when we cross-checked median income, age, and marital status

for several states against data reported by the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1998). Although our

analysis will focus on spillover effects within metropolitan areas, we present a map of the 1997


7 The respondents are divided into 207 metropolitan areas that are defined by the television market they reside
in. These areas are generally larger than comparable SMSAs. The San Francisco area, for example, includes all
of the Bay Area.
8 For a discussion of the potential problems with such retrospective data see Besley and Case (1993) or
Hamermesh (1998).

                                                      5
computer ownership rates by state in Figure 1. Figure 2 is a histogram of ownership rates by

metropolitan area.


IV. Empirical Specification and Basic Results

A. Empirical Specification
         We concentrate on the dichotomous choice facing people who do not yet have a home

computer at the start of the year of whether to buy a computer. For household i in year t, call

this decision yit , where yit -{0,1}. If p*it is household i's reservation price in year t and pit is

the market price facing household i in year t, then



                                             yit = 1 if p*it      pit

                                              yit = 0 if p*it • pit .



Consider a household that buys in year t. Since this is the first purchase, this is the first year in

which the market price of a computer has been below the household's reservation price. This

may have come about because the market price fell, the household's reservation price rose, or

some combination. We specify that



(1)               Probability(yit = 1) = - CITY%t•" + " xoi + xitu + cut + uit .9



CITY%t•" is the variable of interest. It is the fraction of households in the city having a

computer in the previous year. If there are local learning and network externalities, then people

who do not own computers who are living in areas where owners are prevalent will be more

likely to buy one. This should appear as a positive coefficient on CITY% in (1).10

9 We use a linear probability model for simplicity, particularly in the IV context. Our basic results were the
same using a probit model.
10 This model is analagous to epidemiology models in which an infectious disease spreads more quickly the
larger the fraction of the population infected. In the marketing literature, this is known as the Bass (1969)
model, and many examples of its use can be found in the survey by Mahajan, Muller and Bass (1993). The

                                                        6
        The xoi are household observables. In the basic specification these are age, education,
income, gender, race, marital status, the presence of children, whether the respondent uses a

computer at work, and whether the respondent runs a business from home. There is no time

subscript since we have this data for 1997 only.

        The xuit are household unobservables correlated with CITY%t•" but uncorrelated with

xoi . Although families may not sort into cities based on their propensity to own computers, they
may sort on characteristics that are correlated with that propensity. To generate xuit , however,
the sorting must be over and above sorting on observables like income, age, education, or use

of a computer at work, because these are controlled for in (1). We have in mind something like

technological sophistication that is correlated across households within cities but is not

captured by the observables. Measurement error in xoi (e.g., errors in reported income) could

also contribute to xuit .

        The cut are city-level unobservables such as the quality and price of Internet access, the

price of computers, and the density of computer stores. It is important to note, though, that

these differences may arise in response to city differences in computer ownership rates, and

thus themselves may represent network externalities. Finally, the uit are idiosyncratic

household unobservables.

        The unobservable terms clarify the potential sources of bias in a regression such as (1).

In the spirit of the peer group literature, if the CITY% is positively correlated with the xui , then
                            s) will be biased upward. If people in Silicon Valley love
the estimated local effect (-

technology, they may be more likely to own computers and to buy them even if they do not yet

own them. This will spuriously make the spillover seem large. Similar biases arise when

differences in city specific unobservables, cut , are large. On the other hand, the estimates may

have a downward bias because of survivor bias (see Heckman and Singer, 1985). If the only

people living in Silicon Valley who do not own computers in 1997 actually hate technology and

model is also very similar to the work of Glaeser (1997) on learning within cities and resembles work on local
interactions such as Durlauf (1993) and Brock and Durlauf (1995).

                                                       7
                                                                             s. In either case,
will never buy a computer, this will create a downward bias in our estimated -

instrumenting is necessary.



B. Basic Results

         We start, in column 1, by presenting the traditional ownership regression that suffers

from potentially large biases. The dependent variable is a {0,1} for whether the individual

owns a computer and the independent variable of interest is the mean ownership rates of other

people in the metropolitan area. Not surprisingly, a household is more likely to own if other

households in the same metro area own (coefficient .369, standard error .028), even controlling

for household characteristics such as education, income, age, and whether a computer is used

at work. This coefficient is bound to be biased upward because of unobservable city features

and correlated household observables. In contrast to this regression of ownership on

ownership of others in the city, we now turn to regressions of first-time adoption on lagged

ownership of others in the city.

         We are more interested in the impact of lagged ownership on the probability of first-

time adoption for two reasons. First, it may mitigate the bias from correlated household

unobservables. By looking only at non-owners and asking if they are more likely to adopt if

surrounded by more owners, we are isolating people who are demonstrably different from

computer owners. Second and more important, the economic logic of learning and network

externalities suggests that the stock should affect the flow. In the case of learning, a bigger

stock means more owners from which to learn how to use and buy a computer, promoting

adoption. In the case of network externalities, a bigger stock means a bigger network in which

to participate.11




11 In fact, theory suggests that what should matter is the expected size of the network over the entire lifetime of
the computer. This could also hold true for learning if adopters expect to be learning from other owners even
after they have adopted. This is quite difficult to deal with appropriately, however, since the path of computer
ownership will be strongly affected by the hard-to-predict future rate of decline of computer prices.

                                                         8
        In column 2 of Table 2 we look at individuals who do not own computers at the end of

1996 and ask whether they are more likely to buy one in 1997 if there were many owners in

their city in 1996. The estimated coefficient on local ownership rates, -, is listed in the first

row. The estimate of - is positive and highly significant, suggesting that local spillovers may be

important. The t-statistic is over 6.12 It is also economically important. The point estimate of

.10 implies that, controlling for household-specific observables, a non-owner in a city with 10

percentage points higher computer ownership in 1996 has a 1 percentage point higher

probability of making a purchase in 1997.13 This is substantial relative to the 1997 mean

adoption rate for non-owners of 7.8%. The levels coefficient in column x is likely to be higher

than the adoption coefficient both because of the cumulative nature of the levels regression and

because it is more susceptible to the bias from common unobservables across people.

        The other coefficients listed in column 2 have predictable signs. Households with more

income and education are more likely to buy their first computer. Using a computer at work,

running a business from home, and having children in the household are also associated with a

higher probability of first purchase. Since this is a linear regression, the coefficients are

marginal probabilities. For example, having a child between 6 and 17 in the household means a

4.2 percentage point higher probability of buying. The largest marginal effect (as well as the

largest t-statistic) is on using a computer at work. This raises the probability of purchase by 7

percentage points, almost doubling it at the mean of the covariates.

        Columns 3 through 5 estimate the same specification but for different years. Column 3

looks at the purchase decisions of non-owners in 1996 as a function of city ownership in

1995.14 Column 4 examines the decision in 1995 as a function of ownership in 1994. In both

cases, the estimated coefficients remain large, positive and highly significant. The ceofficient in

1996 is .142. The coefficient in 1995 is .135. In column 5 we examine the responses of 1997


12 All of the standard errors in the paper are corrected for the fact that the CITY% does not vary by household.
13 We obtained very similar results using the share of people in a city who either own a computer at home or use
a computer at work for CITY% (rather than just the share who own a computer at home).
14 The observables of the individual are given only in 1997 so we use the same values for earlier years.


                                                       9
non-owners to the question "How likely are you to purchase a computer in the next year?"

(rated from 1 to 10) as a function of city ownership in 1997. Here we construct a pseudo-

probability of buying by subtracting 1 and then dividing by 10. This gives a scale from 0 to .9.

In this prospective purchase regression, increased ownership rates in a city are again associated

with significantly higher probabilities of buying. The coefficient of .106 for prospective

purchases is close to our baseline estimate of .102 for actual purchases.

        The results in Table 2 show a robust coefficient on CITY%, consistent with local

learning and network benefits. But this is also consistent with unobserved common traits

between the new adopters and existing owners, so in the next section we test whether the

coefficient can be attributed to this alternative hypothesis. Before doing so, however, we

illustrate the quantitative importance of the spillover implied by the point estimate for 1997.

        Summing equation (1) across households within a city yields


                          fct                    o    u    u
(2)                     "•Fc,t•" = - Fc,t•" + " xc + ct + xct ,



where fct is the fraction of city c households who buy their first computer in year t and Fc,t•" (=

CITY%t•" ) is the fraction of households in city c who own a computer in year t • 1. i.e., f and

F are the density and cumulative density, respectively, of computer adoption (first-time

computer purchase). We then have


                                                                 o    u    u
(3)             t•" + fct œ Fcß
        Fct = Fcß             t•" + [1 • Fcß
                                           t•" ] [ - Fc,t•" + " xc + ct + xct ] ,




which is precisely the Bass (1969) diffusion model. Analogous to models of a contagious

disease, the fraction of the city with a computer this year (Fct ) is equal to the fraction last year

   t•" ) plus the hazard rate for buying a computer (fct Î Ð" • Fc,t•" Ñ ) times the fraction of the
(Fcß




                                                  10
population which is at risk (1 • Fcß
                                   t•" ). When - ž 0, the hazard is rising in the fraction of the

population who own in the previous period.15

         For non-owners, the 1997 hazard rate in our sample was approximately 8%. Given our

baseline estimate of - = .10 and an average Fc,t•1 across cities of 40% in 1996, -*Fc,t•"

contributed 4 percentage points to the 8% hazard rate. The remaining terms (" xoc + ctu + xuct )

contributed the other 4 percentage points. Thus in 1997 one half of the adoption rate may have

come from local spillovers. In short, if our coefficient reflects spillovers, then spillovers

substantially affect the speed of diffusion.


V. Unobserved Common Traits
         The most obvious alternative explanation for the positive coefficient on local ownership

is that it represents nothing more than the existence of unobserved common traits across people

in a city. In technologically sophisticated places where a large fraction of the population

already owns computers, non-owners may also be more sophisticated and thus likely to buy

computers, even controlling for observables like education and income. We take three

approaches to get around the problem of unobserved common traits.



A. Controls for Unobservable Sophistication

         If the local spillover is coming from unobservable technological sophistication, then

adding some measures of an individual's sophistication ought to reduce the coefficient on CITY

%. In column 2 of Table 3 we attempt to do this by including a variety of proxies for

sophistication. (For comparison, column 1 repeats the baseline regression results from column

2 of Table 2). These additional variables include ownership of several types of consumer

electronics (satellite dish, big-screen TV, cordless phone, CD player, component stereo system,

VCR, and answering machine), dummies for the amount of television the respondent watches


15 Notice that in this model computers can spread even if there are no spillovers, say because of falling prices
interacting with the determinants of household reservation prices (" xoc + ctu + xuct ).

                                                        11
per month, and subjective answers (from one to ten) to questions of how well the statements "I

like technology," "technology is important to me," and "I like to spend time learning about new

technology products" describe their personality. The coefficients on these extra variables are

not listed to economize on space (they are all significant with predictable signs).16 Column 2

makes clear that, despite their significance, these additional variables do not change the

estimated local effect. The coefficient is still positive and significant, with an almost identical

point estimate (.101 vs. .102).17

        The next regression is motivated by the debate over the impact of computers on wages.

DiNardo and Pischke (1997) show that, while using a computer seems to raise wages

substantially (Krueger, 1993), so does using a pencil and sitting down while working. Further,

controlling for pencil use and working while sitting often lowers the estimated wage effect of

computers substantially. They argue that this casts doubt on a causal interpretation of the

computer coefficient.

        To apply this to our context, column 3 of Table 3 adds to the regression of column 2

the fraction of households in the city who own each of the seven consumer electronic goods.

We do not think there are plausible learning or network benefits for computer adoption arising

from widespread use of stereos, VCRs, and so on. Thus if these variables matter and lower the

coefficient on the fraction of people owning computers, it would cast doubt on a spillover

interpretation. We find in column 3, however, that the results change little. The local effect of

computer ownership is still positive and significant (t-statistic of 3) and has an almost identical

magnitude (.104 vs. .102). Although we do not list the other coefficients for space reasons,

none of the seven spurious ownership fractions is positive and significant.

        Adding variables correlated with unobservable sophistication does not seem to change

the estimated importance of spillovers.

16 Ownership of other electronics could also be proxying for lifetime income, which the current income variable
measures with error.
17 Because many people have missing values for at least one of the additional variables, the sample size is
smaller in column 2 and the two regressions are not directly comparable. Without the additional variables but
with the smaller sample, however, the coefficient is almost identical to our baseline coefficient in column 1.

                                                      12
B. Instrumental Variables

        Our second strategy for dealing with household unobservables is instrumenting.

Instruments must be relevant (correlated with the fraction of the city that owns computers) and

valid (uncorrelated with the household's unobservables).

        In column 4 of Table 3 we use the city means of the 10 household variables (education,

income, age, and so on) that appear in the baseline regression in column 1. Positive local

externalities mean that, conditional on its characteristics, a household should be more likely to

buy its first computer if it is surrounded by households with observables favorable to computer

ownership. For example, a childless household surrounded by households with kids should be

more likely to adopt than a childless household surrounded by childless households. Thus city

means should be relevant instruments, and they are (the 1st-stage R# is 0.88).18 Are city mean

observables (call them xo ) valid instruments, i.e., uncorrelated with household observables (xui )?

One might worry that they are positively correlated because, say, cities with lots of households

with children are filled with the more technologically savvy. But note that xui is orthogonal to

xoi by construction because a household's observables are included in the regression. For

example, the coefficient on kids in the household should incorporate any correlation between

the household's sophistication and the presence of kids. For this reason, city mean observables

would not be correlated with household unobservables simply because cities with kids tend to
be filled with technological sophisticates. It would have to be that, controlling for whether a

household includes kids, it is more savvy the higher the fraction of households in the city with

kids.

        As column 4 of Table 3 shows, using these city means as instruments gives an almost

identical answer to OLS (.104 vs. .102), with the CITY% coefficient estimated quite precisely

(t-statistic of 6.1). And we cannot reject the overidentifying restrictions at the five percent



18 Case and Katz (1991) develop this insight and propose a likelihood ratio test of, in our example, whether the
city means for the observables matter for individual decisions. When we did this test using our data, we easily
rejected the hypothesis that there are no local effects.

                                                       13
level (p-value of .16).19 We obtained similar results (and also could not reject overidentifying

restrictions) when we excluded various subsets of the instruments such as, respectively, the two

work variable city means, the income and education city means, and the race city means. Thus,

for example, adoption is more likely if a household is surrounded by households with kids,

controlling for whether the household has kids or not.

         Next we consider the weather in the city as an instrument because of its exogeneity. It

would be a relevant instrument if a good climate, as an amenity, tends to attract high income

people who will buy more computers (but not valid if people sort into cities with good climates

based on their technological sophistication). We use the overall climate score for an area given

by the Places Rated Almanac (for those areas not included in the Almanac, we use the closest

alternative location). The data show that places with higher climate scores do have significantly

higher incomes and the first-stage R# was .19. With climate as the only instrument (column 5),

the coefficient on city ownership is .163 (standard error of .046).

         Our instrumental variables results also suggests that unobserved common traits are not

the source of the city spillovers.



C. Spillovers by Type of Owner

         Our third check for whether the estimated spillover is the result of unobserved common

traits within a city uses information on who the existing owners are. Our results show that

having a high ownership of computers makes non-owners more likely to adopt in the coming

year. If this comes from common traits across owners and non-owners (such as technical

sophistication), this predicts that the estimated spillovers should be largest from owners who

are most like the non-owners. They are most likely to share unobserved common traits. The

network and learning spillover story, however, predicts something quite different. It predicts




19 In testing the over-identifying restrictions, we take account of the fact that the data are grouped by city using
the technique of Hoxby and Paserman (1998).

                                                         14
that experienced, heavy users should be the most important influence on potential adopters

because they have the most information and are the most valuable members of a local network.

        Using the information in the survey on how many computers a household has ever

owned, we divide city ownership into two groups: people who have owned two or more

computers in their lifetime (19% of all households) and people who have owned only one in

their lifetime (also 19% of all households). We would expect non-owners to have more traits in

common with people owning their first computers than with experienced owners, so if the

unobservables bias explanation is correct there should be particularly high rates of adoption in

places where there are many first time owners. On the other hand, if the spillover explanation

is correct, since multiple-computer owners are likely to be better informed, have more software

to share, and so on, the coefficient on experienced users should be larger. The results,

presented in column 6 of Table 3, show that, in fact, multiple-lifetime-purchasers are

substantially more influential. The coefficient for the fraction of city households that are

multiple-lifetime-purchasers is .128 with a t-statistic of more than 6, while the coefficient for

single-purchasers users is .021 (standard error .055).

        Similarly, in column 7 of Table 3 we classify computer owners into two usage

groupings. We define households who report using a computer more than 20 days per month

as "heavy users" and those using it fewer than 20 days per month as "light users." From this we

decompose the CITY% into the share of the city that owns a computer and uses it more than

20 days per month and the share that owns but uses it fewer than 20 days per month (these

average 26% and 12% of households, respectively). Again, we expect the unobserved traits of

the light users to be most like the non-owners but the true spillovers to be more important from

the heavy users. Again, the results show that the coefficient is much larger on the group that is

less likely to share unobserved common traits (.140 on heavy users versus

-.008 on light users). Indeed, the light users have no significant spillover at all.

        Taken together, each of our three approaches suggests that the estimated effect of city

ownership on future adoption rates is probably not caused by common unobserved traits.


                                                 15
VI. Identifying the Type of Network

       If the CITY % coefficient is a true spillover and not just a consequence of unobserved

common traits, then we would like to know more about the channel and nature of the spillover.

In this section we try to determine whether local schools are an important channel, whether

computer adopters are trying to keep up with the Joneses who already own computers, whether

local computer retailers and the local computer industry play a special role, and whether any

externalities might operate through use of e-mail and the Internet.



A. Local Schools

       One explanation for the city ownership coefficient is that it is being driven by computer

use in local schools. School districts in which lots of families own computers may, for

example, draft curricula that encourage non-owning families to buy a computer. To see if local

schools are a possible network hub, in column 1 of Table 4 we run our baseline specification

only on households without children (hence the smaller number of observations and the absence

of the children demographic control). The coefficient on city ownership is again significant and

has a similar magnitude (.092 versus .102). The school system cannot directly explain the local

spillovers for these households. The school system may be an important conduit of learning

and network benefits of computers, but this regression suggests those benefits are not restricted

to families with children in school.



B. Peer Pressure and Keeping Up With the Joneses

       One possible effect of local ownership on computer adoption, distinct from

conventional learning or network externality stories, arises from a desire to show off and

impress others, i.e., to "keep up with the Joneses." This is certainly a type of local effect but

has very different policy implications. In a world with learning from others and network

benefits, it may be appropriate to subsidize adoption. If people are buying computers just to

show off, in contrast, it may be appropriate to tax adoption.


                                                16
         Distinguishing "good" local influences from "bad" ones is quite difficult, but in column 2

of Table 4 we examine the computer use of people who bought their first computer in 1997.

We might expect those who are buying computers just to keep up with the Joneses to use their

computers less frequently once they own them. That is, if peer pressure causes our results,

there might be a negative relationship between frequency of computer use by new buyers and

the share of people in the city who already own computers. Higher CITY% places should have

more peer pressure and more buying just for show (and thus lower use).

         The results in column 2, where the dependent variable is the days per month that new

buyers use their computers, indicate no significant relationship. New buyers do not use their

computers less frequently if they buy in places where there are many owners.20 The point

estimate is extremely small and insignificant. The coefficient is -0.13 with a standard error of

2.05, whereas the mean use for new buyers is 23.2 days.



C. Local Prices/Local Industries

         Another explanation of our local effect is that cities where there are many computer

owners may have large numbers of people working in the computer industry, or they may have

lower computer store prices, denser networks of computer stores, and cheaper access to the

Internet. This may increase the probability of buying and thus explain our coefficient.21 This

local effect could itself arise because of network externalities. Cities with lots of computer-

owning households may endogenously have a dense network of computer retailers and local

phone numbers to access the Internet, benefiting new adopters.



20 This is also contrary to what one would expect from price differences. If adoption is high because local prices
are low, adopters should include more marginal buyers who will use their computer less intensively.
21 Fixed city price differences are actually not sufficient to generate a positive correlation between the CITY%
and the adoption rate of non-owners. For non-owners, the local market price has up to now exceeded their
reservation price. If the distribution of log reservation prices across households is uniform between 0 and p (so
that low price cities have higher ownership), then low price cities would need to have more rapidly falling
computer prices. i.e. one would need price divergence, not just price level differences. If the distribution of
reservation prices is non-uniform, however, then level differences in city prices could produce positive or
negative local effects.

                                                       17
        To test this explanation we examine the geographic areas in more detail. Thus far we

have been grouping households according to metropolitan area. For each person we also have

the state they live in, and many of the metropolitan areas cross state boundaries. The New

York City area, for example, includes people in New Jersey and Connecticut. We therefore

create a narrower local area, the "city-state". This splits a city like New York into three

different city-states: New York-New York, New York-New Jersey, and New York-

Connecticut. We then create the fraction of ownership within each of these city-states.

        In column 3 of Table 4 we repeat our standard regression but with the ownership shares

both by city-state and by city. The evidence is quite clear that the local effect is concentrated at

the more local, city-state level. In column 4 we add city dummies which should absorb any

metropolitan area level differences in industry composition, Internet access, computer store

availability, and so on. The coefficient on the local spillover remains large, positive and

significant (the coefficient is .086 with a standard error of .033). Thus the local effect cannot

be explained by differences in any citywide features.22 To explain the results, prices would

have to differ systematically within metropolitan areas. Because of these results, in the

regressions that follow we will use the CITY-ST% rather than the CITY%.

        We are able to examine the issue in even greater detail using the information given by

non-owners in 1997 of how likely they are to buy a computer in the next year. These same

respondents were also asked how many of their family and friends own personal computers

(potential answers to the latter are "all", "most", "some", "very few", and "none").

        Column 5 of Table 4 shows a regression of the reported likelihood of buying on

dummies for the share of friends and family that use computers, the fraction of the city-state

that own computers, and our standard list of household observables (comparable to the

specification with this dependent variable in column 5 of Table 2). The results show that, the

22A variant of the local price hypothesis is that the presence of computer owners affects adoption through the
market for used computers. Cities with many owners may have lots of inexpensive or free old computers. Our
data contains information for some respondents on the type of store in which they purchased their computer.
Using this information we found the same spillovers from local ownership looking only at the decision to buy a
new computer.

                                                      18
larger the fraction of family and friends that own a computer, the higher the reported likelihood

of a first purchase in the next year. Going from "none" to "all" of friends and family owning

computers raises the reported likelihood by .208 (the mean reported likelihood is .245). The

friends and family dummies are highly significant, with t-statistics ranging from 9 to 40. Their

inclusion also renders the estimated spillover at the city-state level small and insignificant.

Column 6 of Table 4 shows that adding city-state dummies does not change the estimated

effects of ownership by friends and family. These results suggest that the spillovers occur

among friends and family members • exactly the people a household interacts with most • and

are consistent with the idea that personal interactions form the basis of spillovers. For local

effects such as prices to explain these results, the prices would need to be specific to the

household and its friends and family.23



D. Internet and e-Mail Networks

        In Table 5 we present a series of regressions, each of which breaks the CITY-ST% into

computer users who do and do not report using their computer frequently for specific activities.

If there are networks associated with sharing software files, for example, we might expect that

spreadsheet or word processing computer users would have more influence on new adopters

than would owners who do not use those types of software. The first 5 columns of Table 5

reveal, however, that spillovers from computer owners are equally strong from users and non-

users of word processing, spreadsheets, games, graphics, and family budgeting • precisely the

types of software where file sharing might be prevalent.

        Column 6 shows that spillovers do not appear to be from use of home computers for

work. The spillovers appear larger from those who do not use their computers to do work at

home than from those who do, although the difference is not significant at the 10% level.




23 These results could also be explained by common unobserved traits among friends and family, similarly
inclined school districts of friends and family, and pressure to keep up with friends and family.

                                                     19
       More significantly, columns 7 and 8 of Table 5 are consistent with the view that

computers are components of local communication and information networks. In these

columns we look at users who frequently use the Internet and e-mail. People who frequently

use these are more influential. The coefficient on Internet households is .132 compared to only

.044 on other households (the p-value that the coefficients are the same is .07). The coefficient

on e-mail users is .141 versus .028 on those who do not use e-mail (p-value .03 on their

equality). These are suggestive of local communications networks but are also consistent with

local learning if Internet and e-mail users are more knowledgeable than other computer owners,

or are more active in communicating with others. We do not know what share of e-mail traffic

goes to local users but our data do suggest that the Internet, at least, has a strong local

component. When people with on-line access are asked what they usually do on-line, the top

answers do not appear particularly local (45% usually visit product or company websites and

42% usually visit reference sites), but four of the next five may include significant local content

(37% check the weather, 29% read a daily newspaper, 25% usually visit a sports site, and 24%

participate in on-line chats). A bigger local pool of on-line computer owners means a bigger

network of local users of e-mail and, perhaps, endogenously greater supply of websites with

local information.


VII. Conclusion
       Using data on 110,000 U.S. households in 1997, we have found evidence that local

spillovers are important for household computer adoption: households are more likely to buy

their first computer when a high fraction of people around them already own computers. Our

point estimates imply that such spillovers could play a quantitatively important role in the

spread of home computers, perhaps doubling the rate of adoption.

       Applying a battery of tests, we found that this effect was robust and unlikely to be

explained by common unobserved local traits or by alternative network explanations such as

local prices, local industry composition, local schools, or peer pressure. The networks do not


                                                20
appear to be tied to any particular type of software nor to the use of an at-home computer for

work. Instead, networks seem related to use of the Internet and e-mail, consistent with

computers as the hub of local information and communications networks.




                                              21
        Figure 1



SHARE OF HOUSEHOLDS WITH PCs
        0.508   to   0.63   (8)
        0.468   to   0.508 (11)
        0.421   to   0.468 (10)
        0.384   to   0.421 (9)
        0.32    to   0.384 (11)
           .08




           .06
Fraction




           .04




           .02




            0
                 .25       .35       .45       .55       .65

             Figure 2: Mean Computer Ownership by City
                      TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR 1997



           Variable                         Non-Owners                       Computer Owners


          Education                              12.8                                14.4
                                                 (2.2)                               (2.4)

            Income                               30.0                                52.6
                                                (23.0)                              (30.4)

              Age                                49.6                                44.4
                                                (15.4)                              (13.3)

            Female                               .601                                .478
                                                (.490)                              (.495)

        Kids Age 6-17                            .206                                .356
                                                (.404)                              (.479)

            Single                               .532                                .356
                                                (.499)                              (.479)

             Asian                               .006                                .016
                                                (.077)                              (.125)

    Non-Asian Minority                           .137                                .102
                                                (.344)                              (.303)

 Use a Computer at Work                          .289                                .675
                                                (.453)                              (.468)

Run a Business from Home                         .081                                .178
                                                (.273)                              (.383)

  Number of Observations                        48699                               60624


Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Education and age are in years, income is in
thousands, and the other variables are in fractions of one.
                TABLE 2: BASIC RESULTS AND ROBUSTNESS

                            (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                         Ownership       Adoption        Adoption        Adoption      Likelihood
                           1997          1996-97        1995-1996        1994-95        1997-98

CITY % (year t)             .3690
                           (.0284)
CITY % (year t-1)                           .1018          .1415           .1349          .1056
                                           (.0154)        (.0171)         (.0183)        (.0259)

  EDUCATION                 .0357           .0059          .0097           .0096          .0102
                           (.0009)         (.0006)        (.0005)         (.0005)        (.0006)

    INCOME                  .0300           .0092          .0133           .0120          .0166
                           (.0009)         (.0009)        (.0005)         (.0004)        (.0006)

       AGE                 -.0238          -.0090         -.0056          -.0028         -.0560
                           (.0012)         (.0009)        (.0008)         (.0007)        (.0010)

     SINGLE                -.0785          -.0219         -.0225          -.0223         -.0104
                           (.0036)         (.0024)        (.0025)         (.0024)        (.0028)

    FEMALE                 -.0308          -.0051         -.0047          -.0022         -.0110
                           (.0026)         (.0021)        (.0023)         (.0021)        (.0026)

       KIDS                 .1098           .0418          .0632           .0513          .1079
                           (.0052)         (.0041)        (.0027)         (.0025)        (.0042)

      ASIAN                 .0548           .0282          .0370           .0398          .0364
                           (.0116)         (.0183)        (.0124)         (.0113)        (.0160)

  NON-WHITE                -.0556          -.0122         -.0154          -.0151          .0721
                           (.0051)         (.0033)        (.0032)         (.0030)        (.0059)

  WORK COMP                 .2113           .0701          .0667           .0639          .0816
                           (.0043)         (.0032)        (.0025)         (.0024)        (.0032)

    OWN BIZ                 .1229           .0578          .0586           .0407          .0835
                           (.0037)         (.0043)        (.0036)         (.0033)        (.0044)

         N                101,253          61,399         67,599          73,433          53,468

  Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. The income and education coefficients are
  multiplied by 10 for presentation. Each regression is a linear probability model. Column 1
  regresses ownership of the individual on the fraction of the city owning in the same year.
  Columns 2 through 4 regress the decision to buy a computer in the later year on the share of
  the city owning a computer in the previous year. Column 5 looks at the self-reported
  likelihood of buying a computer in the next year.
                                             TABLE 3: CORRECTING FOR UNOBSERVABLES

                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)
                            OLS                 OLS                 OLS                 IV                  IV                 OLS                OLS

                          Baseline             More             City % for         City Means            Climate            Purchase            Intensity
                                              Controls          Electronics        for Demog.                              Experience            Of Use

     CITY %                 .1018              .1012               .1039               .1116              .1625
                           (.0154)            (.0205)             (.0348)             (.0183)            (.0455)

     Demog.:               10 vars            10 vars             10 vars             10 vars            10 vars             10 vars             10 vars

      Others:                                7 goods         7 goods
                                          3 attitude vars   7 CITY%
                                            Hrs of TV     3 attitude vars
                                                            Hrs of TV
    2+ Comps                                                                                                                  .1276
     CITY%                                                                                                                   (.0201)

      1 Comp                                                                                                                  .0213
      CITY%                                                                                                                  (.0551)
                                                                                                                                                  .1401
    Heavy Use                                                                                                                                    (.0232)
     CITY%
                                                                                                                                                 -.0076
     Light Use                                                                                                                                   (.0712)
      CITY%

         N                 61,399              38,830             38,830              61,399              61,292             61,399              61,399

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Variables are defined in the text. The instruments used in the IV estimates are listed at the top of the column.
Coefficients are not listed for some of the variables as indicated in each column.
                      TABLE 4: IDENTIFYING THE TYPE OF NETWORK

                            (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)
        Vars.             No Kids      Computer        City-         City           1998             1998
                                         Use           States      Dummies         Friends      City-ST Dums

      CITY %               .0919         -.1313        .0101
                          (.0179)       (2.050)       (.0420)

    CITY-ST %                                          .0926         .0862          .0340
                                                      (.0383)       (.0327)        (.0189)

 Friends w/comp--                                                                   .2080            .2068
       ALL                                                                         (.0101)          (.0102)

 Friends w/comp--                                                                   .1981            .1987
      MOST                                                                         (.0047)          (.0048)

 Friends w/comp--                                                                   .1137            .1151
      SOME                                                                         (.0046)          (.0047)

 Friends w/comp--                                                                   .0426            .0444
    VERY FEW                                                                       (.0044)          (.0044)

   Demographics:           9 vars       10 vars       10 vars       10 vars        10 vars          10 Vars
    CITY Dums:              No            No            No           Yes             No                --
  CITY-ST Dums:             No            No            No            No             No               Yes

          N               47,929         4,841         61,399        61,399        52,868           52,868

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Variables are defined in the text. Column 1 restricts the sample to
individuals with no children. Column 2 examines computer use measured in days per month. The dependent
variable in columns 5 and 6 is the self reported likelihood of buying a computer in 1998.
                                                    TABLE 5: NETWORKS BY TYPE OF USE

           Variables                    (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)

                                      Word          Spreadsheet        Games        Graphics      Family        Work at       Internet       e-mail
                                    Processing                                                    Budget         home


       CITY-ST%                        .1032            .0898           .1084         .0954        .1171         .0619         .1315         .1408
 (Frequently Use Feature)             (.0173)          (.0392)         (.0307)       (.0545)      (.0436)       (.0331)       (.0198)       (.0213)

      CITY-ST%                         .0937            .1125           .0938         .1048        .0941         .1498         .0442         .0283
(Do Not Freq. Use Feature)            (.0661)          (.0352)         (.0361)       (.0270)      (.0283)       (.0375)       (.0387)       (.0392)


       Other Variables                10 Vars         10 Vars         10 Vars       10 Vars       10 Vars       10 Vars       10 Vars       10 Vars

               N                      61,399           61,399          61,399        61,399        61,399        61,399        61,399       61,399

     p-value on equality                .89              .74             .80           .90           .72           .16           .07           .03
         restriction

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Variables are defined in the text. Coefficients are not listed for some of the variables as indicated. The
first row is the share of the city-state which owns a computer and frequently uses their computer for the purpose listed at the top of the column. The
second row is the share of computer users who do not frequently use their computer for that purpose.
                                            References

Andolfatto, David and Glenn M. MacDonald (1998), "Technology Diffusion and Aggregate
    Dynamics," Review of Economic Dynamics 1, 338-370.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger (1997), "Computing Inequality: Have
    Computers Changed the Labor Market?" NBER Working Paper #5956.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1997), "Technology Diffusion, Convergence, and
    Growth," Journal of Economic Growth 2, 1-26.

Bass, Frank M. (1969), "A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables," Management
     Science 15, 215-227.

Berndt, Ernst R. and Robert S. Pindyck (1998), "Network Externalities and Diffusion in
    Pharmaceutical Markets: Antiulcer Drugs," mimeo., MIT.

Bernhoff, Josh, Shelley Morrisette, and Kenneth Clemmer (1998), "Technographics Service
    Explained," The Forrester Report, January, 1(0).

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (1993), "Modelling Technology Adoption in Developing
     Countries," American Economic Review 83, 396-402.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (1997), "Diffusion as a Learning Process: Evidence from HYV
     Cotton," mimeo., Princeton University.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer and Ivo Welch (1998), "Learning from the Behavior of
    Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades," Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 12, 151-170.

Borjas, George J. (1995), "Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externalities,"
     American Economic Review 85, 365-390.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Shane Greenstein (1996), "Technical Progress and Co-invention in
    Computing and in the Uses of Computers," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
    Microeconomics, 1-77.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Scott Stern, and Manuel Trajtenberg (1997), "Market Segmentation
    and the Sources of Rents from Innovation: Personal Computers in the Late 1980s," RAND
    Journal of Economics 28, S17-44.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Manuel Trajtenberg (1995), "General Purpose Technologies: 'Engines
    of Growth'?", Journal of Econometrics 65, 83-108.




                                             22
Brock, William and Steven Durlauf (1995), "Discrete Choice with Social Interactions I: Theory"
    NBER Working Paper # 5291.

Case, Anne, James R. Hines, and Harvey S. Rosen (1993), "Budget Spillovers and Fiscal Policy
    Interdependence: Evidence from the States," Journal of Public Economics 52, 285-307.

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz (1991), "The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
    and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths", NBER Working Paper #3705.

Chari, V.V. and Hugo Hopenhayn (1991), "Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffusion of
    New Technology," Journal of Political Economy 99, 1142-1155.

DiNardo, John E. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (1997), "The Returns to Computer Use Revisited:
    Have Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
    253-290.

Downes, Tom and Shane Greenstein (1998), "Universal Access and Local Commercial Internet
   Markets," mimeo., Tufts University.

Durlauf, Steven (1993), "Nonergodic Growth Theory," Review of Economic Studies 60, 349-
    366.

Dybvig, Philip H. and Chester S. Spatt (1983), "Adoption Externalities as Public Goods,"
    Journal of Public Economics 20, 231-247.

Economides, Nicholas (1996), "Economics of Networks," International Journal of Industrial
    Organization 14, 673-700.

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab (1992), "Measuring Peer Group
    Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior," Journal of Political Economy 100, 966-991.

Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner (1985), "Standardization, Compatibility and Innovation,"
     RAND Journal of Economics 16, 70-83.

Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (1995), "Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
     Human Capital and Technological Change in Agriculture," Journal of Political Economy
     103, 1176-1209.

Friedberg, Leora (1997), "The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers," mimeo., UC
     San Diego.

Gandal, Neil (1994), "Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test for Network
    Externalities," RAND Journal of Economics, 25, 160-170

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman (1996), "Crime and Social
    Interactions," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 507-548.

                                              23
Glaeser, Edward (1997), "Learning in Cities," NBER Working Paper # 6271.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Joanna Stavins (1999), "Network Externalities and Technology
   Adoption: Lessons from Electronic Payments," mimeo., University of Minnesota.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Mehmet Yorukoglu (1997), "1974", Carnegie-Rochester Conference
    Series on Public Policy 46, 49-95.

Griliches, Zvi (1957), "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
      Change," Econometrica 25, 501-522.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global
    Economy, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Hamermesh, Daniel (1998), "The Art of Labormetrics," forthcoming, Handbook of
   Econometrics, Volume 5, North Holland Press.

Hausman, Jerry (1998), "Taxation by Telecommunications Regulation" Tax Policy and the
    Economy, Volume 12, James M. Poterba (ed.), MIT Press.

Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer (1985), "Social Science Duration Analysis," in J.J.
    Heckman and B. Singer (eds.), Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, Cambridge
    University Press.

Heckman, James J. and James M. Snyder (1997), "Linear Probability Models of the Demand for
    Attributes with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Preferences of Legislatures,"
    RAND Journal of Economics 28, S142-S189.

Helpman, Elhanan and Manuel Trajtenberg (1995), "Diffusion of General Purpose Technologies",
    in E. Helpman (ed.), General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, MIT Press.

Hoxby, Caroline and M. Daniele Paserman (1998), "Overidentification Tests With Grouped
    Data," NBER Technical Working Paper # 223.

Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow (1994), "Learning by Doing Spillovers in the
     Semiconductor Industry," Journal of Political Economy 102, 1200-1227.

Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson (1991), "Geographic Localization of
     Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations," Quarterly Journal of Economics
     108, 577-598.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald (1994), "Competitive Diffusion," Journal of
    Political Economy 102, 24-52.



                                             24
Katz, Michael and Carl Shapiro (1986), "Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network
    Externalities," Journal of Political Economy 94, 822-841.

Kokoski, Mary and Keith Waehrer (1998), "Hedonics and Quality Adjustment of Price Indices for
    Consumer Electronics Products," mimeo., U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Krueger, Alan B. (1993), "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
    Microdata, 1984-1989," Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 33-60.

Lucas, Robert E. (1993), "Making a Miracle," Econometrica 61, 251-272.

MacCarthaigh, Sean (1997), "Technology Town," Irish Times, November 14.

Mahajan, Vijay, Eitan Muller, and Frank M. Bass (1993), "New Product Diffusion Models", in J.
   Eliashberg and G.L. Lilien (eds.), Handbooks in OR & MS, Vol. 5, Elsevier Science.

O'Regan, Katherine and John Quigley (1996), "Spatial Effects Upon Employment Outcomes: The
    Case of New Jersey Teenagers," New England Economic Review, May-June, 41-58.

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1994), "Barriers to Technology Adoption and
    Development," Journal of Political Economy 102, 298-321.

Saloner, Garth and Andrea Shepard (1995), "Adoption of Technologies With Network Effects:
     An Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines," RAND Journal
     of Economics 26, 479-501.

Tiebout, Charles (1956), "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political Economy
    64, 416-424.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1998), Current Population Reports, P60-200, Money Income in the
     United States: 1997, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.

Yaukey, John (1997), "Blacksburg, Va.: A Town That's Really Wired," Ithaca Journal, April 8.

Youn g, Alwyn (1991), "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2), 369-406.




                                            25
</ref_section>
