NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHANGING DISTRIBUTION
OF JOB SATISFACTION
Daniel S. Hamermesh

Working Paper 7332
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7332

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999

I thank Andrew Clark, Li Gan, Jennifer Hunt, Viktor Steiner and participants in seminars at the NBER and
several universities for helpful suggestions, David Trybula for extremely careful and energetic research
assistance, and the Russell Sage Foundation for support under grant 85-97-03. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,

may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Changing Distribution of Job Satisfaction
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 7332
September 1999
JEL No. J30
ABSTRACT
The distribution of job satisfaction widened across cohorts of young men in the United States
between 1978 and 1988, and between 1978 and 1996, in ways correlated with changing wage inequality.
Satisfaction among workers in upper earnings quantiles rose relative to that of workers in lower quantiles.
An identical phenomenon is observed among men in West Germany in response to a sharp increase in the
relative earnings of high-wage men in the mid-1990s. Several hypotheses about the determinants of
satisfaction are presented and examined using both cross-section data on these cohorts and panel data from
the NLSY and the German SOEP. The evidence is most consistent with workers? regret about the returns
to their investment in skills affecting their satisfaction. Job satisfaction is especially responsive to surprises
in the returns to observable skills, less so to surprises in the returns to unobservables; and the effects of
earnings shocks on job satisfaction dissipate over time.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermesh@eco.utexas.edu

In the end, economics is not about wealth -- it s about the pursuit of happiness (Krugman, 1998).
I. Introduction and Rationale
A rapidly growing literature has identified rising earnings inequality as the premier labormarket problem of the 1980s and 1990s in the United States (e.g., Bound and Johnson, 1992; Juhn
et al, 1993), and its importance in other countries has also been examined.1 Recently some attention
has been paid to the changing distribution of nonwage monetary returns to work (Pierce, 1998); and
the changing distribution of a variety of nonmonetary aspects of work has also been analyzed
(Hamermesh, 1999). All of these studies concentrate on some part of what workers derive from their
jobs, and the student of inequality can use them to piece together a jigsaw puzzle describing much
of the total change in inequality of the returns to work. But any study of nonwage monetary or even
nonmonetary returns will necessarily ignore some nonpecuniary aspects of these returns. What is
needed is an understanding of how the overall distribution of the returns to work has changed.
Only one measure, the satisfaction that workers derive from their jobs, might be viewed as
reflecting how they react to the entire changing panoply of job characteristics. As our theoretical
arguments and empirical analyses will demonstrate, even this measure cannot in the long run reflect
changing inequality in the overall returns to work. In the short run, however, it can provide a
reflection of all the returns to labor-market activity, and as such can allow us to infer whether and
how the relative well-being of different kinds of workers has changed in response to shocks to the
labor market.

1

See OECD (1996) for an examination of time-series patterns in wage inequality in a number of developed
economies.
3

Economists have traditionally been loathe to deal with subjective outcomes describing work,
feeling that these cannot be linked to any underlying concept of utility and that, even if they could,
their subjective nature renders them too noisy to be of analytical value. We have not, however, been
entirely aloof from an area that has chiefly been the domain of social psychologists. Hamermesh
(1977) constructed and tested a theory of overall job satisfaction; and Freeman (1978) and Borjas
(1979) examined the effects of unionization on overall job satisfaction. More recently Farber (1990)
continued the analysis of unions and job satisfaction, and Clark and Oswald (1996), Gerlach and
Stephan (1996) and others have considered cyclical variations in satisfaction.
In this study I examine how the distribution of satisfaction from work has changed over time
in the United States and elsewhere. The first part of the empirical analysis takes subsamples of male
workers ages 26-31 in 1978 from the National Longitudinal Survey cohort of young men (NLSYM)
who were asked questions about their satisfaction with their jobs and compares them to men the same
age in 1988 who were asked the same question in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY). In the second part of the study I control for the heterogeneity in workers’ satisfaction that
is inherent in the first part by following the job satisfaction of members of the NLSY over a long
period (1984-96) as they matured and as the distribution of their pay changed, presumably in part
unexpectedly. In both of these empirical analyses we expect to observe a widening of the distribution
of satisfaction, one that is correlated with the growing inequality of pay and of nonwage benefits and
nonpecuniary amenities. As a check on the validity of this approach, a third set of empirical analyses
examines cross-section and longitudinal data on job satisfaction and pay inequality in Germany from
1984 to 1996.

2

II. Motivation
If job satisfaction were a monotonic transformation of full income, and thus a true measure
of utility, it would be extremely interesting for use in welfare comparisons. Regrettably, as I argue,
that is not likely to be the case. Despite that disappointment, however, while it is not likely to
indicate their well-being in any sense that is useful for an outsider evaluating welfare, how workers
perceive their work does affect economic outcomes. A more satisfied worker, even one whose
economic situation appears to an outsider to be no better than that of otherwise identical workers,
is less likely to leave his/her job voluntarily. Depending upon current job satisfaction, a worker will
be more or less likely to invest in firm-specific human capital that will increase his/her commitment
to the employer (with the same argument applying to occupation- or industry-specific investment).
Indeed, one might even reasonably imagine that the fluctuations in the animal spirits that are a
major Keynesian motivation for business cycles arise in part from variations in workers perceptions
of their well being. Presumably more satisfied workers, who are secure in their jobs, have a reduced
motive to undertake precautionary saving. In short, even though it may be a substantial stretch to
link expressed job satisfaction (or satisfaction generally) to utility, studying job satisfaction is still
important for understanding labor-market behavior and perhaps economic activity more generally.
All of the available sets of data describe job satisfaction (JS) as a categorical response that
presumably maps the worker s underlying feelings about his/her job to a few discrete choices.
Assume that there are J such choices, and let S be a continuous index of the worker s satisfaction.
Then we will observe worker i s responses on JS as:

3

(1)

JSi = J ,

if Si t > SJ ;

JSi = J-1 , if Si t > SJ-1 ;
.
.
.
JSi = 1 ,

if Si t # S2 .

Recognizing that this is a tremendous simplification, to make the notation here easier I assume that
Si t is a linear function of its argument(s).2 In each case I assume that these arguments are measures
of objective characteristics of the job.
The determination of job satisfaction depends on workers expectations about their current
earnings and working conditions. Consider a series of cases describing workers perceptions.
I. Complete forgetfulness and complete surprise. Workers care only about their current full
earnings Ei t and make no comparisons based on their characteristics (or compare themselves only
to the average worker) or on their past histories or those of other workers. In this case:
(2a)

Si t = E i t .

The transformation from current earnings to job satisfaction is monotonic, and comparisons of job
satisfaction indicate utility comparisons. In reality even in this case the transformation from wages
to S will be nonlinear: Although we expect wages and amenities to be related to a worker s full
earnings, the demands for each are not unit full income-elastic. Indeed, given evidence that the
demand for job-market amenities is highly income-elastic (Hamermesh, 1999), one might expect the
distribution of job satisfaction to be wider than that of wages. Under this assumption greater (lesser)
wage inequality will generate correlated increases (decreases) in the inequality of job satisfaction.

2

All that is needed is that S be a monotonic transformation in its arguments.
4

II. Knowledge of average current rates of return. This assumption stems from expectancy
theory (stated by Lewin, 1938, and summarized nicely by Vroom, 1964). Hamermesh (1977) showed
that this approach to the determination of job satisfaction dominated empirically the assumption
implicit in (2a) in a cross-section of American workers in 1969.3 If workers compare themselves to
others who had made the same investments at the same time, differences in satisfaction will arise out
of heterogeneity in the returns to those investments. Only supernormal returns and quasi-rents will
generate higher job satisfaction. In a cross section this implies that job satisfaction will be related to
the residual from equations relating earnings to measures of investment in general human capital, and
to measures of quasi-rents (e.g., returns to firm tenure). The satisfaction index is determined as:
(2b)

Si t = Ei t - E*i t*Xi ,

where E*i t*Xi are the full earnings of the average worker with characteristics X identical to those
of worker i. Increasing (decreasing) inequality in the distribution of earnings over time will increase
(decrease) the dispersion in the distribution of job satisfaction only if the change in inequality results
from greater dispersion in the returns to unobservable skills. This requires separating out changes
in this distribution from those in wages generally (see Di Nardo et al, 1996).
III. Disappointing returns. As is implicit in Lévy-Garboua and Montmarquette (1998), a
rational individual will base his/her job satisfaction on comparisons of outcomes to expectations that
were formed at the time that the investment decisions that generated those returns were undertaken.
Thus in this view job satisfaction is determined by the worker comparing his/her full earnings to what
would have been expected upon entering the labor market at time t0, having made the investments
3

A journalistic description of the problems of managers and professionals earning only $100,000 to
$200,000 (Wall Street Journal, August 3, 1998, p. 1) illustrates the role of expectancy theory in affecting
satisfaction.
5

the worker made and with the returns to the worker's other characteristics. No extra satisfaction is
generated by unusually high or low returns received by heterogeneous workers that were expected
at t0; but temporal changes in the means and variances of the distributions of returns will alter the
distribution of job satisfaction, so that:
(2c)

Si t = E i t -

ti 0

E*i t*Xi ,

where ti 0E*i t*Xi is the full earnings that a worker with i's characteristics would have expected to
receive at time t had labor-market conditions remained as they were when i entered the labor market
at time ti 0.
Admittedly this is backward-looking, in the sense that the worker retains at time t full memory
of the expectation at ti 0; but it is consistent with substantial evidence in the literature in psychological
economics of the role of regret in affecting behavior (for example, Thaler, 1992, Chapter 6).
Rising (declining) earnings inequality will raise (lower) the variance of the distribution of job
satisfaction to the extent that today s workers formed their expectations when the distribution of
earnings was different. This will persist until all the workers who entered the labor market at a time
when earnings inequality differed from its current state have left the labor market.
IV. Rational expectations with learning and heterogeneity. It is difficult to believe that regret
lasts an entire working life: If the demand for a worker s skills dropped unexpectedly and
permanently in the first year of the stream of returns, one might expect that worker to be more
regretful in that year than thirty years later. After some period of time the worker s expectations of
future returns may have adjusted to the likely reality. This consideration suggests that job satisfaction
will be determined by the deviation of the returns to the worker s skills over a continually adjusting

6

forecast of those returns. The forecast will be based on what the worker expected at ti 0, but modified
by events. The satisfaction index will be determined as:

(2d)

t
Si t = Ei t - Ó âkE*i k*Xi ,
k=t
0

with the weights âk presumably greater as k 6 t. In this case increasing (decreasing) inequality of
earnings can increase (decrease) the dispersion of job satisfaction, but only if the changes in inequality
are unexpected. If earnings inequality is greater and has been so for some years, the distribution of
satisfaction will approach what it was before the initial shock occurred.
We can go beyond the four Cases to examine how job satisfaction responds to unexpected
returns to investment in human capital as compared to unexpected returns to a worker s
unobservable (to the econometrician) characteristics. There is no reason to expect workers to react
the same way to changes in the returns to their investments in education and on-the-job training as
they do to changes in the returns to their native capacities, since their ability to perceive these two
sources of the wage outcomes may differ. (2c) and (2d) could be decomposed into two components,
one showing the deviation of returns to those measurable skills in which the worker had invested, the
other showing the deviation in returns to unobservables. Also in (2d) the paths of adjustment of
expectations (the âk) of the responses to surprises need not be the same for both components of the
unexpected returns.4

4

The theoretical issue throughout this discussion is essentially one of examining the extent of cognitive
dissonance between where the worker currently is and what he/she perceives the correct place to be (see Festinger,
1957). The empirical issue is the determination of what that perception is and how it evolves.
7

III. Cohorts of American Men
A. Data
The ages of the respondents and the timing of information on job satisfaction in the National
Longitudinal Survey of Young Men and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth fortuitously
enable us to compare workers within a narrow, fairly young age range just before and immediately
after the most rapid increase in earnings inequality in the past 75 years occurred in the United States.
I take nonhispanic white male workers 26-31 in each survey, with those in the NLSYM observed in
1978 (one of only two years in which questions about job satisfaction were asked in that study) and
those in the NLSY observed in 1988. In both surveys workers were asked the question, How do you
feel about your job? Do you like it: very much (4); like it fairly well (3); dislike it somewhat (2);
dislike it very much (1)?

5

Because the last response is very rare (1.73 percent in 1978, 1.51 percent

in 1988), and the third is not common, I combine these two categories in the analyses here and in
Section IV.
The sample used in most of this section consists of all men in the required range of ages
whose annual hours of work averaged at least 35 per week in the year preceding the survey (so that
I restrict the analysis to full-time workers). This restriction eliminates 10 percent of working men this
age in 1978, and 14 percent in 1988. I use annual earnings (for 1977 in the NLSYM, 1987 in the
NLSY) to measure wages in the comparisons in the remainder of this section and in Section IV to
reduce problems of measurement error (see Bound et al, 2000).

5

The responses are coded in the data in reverse order. I have transformed them here to make the ordering
consistent with general usage.

8

B. The Relationship Between Changing Earnings Inequality and Job Satisfaction
Table 1 presents the distributions of the crucial variables in this analysis, reported job
satisfaction and actual annual earnings. The data on earnings corroborate for these very narrow age
groups the well-known results on changing earnings inequality: The distribution widened substantially
during the 1980s, as shown by the changing ratios Wp /W50, annual earnings at percentile p relative
to median annual earnings at the time. Moreover, as comparisons of the second part of the table
show, the greatest change that occurred was the result of rapid growth of earnings at and within the
top decile of the distribution.
The first thing to note from the distribution of job satisfaction is that there is no apparent
evidence that average satisfaction increased during this decade. Indeed, if anything there is some
indication that the responses became more negative during this period. Other than Case I the
explanations of job satisfaction outlined in Section II do not imply any necessary trend in the
responses, and even Case I might be interpreted as requiring only comparisons to other workers'
actual wages at each point in time. Thus the absence of an upward trend in satisfaction during a time
of rising real wages is not surprising. The Table also shows no indication of widening dispersion in
the distribution of job satisfaction. This too is not surprising, as the arguments in Section II imply
that we should observe changes in the distribution of job satisfaction of workers arrayed by their
earnings, not necessarily in the raw distribution of satisfaction. (For example, if average earnings rise
steadily, and some shock lowers the return to skill, the earnings distribution will narrow even though
under Case III and, at least until expectations adjust, also under Case IV we would observe the
distribution of satisfaction to have widened.)

9

We cannot test the predictions of Section II even indirectly without examining how job
satisfaction changed at different points of the widening distribution of earnings. In all cases over 40
percent of the sample members like their jobs very much, and over 40 percent like them fairly well,
so that the most useful comparison is of how these two fractions differ over time by earnings quartile.
For that purpose I array the respondents by annual earnings (by quartiles, to circumvent the random
variation induced by the small sample sizes within deciles) and examine how average job satisfaction
changed over time within each quartile.
Figure 1 presents ( ) the double-differences in the logarithm of average earnings by quartile
compared to the lowest quartile of workers sorted by earnings. As was implied by the data in Table
1, these double-differences are positive, with the largest value being that for the double-difference
between the top and bottom quartiles. Figure 1 also presents:
(3)

Ä2q j = {[fq = j] - [f1 = j]}88 - {[fq = j] - [f1 = j]}78 , j = 4, 3 ,

where f indicates a fraction and q denotes a particular quartile. During this time of rising earnings
inequality the fraction of workers in each of the highest three earnings quartiles who said that they
liked their jobs very much ( ) increased relative to the change in the lowest quartile, while the
fractions stating they only liked their jobs fairly well ( ) decreased relatively. Moreover, these
changes were greatest in the top quartile, which saw the biggest relative increase in earnings. These
results are consistent with Cases I, III and IV in Section II, and with Case II to the extent that the
rising inequality of returns to unobservables accounts for part of the overall increase in earnings
inequality.

10

C. Distinguishing the Cases
To determine which of the alternative explanations of job satisfaction in Section II describes
these data better, we need to move from those abstract models to an estimable model. Ideally I
would like to approximate Eit , E*it*Xi and ti0E*it*Xi by measures that account for a large variety of
returns to work, not just by wages. Regrettably, good measures of the nonwage monetary returns
to work are not available in this data set; and obtaining even incomplete measures of just some of the
nonpecuniary aspects of these workers jobs is very difficult. Accordingly, I proxy E by the worker s
wage, W, throughout the empirical work. While this neglects substantial aspects of the returns to
work, the wage, nonwage pecuniary returns, and nonpecuniary amenities are all increasing functions
of full earnings (none is inferior). Thus one can view W as a monotonic function of E whose elasticity
probably is not unity and need not even be constant.
Table 2 shows the parameter estimates describing various characterizations of the cases in
Section II using the data on job satisfaction for young men ages 26-31 in 1988. I present the results
of estimating these ordered probits as the impact of a ten log-point increase in the independent
variable on the probabilities of being in each of the three job-satisfaction categories. The first
coefficient in each triad is .1MPr{JSt =4}/MZ}, and the second is .1MPr{JSt =3}/MZ}, where Z is a wage
measure. The sign of the t-statistic in parentheses below the derivative indicates the sign of the
coefficient in the ordered probit.
The coefficients in the first row are from an ordered probit in which the only independent
variable is the worker s annual earnings (in 1987), as in (2a). Those in the second row are on the
residual u88 from a regression of annual earnings reported in 1988 (for 1987) on education, actual job
experience, job tenure, annual hours, and indicator variables for marital status, location in the South
11

and in an SMSA, union status, and bad health. This ordered probit is the econometric analog of (2b).
Unlike in Hamermesh (1977) actual earnings describe the distribution of job satisfaction better than
does the residual from a cross-section earnings equation.
Neither of these models describes job satisfaction in 1988 as well as does a simple version of
Case III, in which I try to capture the idea of regret/disappointed expectations. The estimated effects
from the ordered probits that are presented in the third row of Table 2 are on annual earnings in 1988
and on

78

W^i,88, what the average earnings in 1988 of a worker with individual i s observable

characteristics would have been had the distribution of returns to someone with those characteristics
remained unchanged between 1978 and 1988. This equation is thus essentially identical to (2c),
except actual earnings replace full earnings. By using 78W^i,88 to proxy

E*i t*Xi I implicitly assume

ti 0

that when they entered the labor market in (roughly) 1978 those workers who were 26-31 in 1988
based their expectations about their labor-market success at those ages on the experiences of workers
who were 26-31 in 1978.6
This model performs better than the simpler models describing Cases I and II: Not only are
the pseudo-R2 higher and each of the coefficients above its standard error; the coefficient on 78W^i,88
has the expected negative sign. The results suggest that, if a worker s current wage is above (below)
what his observable skills would have generated based on his expectations when he entered the labor

6

In all of these equations I experimented with including other variables, among them each of the measures
included in the equations used to generate u88. Among these none achieved a t-statistic above 1 in absolute value.
Including a vector of indicator variables for one-digit industry generated only one new result, namely that workers
in professional services were more satisfied (given their wages, or the residuals of their wages) with their jobs
than were other workers. Even here, this effect was only marginally significant statistically. The inclusion of
these other variables never lowered the statistical significance of the wage measures.
12

market, he is unusually satisfied (dissatisfied) with his job. The importance of this variable suggests
that workers do exhibit some regret in their feelings about their work. Comparing the results to those
of Case II implies that workers are more concerned with how the labor market treats them relative
to their initial expectations than how it treats them relative to its current treatment of other workers
with the same (observable) skills.
While the data from these two cross-sections of young men do not allow distinguishing
between Cases III and IV, they can be used to examine the relative importance of regrets about the
returns to observable and unobservable characteristics in the determination of job satisfaction. The
remaining effects presented in Table 2 are from ordered probits that include as independent variables
combinations of measures that decompose earnings shocks into those to the returns to the observable
and unobservable components of skills. The first term is [u88 - u^p,78], the residual from an equation
describing earnings in 1988 minus what that residual would have been at the p th percentile of the
earnings distribution if the distribution of observed earnings had remained unchanged since 1978. The
^ second term is [W
88

78

^ ], the earnings predicted in 1988 for a person with worker i s
W
88

characteristics minus what would have been predicted for those characteristics in 1978. The first term
thus measures how well the worker was rewarded in 1988 relative to otherwise observationally
identical workers then, compared to the returns that those unmeasurable skills would have generated
in 1978. The second term measures the gain (or shortfall) of the returns to his/her measurable skills
(demographics, education, years of tenure, union status, etc.) relative to what could have been
expected in 1978.
The fourth and fifth rows of Table 2 present the results of including these two measures
separately, while the sixth set of ordered-probit coefficients includes them both. Clearly, this
13

decomposition of the measures that are essentially summed in Case III matters, since the pseudo-R2
rises. More important, the estimates suggest that the unanticipated returns to a worker s observable
characteristics -- education, job tenure, etc. -- are the more important determinants of job satisfaction.
Workers are either less aware of unexpected returns to their idiosyncratic characteristics (those parts
of their drive, innate ability, etc., that are not determinants of the education and job tenure that they
accumulate); or the returns to these unobservables simply do not affect how they perceive their jobs.7
The final equation in Table 2 includes an interaction of [u88 - u^p,78] and [W^88 - 78W^88] to test
whether unusually high (low) unexpected returns to both observables and unobservables interact to
generate unusually high (low) job satisfaction. With the inclusion of this interaction term all three
coefficients are significantly nonzero; and the results suggest that unusual returns along both
observable and unobservable dimensions affected job satisfaction in 1988. Between 1978 and 1988
the returns to both types of skills rose; and workers who were fortunate enough to have accumulated
a lot of education and who were highly able reaped the benefits of those apparently unexpected higher
returns and were especially well satisfied with their jobs.
D. Cohorts of Men 31-33, 1978 and 1996
Only longitudinal data can both circumvent the problems of heterogeneity and enable us to
distinguish empirically between Cases III and IV; but using a pair of cross sections still further apart
than the decade that separates the workers in the samples on which the estimation in Part B was based
can at least provide a hint of whether workers’ expectations about their treatment in the labor market
do adjust to the realities that confront them as their careers progress. I take 31-33 year-old
7

While I present only the results for nonhispanic whites in Table 3, estimates for the entire sample of males 26-31
years old were generally comparable and demonstrated the superiority of Case III over Cases I and II as an
14

nonhispanic white males observed in 1978 in the NLSYM and compare them to men in the same age
group in the NLSY observed in 1996. The sample for 1978 contains the same men age 31 who were
also included in the data used in Part B. I reuse these observations in order to prevent an already
small sample (400 observations in 1978, 627 observations in 1996) from becoming smaller still.
Figure 2 shows double differences in the logarithms of annual earnings by quartile. The
results indicate unsurprisingly that over this nearly twenty-year period the distribution of earnings in
this narrow age range became less equal, with the biggest change being the sharply widening gap
between workers in the top earnings quartile and others. The other two lines in Figure 2 present the
double differences in the fractions of workers responding that they are very or somewhat satisfied
with their jobs. These results are directly comparable to those in Figure 1 for slightly younger
nonhispanic white men observed over the decade 1978-88. As in that Figure the double differences
on JS = 4 are positive, suggesting that even over this longer period workers’ expectations about their
labor-market success did not fully adjust to the change in outcomes.
A comparison of the results in the two Figures reveals one crucial difference, however: The
largest positive double difference in Figure 1 was in the top quartile, mirroring the very sharp rise in
relative earnings in that quartile compared to others. In Figure 2, even though the top-bottom
quartile double difference in log-earnings over the eighteen-year period exceeded that in Figure 1 and
is the largest in this Figure, the double difference in JS in the top quartile is smaller than those in the
third and second quartiles. While the changing distribution of job satisfaction matched the changing
distribution of earnings (by quartile) perfectly between 1978 and 1988, the match was less complete,
although still in the expected direction, between 1978 and 1996. This distinction provides some

explanation of job satisfaction in 1988.
15

evidence that there was at least some adjustment in workers’ expectations about the returns to their
skills after they entered the labor market, and it thus hints that Case IV may describe the path of job
satisfaction better than Case III.
IV. Longitudinal Changes in Job Satisfaction When Earnings Inequality Widens -- U.S. 198496
The attempt to distinguish among the theories of job satisfaction is plagued by problems of
heterogeneity. Individuals who are inherently more satisfied may also be those who invest more in
themselves, whose wages are higher (or higher than an econometrician would expect) and whose
wages grow more rapidly once they cease formal education. The ordered probits describing Cases
I-III may thus have been misspecified because they ignored a common component in both the job
satisfaction measure and the wage measure(s). For example, (2a) might more appropriately be
specified as:
(2a')

Si t + vi = Ei t + èi ,

where vi and èi are individual effects, with E(vi)=E(èi)=0, and E(vièi)>0. The vi and èi might be
viewed as positively correlated measurement errors that are unchanging over time. Clearly,
estimation based on (2a') or its analogs will impart a positive bias to the impact of earnings measures
on satisfaction because of heterogeneity rather than any causation from E to S. This difficulty has
no effect on our inferences about the changing distribution of job satisfaction, but it does prevent us
from drawing structural inferences.
To circumvent this potential difficulty we need to examine longitudinal data that allow us to
difference out the vi and èi. The NLSY is the only American data set that contains repeated
observations on large numbers of individuals' job satisfaction, and I use it again in this section. Since
W is represented by annual earnings, I again restrict the sample to full-time workers (in this case,
16

those who worked at least 1500 hours in a year). In order to avoid observing sample members during
a time when many were acquiring additional education I start the panel only in 1984.8 To prevent
sample sizes from becoming minuscule because of the restriction to full-time employees, I examine
panel members' job satisfaction over the twelve-year period 1984-96, but only in the three years 1984,
1990 and 1996. (Three years of data suffice to discriminate between Cases III and IV.)

This

restriction and the requirement that information be available on satisfaction in each year and on the
observables used to predict W reduce the sample to 1280 individuals.
I estimate standard log-earnings equations for each of t = 1984, 1990 and 1996 to obtain ut
for use in estimating empirical analogs to (2b). In each case the explanatory variables include the
usual human capital measures (education, actual experience and job tenure), indicators of union
status, a variety of demographic measures, and indicators of location, with separate earnings
equations estimated each year for men and women. For each sex the earnings equations for the three
years are estimated as a system of seemingly-unrelated equations. The more difficult choice is the
^ .. An early cross section of the NLSY cannot be used for this purpose, since the
estimation of t 0W
t
age range in any cross section is too narrow to allow within-sample prediction of the growth of
earnings in the NLSY over the twelve-year period that we use.
The best alternative is to predict earnings growth in the NLSY sample by examining a cross
section of workers from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Groups on whom we have some of the same
information as in the NLSY. This approach has the virtue of providing very large samples covering

8

By 1984 the number of sample members whose education was still increasing grew much more slowly than
before. Indeed, while the fraction of the sample with 16+ years of schooling rose from 12.2 percent in 1982 to
18.2 percent in 1984, it grew to only 22.9 percent in 1990 and to 22.7.

17

the entire age range of full-time workers, but the disadvantage that it lacks the richness of information
in smaller samples such as the NLSY. Nonetheless, it captures the majority of the determinants of
earnings differences (especially among full-time workers) that we observe in these smaller samples.
I use the 1979 CPS-ORG, because that year roughly corresponds to t0. Using the CPS-ORG I
estimate the log-earnings equations for 1979, the results of which are presented in Appendix Table
A1. The estimated coefficients are completely unsurprising and require no comment here. I then use
these coefficients and the data on the NLSY panel members (including their computed potential
^ in each of the three years t -- 1984, 1990 and 1996.
experience) to obtain 79W
t
The final issue in specifying the longitudinal models is the treatment of the measures of job
satisfaction. In the panel data these can be viewed as allowing us to form a pair of 3x3 transition
matrices, one showing transitions in satisfaction from 1984 to 1990, the other from 1990 to 1996.
While I present these matrices below, by themselves they are not readily usable in models describing
the determinants of changing job satisfaction. I thus estimate ordered probits for JS90 and JS96, in
each case using as additional independent variables a vector of two indicator variables that spans JSt-6.
Obviously there are many other ways to describe the changes implicit in these 3x3 transition
matrices, but this one is simplest.9 Coupled with six-year changes in the various wage measures, it
allows us to remove the vi and èi from the equations. At the same time, for JS96 we can distinguish
between Cases III and IV by examining the relative effects of recent and past changes in the wage
measures on the satisfaction outcomes.

9

In this case, however, ordered probit does lead to estimates of the parameters that have biases in unknown
directions.
18

Table 3 presents the characteristics of both the full subsample of 1280 workers and, for
purposes of closer comparison to the results in Section III, for a still smaller subsample consisting of
nonhispanic white males whose educational attainment was unchanged from 1984 to 1996. Panel A
of the table demonstrates the expected rise in earnings over the twelve years. More interesting for
our purposes is the pattern of wage growth in the smaller subsample shown in the first row of Panel
B. The returns to schooling in this subsample rose from 1984 to 1990, but stayed essentially constant
between 1990 and 1996.10 That earnings differentials by education first widened in this sample and
then stopped widening provides substantial scope for examining the time path of responses of job
satisfaction to wage shocks.
The remainder of Table 3 presents the distribution of earnings within this subsample broken
down by education (at most 12 years, more than 12 years) as well as the distributions of job
satisfaction by education for each of the three years sampled. Perhaps the most interesting thing to
note is that workers with at least some college education were more satisfied with their jobs than
were high-school graduates. This difference suggests the role of current earnings; but it is also
remarkable that, between 1990 and 1996, when the rate of return to schooling ceased rising in this
sample (and perhaps in the United States more generally), the distribution of job satisfaction among
more educated workers began to approximate that of less educated workers more closely. This
conjunction of a growing similarity in the responses of workers with different educational attainment
and a halt in the growing returns to schooling suggests that changes in job satisfaction are more subtle
than might be implied by a theory based on current outcomes alone.

10

The rates of return shown in the table are coefficients of years of schooling from the log-earnings equations that
are used to calculate ut..
19

Table 4 lists the transition matrices for the 1280 continuous full-time employees in the NLSY
sample. The ÷2-statistics for both six-year transition matrices and the twelve-year matrix (1984 to
1996) show that current job satisfaction is not independent of previous job satisfaction ( ÷2.01(4) =
13.28). This may be evidence that vi // 0, or it may show that some individuals earn high wages, or
unexpectedly high wages, and are more satisfied with their jobs because of that. Nonetheless, that
the off-diagonal elements in each matrix contain nearly half the sample members suggests that there
is ample room for describing changes in job satisfaction over the six-year intervals.

The

corresponding elements of the two six-year transition matrices are remarkably similar, with the only
difference being the somewhat smaller off-diagonal terms in the later matrix, perhaps indicating
greater stability of workers' responses as they settle into longer-term jobs. The lesser significance of
the ÷2-statistic describing the twelve-year transition matrix may suggest that the impacts of shocks
that affect job satisfaction dissipate over time.
Table 5 contains the principal results of this section, the ordered probits describing job
satisfaction in 1990 and 1996. In each equation I also include indicator variables for JS = 4 and JS
= 3 at time t-6. The results are presented as in Table 2: The first two numbers are the impacts of ten
log-point increases in the independent variables on the probabilities of responding JSt =4 or JSt = 3,
while the t-statistic on the ordered-probit coefficient is in parentheses below these derivatives. The
first thing to note is that the hypotheses implicit in Cases I and II both make some sense in these
estimates that account for individual heterogeneity. For both 1990 and 1996 the coefficient on dWt
^ ) to the equation
is positive and significant, as is that on dut. Moreover, when we add d(79W
t
containing dWt to embody Case III, the impact of the actual wage remains unchanged and still highly
significant, while the wage predicted at t0 is either negative, or positive and insignificant. Case II
20

seems to describe the data best in 1990, while in the ordered probits without the lagged wage terms
Case I or III does better in 1996.11
Because we have many years of longitudinal information on these workers, we can distinguish
at least crudely between Cases III and IV by including lagged changes (changes between 1984 and
1990) in the various wage measures in the ordered probits for job satisfaction in 1996. The second
row in each pair of ordered probits describing JS96 includes lagged terms (measuring percentage
changes in the wage variable between 1984 and 1990). Considering the first equation (containing
only dWt and dWt-6), the insignificant term in the lagged wage change suggests very clearly that more
distant lags in a stimulus to job satisfaction have little effect (implicitly that the shocks are dissipated
over time). A similar result is apparent in the equations embodying Case II (including dut and dut-6).
The results become more interesting in the final specification in Table 5, the only one presented thus
far that enables us to differentiate Cases III and IV. While the lagged wage change term is
insignificant, the lagged term in the change in expected wages is highly significant statistically (and
has the expected negative sign). None of the results showing the unimportance of lagged changes
in the wage measures varies qualitatively if we delete the lagged satisfaction measures from the
ordered probits. Except for the apparent importance of initial changes in expected wage growth,
none of the lagged changes in wages is important. This finding implies that past shocks to earnings
have no effect on current satisfaction.
As a check on these estimates I present in Appendix Table A2 the results of the same
specifications estimated over the reduced subsample of full-time continuous nonhispanic white male
11

Both here and in the next Section I examined whether job satisfaction responds asymmetrically to wage growth
(or wage residuals) depending on whether this is positive or negative. Except for some slight indication in one
case in the next Section, there is no evidence of any asymmetry in the responses of changes in job satisfaction
21

workers. The patterns of the coefficients are somewhat different from those in Table 5: As before,
in the equations describing JS90 Case II seems to fit best; but in the description of JS96 Case I seems
to fit best. There is no evidence that wages predicted at labor-force entry affect current job
satisfaction, and none that past wage shocks persist in the determination of current job satisfaction.
The appropriate general conclusion from estimates based on longitudinal data from the United
States is the same as from the comparison across cohorts of young adult men. Job satisfaction is not
simply based on either actual wages or on apparent unexpected returns (excesses of wages over those
received by observationally identical individuals). Instead, it may be based on comparisons of actual
wages to what the individual might have expected based on the state of the labor market when he/she
was making decisions about investing in human capital. The evidence on whether early labor-market
experience has a long-term effect on job satisfaction is mixed, although the general impression is that
early expectations and wage shocks become less important as workers age. The results in this section
also indicate (since they implicitly relate changes in job satisfaction to changes in wages) that growing
wage inequality generates at least a temporary increase in the inequality of the distribution of job
satisfaction.

to changes in wages (or in wage residuals).
22

V. Longitudinal Changes in Job Satisfaction -- Germany 1984-96
A. Data
Germany is one of the few countries with a long household panel containing information on
a large number of workers

job satisfaction and other characteristics.

This is the German

Socioeconomic Panel (GSOEP) begun in West Germany in 1984 and expanded to a panel in the
former East Germany in 1991. Using data on Germany has the additional virtue that, unlike the
United States, the country experienced no change in earnings inequality, at least through 1994
(Steiner and Wagner, 1997, 1998). Thus we may be able to examine the hypotheses discussed in
Section II in a labor market characterized by a substantially different experience from the American
one.
Because the GSOEP covers Germans of all ages, we cannot focus on two entirely different
cohorts as in Section III.B. Instead, for 1984, 1994 and 1996 I construct data describing all men who
were ages 30-59 in the particular year, who worked 12 months in the previous year and at least 30
hours in the survey week, and on whom earnings information is available. The sample includes West
Germans only. The annual earnings measure is a broad one that adds to 12 times gross monthly
earnings 13th-month pay,

14th-month pay, Christmas bonuses, and vacation, professional and

other pay. The data on job satisfaction in the GSOEP are scaled more finely than those in the NLSY,
with the worker rating his/her job on a scale ranging from very satisfied -- 10 -- to very
dissatisfied -- 0. For purposes of analysis and presentation here I combine the responses into four
categories.

23

B. The Relationship Between Changing Earnings Inequality and Job Satisfaction
The upper parts of Table 6 show the information on earnings and its distribution in this
sample of full-time German male workers ages 30-59. Between 1984 and 1994 there was essentially
little change in earnings inequality, with the slight lengthening of the right tail of the distribution being
due partly to increases in nonwage compensation of higher-wage workers, partly to a slight increase
in their relative monthly earnings.12 Between 1994 and 1996 earnings inequality in Germany expanded
rapidly. As the data in Table 6 indicate, there was little change in the distribution of the left tail of
earnings; indeed, even workers at the 75th percentile did not see their earnings increase greatly relative
to the median. Instead, the right tail of the distribution stretched out rapidly during this period.13
Given this growth in earnings inequality, rather than providing a different pattern against which to
reflect the American results, changing German earnings inequality between 1984 and 1996 allows us
to attempt to replicate the American results over a period in which inequality widened suddenly near
its end.
The distributions of job satisfaction for all workers in the sample in each of the years are
presented in the bottom part of Table 6. By themselves they are not informative, other than to
underscore the perils of comparing trends in average job satisfaction: It is very difficult to believe
that the percentage of men viewing their jobs as yielding satisfaction below 8 on a ten-point scale rose
from 35 percent to 52 percent at a time when real earnings were rising, just as it was difficult to
believe the apparent decline in average satisfaction implicit in Table 1. Comparisons of the effects
12

For example, the 90-50 ratios of monthly earnings were 1.667 in 1984 and 1.706 in 1994.

13

This is not an artifact of some error in the data for 1996. Already in 1995 the 90-50 earnings ratio had
increased to 1.762, essentially half of the increase between 1994 and 1996. Nor is it a result solely of using a
broad definition of earnings, although that is part of the explanation. The 90-50 ratio of monthly earning rose
24

of changing wage inequality on inequality in job satisfaction must abstract from aggregate changes
in satisfaction that may arise from slight changes in survey design, question structure or even general
attitudes about life outside the labor market.
The appropriate examination of how job satisfaction by earnings quantile changed over this
period uses the double-difference calculation presented in (3). Figure 3 presents calculations for 1994
compared to 1984 exactly analogous to those in Figure 1. As is implicit in Table 6, the main change
in earnings inequality over the decade was the slow rise in average earnings in the right tail (shown
by the positive double difference in Ln(W) at the top quartile). Perhaps because of the slowness of
this and the other changes in relative earnings, the double differences in job satisfaction show little
relationship to the patterns of earnings changes.
The results for 1984-94 stand in stark contrast to those in Figure 4, which presents double
differences calculated only over the two-year interval 1994 to 1996. During this two-year period
changes in interquartile earnings differences were as large as they had been over the entire previous
decade. Accompanying these rapid changes was a related rise in inequality of job satisfaction, with
the biggest increase apparent among workers in the top quartile of the earnings distribution. Given
the suddenness and recentness of the rise in relative earnings in the top quartile, it is not surprising
that this finding mirrors the strong results for the U.S. between 1978 and 1988 rather than the
attenuation that occurred over the longer period 1978-1996.
C. Longitudinal Changes in Job Satisfaction
The GSOEP also lends itself for use in an examination of the determinants of job satisfaction
like that conducted on the NLSY in Section IV. Because it contains the same kind of information

to 1.750 in 1996 after fluctuating between 1.65 and 1.70 between 1984 and 1994.
25

needed to construct wage residuals, it allows for distinguishing between Cases I and II.
Unfortunately, because of the broad age range of the respondents, there is no information that would
allow constructing empirical analogs to ti 0E*i t*Xi (and no extraneous information that would enable
me to form these expectations), and thus no way to test Cases III and IV. The panel nature of the
data does, however, allow testing the importance of lagged terms in Cases I and II and thus whether
wage shocks have long-term consequences.
Here I construct a sample of respondents who were full-time (defined above) workers in each
of 1984, 1990 and 1996, the same years used in Section IV for the American NLSY. That dynamic
models of job satisfaction have something to explain is indicated by the transition matrices in Table
7. There is clearly some persistence of the responses: All the ÷2-statistics strongly reject the
hypothesis that job satisfaction in one year is independent of the response six years earlier, although
as in the U.S. the stability becomes less apparent as the interval between observations increases
(notice the lower ÷2-statistics for the matrix linking 1984 and 1996). Nonetheless, the mass of the
distribution in the off-diagonal elements of the matrices is substantial. Indeed, between 1984 and 1990
24 percent of the respondents changed their expressed satisfaction by two or more (of the four)
categories. Between 1990 and 1996 the percentage was 18 percent, still substantial, and as in the
NLSY lower than in the previous six-year period (during which members of the panel were younger
and more mobile).
Table 8 replicates for the GSOEP the estimates of the dynamic job-satisfaction equations that
were presented for the NLSY in Table 5. (Similar estimates, but for the reduced sample of nativeborn workers who acquired no additional education between 1984 to 1996, are presented in
Appendix Table A3.) The earnings residuals are from equations that contain the usual education,
26

experience and tenure terms. For each ordered probit I present the effect of a 10 log-point increase
in earnings on the average worker s probability of responding that he or she is in the top (9 or 10),
the second (8), or the third (6 or 7) category on the scale of job satisfaction. The results for both JS90
and JS96 suggest that Case I, in which changes in job satisfaction depend on earnings, describes the
data somewhat better than does Case II, in which changes in the unexplained component of earnings
determine changes in satisfaction. This partly contradicts the results from the NLSY panel in Section
IV, but we found this same result for levels of job satisfaction in the 1988 NLSY cross section.
The most interesting results in this section are those for JS96 that include the lagged terms in
changes in wages (wage residuals). As in Table 5, these terms, changes in the returns to work
between 1984 and 1990, have little effect on the change in job satisfaction between 1990 and 1996.
Nor is their unimportance an artifact of having included the indicators describing JS90 in the
equations: When these are removed, the t-statistics on the two wage change terms become 3.87 and
0.69, while those on the changes in the wage residuals are 3.55 and 0.83. While we cannot test for
the importance of early-career expectations (test Case III), this evidence reinforces the conclusion
from the NLSY estimates that past earnings shocks have little effect on workers current job
satisfaction. They thus imply that Case IV is a better description of behavior than Case III.
VI. Synthesis and Inferences
With so many different samples and several ways of examining them it is unlikely that we will
find complete unanimity in their implications for the determinants of job satisfaction. Nonetheless,
some conclusions seem quite strongly supported by the analyses: 1) Inequality in job satisfaction
tracks shocks to earnings inequality; but 2) There is little relation between job satisfaction and
persistent inequality of earnings. In terms of underlying models of job satisfaction, all the evidence

27

suggests that recent shocks to earnings matter more to current and recent changes in job satisfaction
than do distant earnings shocks; and the evidence implies that the influence of early-career
expectations on job satisfaction diminishes with time.
That the distribution of job satisfaction widens (temporarily) in response to shocks that widen
the distribution of the returns to work has an interesting implication for the dynamics of those returns.
We know that voluntary turnover and job satisfaction are negatively related (e.g., Clark et al, 1999).
That being the case, our results imply that an exogenous shock that widens the distribution of
earnings also raises turnover among low-wage workers. This change in turn leads them and their
employers to invest less in firm-specific human capital, with the opposite occurring among high-wage
workers and their employers. Since these investments generate future returns, the linkage through
changes in the distribution of job satisfaction, even though these are temporary, can generate
permanent hysteresis effects on the distribution of earnings.
From the studies presented here it is clear that changes in earnings affect job satisfaction.
What is not answered here or in the literature is the exact mechanism through which these effects
operate. While it seems likely that workers pay more attention to comparisons of the returns to
observable than to unobservable skills, the results are mixed about whether workers reference others
with similar observable characteristics, reference all workers, or what. Only with longer panels of
data, preferably from several countries, are we likely to be able to disentangle any further the various
explanations of patterns in job satisfaction.
Limitations on the data have prevented going beyond examining the impacts of
transformations of wages on job satisfaction. Yet the evidence that the demand for nonpecuniary and
nonwage pecuniary returns to work is income-elastic suggests that it would be very worthwhile to

28

examine a broader set of economic determinants of satisfaction. That analysis awaits a set of
longitudinal data that contains objective measures of these nonwage aspects of work.

29

REFERENCES
Borjas, George. 1979. Job Satisfaction, Wages and Unions. Journal of Human Resources 14(1):
21-40.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz. 2000. "Measurement Error in Survey Data."
In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5, ed. Heckman and Leamer. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
---------------, and George Johnson. 1992. Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. American Economic Review 82(3):371-92.
Clark, Andrew, and Andrew Oswald. 1996. “Satisfaction and Comparison Income.” Journal of
Public Economics 61(2): 359-381.
-----------------, Yannis Georgellis, and Peter Sanfey. 1999. “Job Satisfaction, Wage Changes and
Quits: Evidence from Germany.” Research in Labor Economics 17: forthcoming.
DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach. Econometrica 65(5):100144.
Farber, Henry. 1990. The Decline of Unionization in the United States: What Can Be Learned from
Recent Experience? Journal of Labor Economics 8(1):S75-S105.
Festinger, Leon. 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Freeman, Richard. 1978. Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable.
Association, Papers and Proceedings 68(2):135-141.

American Economic

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1977. Economic Aspects of Job Satisfacton. In Essays in Labor Market and
Population Analysis, eds. Ashenfelter and Oates. New York: Wiley.
---------------------. 1999. Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(4):forthcoming.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns
to Skill.” Journal of Political Economy 101(3):410-42.
Krugman, Paul. 1998. Viagra and the Wealth of Nations. New York Times Magazine, August 16,
1998, p. 24.
Lévy-Garboua, Louis, and Claude Montmarquette. 1998. Reported Job Satisfaction: What Does It
Mean? CIRANO, University of Montreal.
30

Lewin, Kurt. 1938. The Conceptual Representation and Measurement of Psychological Forces.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1996. Employment Outlook, July 1996.
Paris: OECD.
Pierce, Brooks. 1998. Compensation Inequality. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Stephan, Gesine, and Knut Gerlach. A Paper on Unhappiness and Unemployment in Germany.
Economics Letters 52:325-330.
Steiner, Viktor, and Kersten Wagner. 1997. East-West German Wage Convergence - How Far Have
We Got? Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung, Discussion Paper No. 97-25.
-------------------------------------------. 1998 Has Earnings Inequality in Germany Changed in the
1980's? Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften 118(1):29-59.
Thaler, Richard. 1992. The Winner’s Curse. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Vroom, Victor. 1964. Work and Motivation. New York: Wiley.

31

</ref_section>

Table 1. Global Job Satisfaction and Selected Characteristics, Nonhispanic
White Male Full-time 26-31 Year-Olds, 1978 and 1988

Annual Earnings
Mean
SD

1978

1988

15154
(6419)

24260
(12407)

Distribution of Wp /W50
Percentile:
5th
10th
25th
75th
90th
95th

0.488
0.589
0.767
1.254
1.549
1.742

0.425
0.533
0.733
1.333
1.733
1.978

Job Satisfaction (percent distributions)
Like very much
Like fairly well
Dislike somewhat
or very much

50.67
42.12
7.21

41.42
48.49
10.09

N

1040

1060

Table 2. The Determinants of 1988 Job Satisfaction, NLSY, Nonhispanic White Male Full-time
Workers (N = 1056)*
Independent Variable:
Case:
I

W88

^

78

W88

^
[u88 - u p,78]

^
^
[W88 - 78W88]

Interaction

.0006
.0055
(2.85)

II

III

u88

.0041

.0082
-.0046
(2.38)
.0083
-.0046
(3.06)

Pseudo-R2

.0028

-.0069
.0004
(-1.23)

.0048

III, decomposed
.0133
-.0075
(1.72)

.0015

.0360
-.0034
(3.22)

.0052

.0105
-.0004
(1.72)

.0362
-.0035
(3.24)

.0067

-.0656
-.0142
(-2.36)

.0372
-.0028
(3.37)

.2287
-.0839
(2.34)

.0109

^
^
^
*The earnings equations underlying the calculation of u88, 78W88 , u p,78 and W88 include education, actual job
experience, job tenure, annual hours, and indicator variables for marital status, location in the South and in an
SMSA, union status, and bad health. Here and in Tables 5 and A2 the first number is the effect of a 10 log-point
increase on Pr{JS=Like Very Much}; the second is the effect of this increase on Pr{JS=Like Fairly Well}, and
the number in parentheses is the t-statistic on the underlying coefficient.

Table 3. Sample Characteristics and Time-series Comparisons of the Distribution of Job Satisfaction,
NLSY
A. Means and Standard Deviations of Ln(Annual Earnings), Full-time Workers All Three Years
(N=1280)
1984:

9.347
(0.575)

1990:

9.976
(0.490)

1996:

10.281
(0.563)

B. Job Satisfaction and Means and Standard Deviations of Annual Earnings, Nonhispanic White Males
with Unchanging Schooling, Full-time Worker All Three Years (N=423)
Return to Schooling (estimate and standard error), seemingly-unrelated estimates
1984:

.069
(.013)

1990:

.102
(.011)

1996:

.108
(.013)

By Education:
# 12 Years of Schooling (N=302):
Annual Earnings
1984:

9.401
(0.506)

1990:

9.969
(0.478)

1996:

10.290
(0.509)

1996:

10.744
(0.528)

Percent Distribution of Job Satisfaction

Like Very Much
Like Fairly Well
Dislike

1984

1990

1996

39.74
50.33
9.93

41.72
52.98
5.30

41.06
50.66
8.28

>12 Years of Schooling (N=121):
Annual Earnings
1984:

9.550
(0.651)

1990:

10.380
(0.410)

Percent Distribution of Job Satisfaction

Like Very Much
Like Fairly Well
Dislike

1984

1990

1996

54.55
39.67
5.79

56.20
38.84
4.96

45.45
47.11
7.44

Table 4. Transitions of Job Satisfaction, NLSY, Continuous Full-time Workers (N = 1280)

Like Very Much

Like Fairly Well

Dislike

1990
1984
Like Very Much 25.23
Like Fairly Well 16.02
Dislike

16.64
25.39
2.66

2.11
4.69
5.55

1.72

÷2(4) = 85.70

1996
1990
Like Very Much 26.41
Like Fairly Well 15.39
Dislike

15.23
27.66
1.80

2.27
4.53
5.08

1.64

÷ 2(4) = 125.61

1996
1984
Like Very Much 24.22
Like Fairly Well 16.33
Dislike
÷2(4) = 66.92

16.56
26.25
3.05

3.20
3.52
5.16

1.72

Table 5. Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Longitudinal Changes in Job Satisfaction,
NLSY Continuous Full-time Workers (N = 1280)*
Independent Variable:
dWt

dWt-6

dut

dut-6

^

d(79W t )

^

d(79Wt-6)

Pseudo-R2

Dependent Variable:
JS90:

.0046
-.0004
(2.50)

0.0377

.0065
-.0014
(2.97)

0.0388

.0042
-.0003
(2.26)
JS96:

.0042
-.0003
(0.73)

.0068
.0003
(3.11)
.0067
.0001
(2.96)

0.0379

0.0523

.0011
.00003
(-.67)

0.0525

.0055
-.0003
(2.29)
.0058
-.0003
(2.35)
.0061
.0006
(2.83)
.0072
-.0009
(2.93)

0.0505

.0058
-.0001
(.56)

0.0506

.0072
.0006
(1.62)
.0020
-.0002
(.12)

.0040
-.0005
(.79)

0.0535

-.0197
.0011
(-3.32)

0.0584

*The ordered probits here and in Tables 8, A2 and A3 also include indicator variables describing JSt-6.

Table 6. Global Job Satisfaction and Selected Characteristics, Full-time
30-59 Year-Old Men, 1984, 1994 and 1996, German Socioeconomic Panel

Annual Earnings
Mean
SD

1984

1990

1994

1996

43831
(19684)

55401
(29552)

66723
(37100)

72346
(46841)

0.649
0.715
0.838
1.259
1.662
2.000

0.646
0.716
0.822
1.298
1.698
2.081

0.646
0.720
0.830
1.293
1.702
2.075

0.631
0.700
0.830
1.326
1.814
2.165

Distribution of Wp /W50
Percentile:
5th
10th
25th
75th
90th
95th

Job Satisfaction (percent distributions)
10 or 9
8
7 or 6
<6

41.40
23.82
18.14
16.64

25.07
28.18
27.79
18.97

19.15
29.19
29.00
22.66

20.13
28.26
30.60
21.01

N

2338

1803

1514

1366

Table 7. Transitions of Job Satisfaction, GSOEP, Continuous Full-time Male Workers (N = 970)

1990
1984

9 or 10
8
7 or 6
<6

9 or 10

8

7 or 6

#6

14.02
5.67

13.51
9.28

8.87
6.91

3.30
2.99

2.68

4.74
2.99

6.70
3.51

3.71
4.95

6.19

4.74
9.79

2.58
4.33

÷2(9) = 107.40
1996
1990
9 or 10
8
7 or 6
<6

10.93
4.74
2.68

7.11
12.16
7.53

0.72

10.10
3.30

7.11
4.43

7.73

10.93
7.53

5.98
4.12

÷2(9) = 210.52
1996
1984
9 or 10
8
7 or 6
<6

10.31
4.43
1.75

÷2(9) = 62.18

12.47
8.76
5.36

2.58

5.67
3.51

5.05
4.95

6.60

Table 8. Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Longitudinal Changes in
Job Satisfaction, GSOEP Continuous Full-time Male Workers (N = 970)*
Independent Variable:
dWt

dWt-6

dut

dut-6

Pseudo-R2

Dependent Variable:
JS90:

.0063
.0229
-.0251
(1.94)

0.0345

.0055
.0250
-.0274
(1.76)
JS96:

0.0343

.0060
.0047
-.0188
(3.44)
.0057
.0032
-.0188
(3.62)

0.0698

.0012
-.0034
-.0025
(1.42)

0.0706

.0064
.0086
-.0210
(3.10)
.0064
.0089
-.0210
(3.29)

0.0690

.0015
-.0033
-.0016
(1.18)

0.0695

*The underlying earnings equations include education, actual job experience, job tenure, annual hours, and an
indicator variable for marital status. Here and in Table A3 the first number is the effect of a 10-percent increase
in the variable on Pr{JS=9 or 10}; the second is the effect of this increase on Pr{JS=8}; the third is the effect on
Pr{JS=6 or 7}, and the number in parentheses is the t-statistic on the underlying coefficient.

Table A1. OLS Coefficients of Human Capital Variables, CPS 1979*
Men

Women

Schooling

.060
(.001)

.082
(.002)

Experience

.026
(.002)

.024
(.002)

Experience2/100

-.022

-.020
(.003)

(.004)

Schooling*Experience/10

.011
(.001)

-.00002
(.002)

Schooling*Experience2/100

-.004
(.0003)

-.002
(.0003)

R2

.338

.264

N

86,934

58,368

*

The dependent variable is the logarithm of usual weekly earnings. Also included in the equations are a
continuous measure of usual weekly hours and indicator variables describing race (black or not), ethnicity
(Hispanic or not), location in the South, location in an MSA, and marital status (married or not).

Table A2. Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Longitudinal Changes in Job Satisfaction,
NLSY Continuous Full-time Nonhispanic White Male Workers with Constant Education (N = 423)
Independent Variables:
dWt

dWt-6

dut

dut--6

^

d(79W t)

^

d(79W t-6)

Pseudo-R2

Dependent Variable:
JS90:

.0073
-.0048
(1.82)

0.0329

.0105
-.0076
(2.28)

0.0355

.0071
-.0045
(1.73)

JS96:

.0028
-.0018
(.19)

.0122
.0067
(3.91)
.0124
.0059
(3.87)

0.0329

0.0577

-.0010
-.0005
(-.44)

0.0579

.0109
.0020
(2.98)
.0111
.0019
(2.98)
.0118
.0069
(3.82)
.0125
.0053
(3.77)

0.0492

.0007
.0002
(.25)

0.0493

.0033
.0021
(.44)
-.0009
-.0005
(-.39)

.0033
.0016
(.39)

0.0579

-.0028
-.0014
(-.31)

0.0584

Table A3. Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Longitudinal Changes
in Job Satisfaction, GSOEP Continuous Full-time West-German Born Male
Workers with Constant Education (N = 558)
Independent Variables:
dWt

dWt-6

dut

dut-6

Pseudo-R2

Dependent Variable:
JS90:

. 0066
.0193
-.0258
(2.17)

0.0399

.0056
.0223
-.0317
(2.42)
JS96:

.0057
.0024
-.0178
(2.67)
.0057
.0028
-.0178
(2.60)

0.0406

0.0850

-.0004
.0011
.0008
(-0.33)

0.0851

.0062
.0063
-.0199
(2.41)

0.0841

.0062
-.0008
.0062
.0020
-.0188
.0011
(2.24) (-0.52)

0.0843

