NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPIRE-BUILDERS AND SHIRKERS:
INVESTMENT, FIRM PERFORMANCE,
AND MANAGERIAL INCENTIVES
Rajesh K. Aggarwal
Andrew A. Samwick
Working Paper 7335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7335

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999

We thank Sheri Aggarwal, Patricia Anderson, George Baker, Espen Eckbo, Bob Gibbons, Charlie
Himmelberg, Glenn Hubbard, Dennis Logue, Richard Sansing, Marc Zenner, and seminar participants at
Columbia, Dartmouth, MIT, North Carolina, and Rochester for helpful comments. We also thank Sarah
Leonard for assistance with Compustat and Andy Halula for assistance with the ExecuComp database. Any
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Rajesh K. Aggarwal and Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©

notice, is given to the source.

Empire-Builders and Shirkers:
Investment, Firm Performance, and Managerial Incentives
Rajesh K. Aggarwal and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 7335
September 1999
JEL No. G3, J3
ABSTRACT
Do firms systematically over- or underinvest as a result of agency problems? We develop a
contracting model between shareholders and managers in which managers have private benefits or private
costs of investment. Managers overinvest when they have private benefits and underinvest when they have
private costs. Optimal incentive contracts mitigate the over- or underinvestment problem. We derive
comparative static predictions for the equilibrium relationships between incentives from compensation,
investment, and firm performance for both cases. The relationship between firm performance and
managerial incentives, in isolation, is insufficient to identify whether
managers have private benefits or private costs of investment. In order to identify whether managers have
private benefits or costs, we estimate the joint relationships between incentives and firm performance and
between incentives and investment. Our empirical results show that both firm performance and investment
are increasing in managerial incentives. These results are consistent with managers having private costs of
investment. We find no support for overinvestment based on private benefits.

Rajesh K. Aggarwal
Amos Tuck School
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
rajesh.aggarwal@dartmouth.edu

Andrew A. Samwick
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
samwick@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
In large corporations, owners delegate decisions such as investment, effort provision, and resource

allocation to professional managers. These decisions are often unobservable or very costly for
the owners to monitor. Owners provide managers with incentives to induce them to take actions

that maximize the value of the firm. This separation of ownership and control is the classic
principal-agent problem.
In this paper, we focus on the investment decisions of managers. Agency problems could lead

managers either to overinvest or underinvest.

For example, Jensen (1986, 1993) argues that

managers take wasteful, negative net present value investment projects because they derive some

benefit from controlling more assets.

This is overinvestment or empire-building. Conversely,

managers may forego some positive net present value investment projects. Investing requires the

manager to oversee the investment. Because managers in general prefer to work less (i.e., they

are inclined to shirk), managers will underinvest. The two different agency problems provide
dramatically different characterizations of firm behavior.

This paper makes three principal contributions.

First, we provide a flexible and tractable

principal-agent model for analyzing investment decisions. We model managers as having either
private benefits or private costs of investment. We show that the optimal provision of incentives

through compensation can mitigate over- and underinvestment problems. The model delivers
clear, testable implications that can be used to identify whether managers have private benefits
or private costs of investment.
Second, we show that the existing evidence of overinvestment is not, in fact, sufficient to identify

the agency problem as one of overinvestmerjt. In an important paper, Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1988) find that over a range of incentives, firm performance is declining in incentives. Theyargue

that this is because managers make investment decisions that serve to entrench them in theirjobs.
As a result, firms are overinvesting (see also Shleifer and Vishny (1989)). However, a finding that

firm performance is declining in incentives does not imply that firms are overinvesting. Such a
finding can also be consistent with firms that are underinvesting. In order to identify whether the
agency problem is one of over- or underinvestment, we need to examine the relationship between
investment and incentives in addition to the relationship between firm performance and incentives.

1

In general, it is not possible to

associate changes in firm performance with changes in corporate

governance mechanism5_takeos,
unless there is also a relationship

board size, capital structure,

dividend policy, and incentives-

between changes in corporate governance

and the actions taken

by managers, such as investment decisions.
for our model and test its comparative static predictions.
Third, we derive a unique equilibrium
firm performance and investment are increasing in incentives.

Empirically, we show that both
that overinvestment is not a feature of the data. Instead, these
These two results jointly imply
that is mitigated through the use of
the presence of underinvestment
findings are consistent with

optimal incentive contracts.

overinvest originated with Jensen (1986), who argues that
The idea that firms systematically
free cash flow rather than to
shareholders must find mechanisms to induce managers to disgorge
to pay out free cash
overinvest. Jensen focuses on the use of debt and dividends to force managers
A number of authors, including
flow and considers the threat of takeover as a disciplinary device.
Stulz (1990), Hart and Moore (1995),

Zwiebel (1996), and Chang (1993), have formalized Jensen's

argument.
and managerial ownership has been used to support
The relationship between firm performance
Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) estimate a nonmonotonic piecewise
the overinvestment model. Morck,
They find that firm
managerial ownership and firm performance.
linear relationship between
between 5 and 25 percent of the firm.
performance is declining in ownership for ownership levels
entrenched in their positions for
They interpret their result as evidence that managers become
perquisites or overinvest,
ownership in this range. As a result of entrenchment, managers consume
and Servaes (1990), immelberg,
lowering firm performance. Many subsequent papers (Mcconnell
similar analyses, with mixed results.
Hubbard, and Palia (1999), and Palia (1998)) have conducted
calculacomes from Jensen (1993), who provides illustrative
Other support for overinvestment
He
shareholder value at a number of the world's largest corporations.
tions of the destruction of

argues that these firms would have generated much more

value had they returned cash to their

in projects that turned out to be negative net present
shareholders rather than invested

value.

capital expenditures in a sample of
in firm value, profitability and
Kaplan (1989) analyzes changes
He argues that management buyouts
seventy-six management buyouts at large public companies.

2

result in improved incentives. His results show that profitability increases and capital expendi-

tures decrease after the buyouts. Other evidence of overinvestment is anecdotal in nature. For
example, Burrough and Helyar (1990, p. 95) describe how managers at RJR Nabisco squandered
shareholders' cash on corporate jet rides for dogs and celebrity golftournaments.1
A number of models predict that firms will underinvest. Reasonsfor underinvestment include

and Rock (1985)), and more general
high leverage (Myers (1977)), dividend signaling (Miller
asymmetric information between firms and capital markets (Myers and Majluf (1984)). Our underinvestment model is based on principal-agent considerations—investing maybe personally costly

for managers because managers have to oversee the investments that their firms make.

Existing empirical support for underinvestment comes from several sources. McConnell and
Muscarella (1985) show that firm stock prices react positively to announcements of increases

in capital expenditures. Poterba and Summers (1995) show that firms systematically evaluate
investment projects using hurdle rates that exceed the firms' costs of capital. They argue that

CEOs of firms in the U.S. have short capital budgeting time horizons. Poterba and Summers
(1995) conclude that firms forego long-term, positive net presentvalue investment projects. Both
of these studies imply that firms could invest more and increase dollar returns to shareholders.2
We provide an alternative model of investment based on agency concerns. In our model,
managers choose the level of investment and have either private benefits or private costs of invest-

ment. The first case we consider is that managers derive private benefits from investment, so that
their utility is increasing in the level of investment. Managers are empire-buildersand continue to

choose investment projects even after all positive net present value investments have been taken.
The second case is that investment is costly for managers. The disutility of investment comes

from bearing oversight responsibilities for that investment. For example, when firms expand existing facilities or start new product lines, managers are required to do more work. Managers will
forego some positive net present value investments in order to lessen the amount of work that they

have to do. Given these assumptions, managers will overinvest in the first case and underinvest
diversification and

in corporate
i A different strand ol the empirical literature looks for evidence of overinvestment
finds evidence of less diversification in firms with higher managerial equity ownership (see, for example, Deois,
Denis, and Sarin (1997)).
2 The sensitivity of investment to cash flow, first documented by Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), also
suggests that investment systematically differs from its optimal level. Hadlock (1998) demonstrates empirically
that this sensitivity rises with ownership, which he argues is inconsistent with overinvestment.

3

in the second case. The two cases reflect very different perspectives on corporate investment and
managerial behavior.
We focus on incentives provided by tying managers' compensation to the performance of their

firms. The optimal contract for the manager ameliorates the overinvestment and underinvestment
problems. We show how the optimal contract depends on the manager's risk aversion, the variance
of firm performance, and the magnitude of the private benefits or costs associated with investment.
We then estimate how performance and investment vary with changes in incentives, given changes

in the underlying exogenous parameters.
In our model, we assume that the firm has sufficient funds to undertake all investment projects

selected by the managers.

In this sense, the firm is potentially subject to a free cash flow

problem. Other studies have noted that debt, dividends, hostile takeovers, product and factor
market competition, and board intervention are mechanisms that could be used to overcome a free

cash flow problem. Compared to these other mechanisms, incentives can be adjusted frequently
and inexpensively, and, when adjusted, they can be targeted precisely for the managers. Incentives

from compensation should be the primary mechanism to influence managerial behavior.

Our results highlight the importance of investment. In order to differentiate between overand underinvestment, we need to examine how both investment and firm performance respond to

changes in incentives in equilibrium. If investment and firm performance both increase or both
decrease in incentives, this supports the private costs model and rejects the private benefits model.

If investment and firm performance move in opposite directions with changes in incentives, this
supports the private benefits model and rejects the private costs model.

To conduct our empirical work, we use data on managerial incentives from Standard and
Poor's ExecuComp dataset. Our sample consists of comprehensive data for the top five executives

(ranked annually by salary and bonus) from the S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, and S&P SmaliCap
600 companies from 1993 to 1997. We use investment and firm performance data from Compustat.

Empirically, we find that both investment and firm performance are increasing in incentives.

These findings are robust to the inclusion of firm-level fixed effects and other factors that could
affect the level of investment and firm performance. These results support a model in which firms

underinvest. Our results also suggest that the underlying sources of variation within and across

4

We find no support for
and the variance of firm performance.
there cannot be an overinvestment
models based on private benefits of investment. Intuitively,
associated with better firm performance
problem due to agency concerns if greater incentives are

firms are managerial risk aversion

and higher investment.

from overinvestment and underinvestOne of our empirical results is of independent interest
firm performance is increasing in incenment problems. We find clear, systematic evidence that
the results in studies such as Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny
This
result
is
in
contrast
to
tives.
which do not find a monotonically increasHubbard,
and
Palia
(1999),
(1988) and immelberg,
Although these studies do not draw this
performance and incentives.
ing relationship between
such as Holmstrom (1979) and
conclusion, their results reject standard principal-agent models
will be increasing in incentives
which predict that performance
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987),
focus
principal-agent models are different from ours in that they
in equilibrium. The standard
is increasing in incentives
Nonetheless, our finding that performance
on effort, not investment.
provides additional support for the standard models.
Section 2, we present the principalThe remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
costs of investment. In Section 3,
have
either
private
benefits
or
agent model in which managers
and investment. The econometric results
incentives,
firm
performance,
we describe our data on

are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.

2. Theoretical Results and PredictioflS
In this section, we show how

incentives are deterned if managers have either private benefits

investment, and firm performance
We also show how incentives,
or private costs of investment.
outcomes are driven by changes in the
Changes in these equilibrium
are related in equilibrium.
0el—managerial risk aversion, the variance of firm performance
underlying parameters of the
Our model illustrates two key points.
benefits or costs of investment.
and the magnitude of private
is insufficient to idefltif)T
First, focusing oily on the response of firm performance to incentives
firm performance could be
underinvestment. In equilibrium,
whether there is overinvestment or
costs of investment and hence underinvest.
declining in incentives even if the managers face private
a declining relationship as
and
Vishny
(1988)
have
interpreted
Studies such as Morck, Shleifer,
be increasing in incentives even if the
Similarly,
performance
could
evidence of overinvestment.
5

managers have private benefits

of investment and hence overinvest.

of firm performance and investment to incentives is sufSecond, examining the joint response
overinvestment or underinvestment. For example, if both

ficient to identify whether there is
the firm is underperformance and investment are increasing in incentives, then in equilibrium
is decreasing
investing. Similarly, if investment is increasing in incentives and firm performance
firm is overinvesting. We derive a full set of results in a
in incentives, then in equilibrium the

tractable principal-agent model of investment.

2.1 The Model
The firm is assumed
We consider a principal-agent setting in which managers choose investments..
wishes to undertake.
to have sufficient free cash flow to fund all investment projects the manager

We assume that firm profits net of the amount invested are:
(1)

ir=mI_I2+g

how productive the firm's investment is, and
where I is the level of investment, in parameterizes
with a mean of zero and a variance of a2. Returns are
g is a normally distributed shock to profits
diminishing returns to investing. In the absence of any principalconcave in investment—there are

agent problem, the optimal level of investment is given by the first

order condition to equation

(1):

(2)

I°=rn.
The optimal level of investment is determined only by the productivity of
are more productive invest more.
The principal employs an agent who chooses

investment—firms that

an unobservable level of investment, or a level of

While shareholders could potentially monitor

investment that is observable but not verifiable.
managers' investment choices, doing so is costly.

Monitoring is particularlY costly in large,

publicly traded corporations in which ownership is dispersed. An

alternative interpretation is

that the productivity of investment in is unobservable. In this case, investment

is observable, but

the principal does not know if the agent has chosen the right level of investment.
that investment is not contractible.
point for our model is that we assume

6

The important

The agent has negative exponential utility with a coefficient of absolute risk aversion of r. The

agent receives a wage contract that is linear in firm performance:

w—wo+air.

(3)

The agent receives a fixed wage component (salary) of w0 and a performance-based component

of air. In this setting, the agent's pay-performance sensitivity is a. We can also interpret the
previous equation as a statement about the agent's wealth. If we assume, as is true of most

executives, that a large fraction of their wealth is invested in their own firms, then w0 is the
component of wealth that is independent of the firm and air is the component of weahh that
depends on firm performance. In this case, a represents executive ownership in the firm.
We allow for either nonpecuniary private costs or benefits of investing for managers. Following

Stulz (1990), we assume that the manager derives linearly increasing benefits or costs of the

form BI from investing more. If B > 0, then every dollar of investment generates a marginal B
dollars of utility for the manager. The manager enjoys private benefits from more investment or,

equivalently, managing a larger firm (empire-building). If B < 0, then the manager incurs costs
of investing. These take the form of oversight costs associated with greater investment. The more

the manager invests, the more work the manager must do to actually manage the investment.
Working is costly for the manager (B < 0), so the manager must be given incentives (a) in order
to invest more.

The principal's problem is to maximize expected profits net of compensation for the agent,
given that the agent will choose the level of investment to maximize her utility. The principal's
program is:

max EQr) — w
s.t. E [i4w + BI)] ii

(IR)

(4)

I E argmaxj B [u(w + BI)] (IC).
The first constraint is the agent's individual rationality (Ia) constraint where ii is the agent's reser-

vation utility. The second constraint is the agent's incentive compatibility constraint (IC), which
requires that the agent choose the level of investment optimally (for her) given the compensation

contract. The agent's certainty equivalent from a contract vi is given by:

u=wo+a(mI_I2)+BI_a2c2,
7

(5)

where a2c2 represents the cost of the agent's risk aversion.
The manager chooses the investment level to maximize her certainty equivalent (5). This level
of investment is:

B
1=m+—.
a

(6)

When compared to the optimal level of investment in the absence of agency problems (1° = in),
we notice two things. First, the level of investment chosen by the manager is distorted by B, her
private benefits or costs of investment. If the manager has private benefits (B > 0), the manager

will overinvest, P > I". If the manager has private costs (B <0), the manager will underinvest,

1 C 1°.

Second, the amount of over- or underinvestment is attenuated by incentives, a. The

greater is a, the closer the manager's choice of investment will be to the level that is optimal in
the absence of agency problems. This is true for both private benefits and private costs.

The principal's problem is to maximize net profits given the agent's choice of investment.
Expected profits net of compensation for the agent are:

E[_w=mI_I2+BI_a2c2_1i

(7)

Here we assume that the managerial labor market is competitive, so that the agent is held to her

reservation utility through the choice of w0. Substituting the agent's choice of investment into
the above expected net profit equation and maximizing with respect to a yields the following first
order condition:

(—ra2a — B2a + B2) = 0.

(8)

The first order condition defines an optimal contract as (the second order condition is satisfied

as well). There exists a unique optimal contract, and this contract is on the interval (0, 1). To
see this, note that because the function —ra2a4 — B2a + B2 is polynomial, it is continuous in

a. As a —

0,

the function is positive. At a = 1, the function is negative. Therefore, there

exists a root on (0, 1). By Descartes' rule of signs, there is at most one real root to the equation
—

B2a + B2 = 0, thus proving uniqueness.

We obtain the following comparative statics by applying the implicit function theorem to
equation (8):
3a5
Or

=

4rc2a3+B2 <0,
8

(9)

= ___—<0
4rc2a3+B2
2B(1—a)
— = __->o,ifB>0,or
4raa+B
3D

(10

—flY4

—
Ocr

3D

Equations (9) and (10) are an

(11)

2B(l—a)
= _<o,fB<0.
4rcr2a3 + B2

immediate consequence of assuming

that managers are risk averse.

a*, declines as risk aversion increases or the variance of

The optimal weight on firm performance,
because shareholders must trade off incentives versus insurance
the performance measure increases
shows that & increases as a manager's private benefits become
for the managers. Equation (11)
costs become smaller in magnitude. The
larger and that & decreases as a manager's private
incentives are used to counteract the manager's private benefits

intuition for these results is that

the manager must be given more
or costs. If private benefits or costs increase (in absolute value),
value), the manager can be given
incentives. If private benefits or costs decrease (in absolute
productivity of investment, m. As a
&
does
not
depend
on
the
fewer incentives. Note that
changes in incentives. As shown
result, changes in m do not affect investment or profits through
and net profits, even
do have direct effects on investment
in equations (6) and (7), changes in in

though incentives are unaffected.

<0 is strongly supported empirically.
Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a, b) show that j4

This

incentives the larger the variance
comparative static result shows that agents' will have weaker
those papers, we show that managers at firms with the largest
of the performance measure. In
sensitivities that are an order of magnitude smaller
variances of stock returns have payperformance
smallest variances of stock returns. This result supports a general
than managers at firms with the

but the unanswered question is which principal-agent model—private
< 0 is consistent with
(10) points out that the finding
benefits or private costs? Equation
developed here. Because the manager is risk averse, greater variance
both principal-agent models
< 0 is
Therefore, our finding of
lower
powered
incentives.
of shocks will always lead to
is generating the data (if either).
insufficient to identify which of the two principal-agent models
models based on the determinants of a, we would need to
In order to distinguish the two
benefits (B > 0) and we find that
If
managers
have
private
observe whether B is positive.
suppo for the models based on private benefits of
> 0, then this would constitute strong

principal-agent framework,

4

9

have private benefits and we find that jij <0, then we
Unfortunately, B is unobservable in a
know that the model, at least in its basic form, is wrong.

investment. Conversely, if managers

large cross-section of firms.
We can reliably observe iv,

I, and a in a large panel of firms.

In order to test the theory, we

predictions of how these three outcomes will change as the
therefore derive comparative static
and c2 vary across firms and over time. In our model, a larger
underlying parameters r, B,
the shareholders are confronted with a larger agency problem.
B in absolute value means that
to mitigate their agency behavior.
Managers with larger values of B will require greater incentives
a2 will allow shareholders to provide higher powered incentives.
For a given B, lower values of r or
firm performance are affected by these incentives in equilibrium.
We focus on how investment and
1. Testing these predictions allows
test
are
summarized
in
Table
The predictions that we will
costs of investment; that is, we can
have private benefits or private
us to infer whether managers

infer the sign of B.

2.2 Investment and Incentives
The optimal a from equation (8) is a function
We start with the investment predictions.
and B. We take the derivative of P with respect to the
of the exogenous parameters r, a2,

varies with a given a change in the exogenous
exogenous parameters
The optimal level of investment from
parameter. Consider first the manager's risk aversion.
effect of risk aversion on incentives a5:
risk
aversion
only
through
the
equation (6) changes due to
and then demonstrate how 1

B 3a5

&r

12

(a)2 5r

C 0), if the manager has
optimal incentives decrease as risk aversion increases ($
increases as risk aversion increases. The
private benefits of investment (B > 0), investment
aversion lowers incentives so as to insulate the manager from risk.
intuition is that increasing risk
As incentives decrease, the
But incentives are what constrain the manager's overinvestment.
costs (B < 0), investment decreases as risk
If
the
manager
has
private
manager invests more.
but in this case lower incentives
aversion increases. The manager again has lower incentives,
Because

reduce investment. Fewer incentives induce the manager to underinvest

10

even more.

Dividing both sides of equation (12) by £$

while holding cr2 and Bconstant yields:

or

B

(13)

level of investment to the optimal amount of incentives given
and an increase in
<0. The manager is overinvesting
>
For
B
0,
a change in risk aversion.
> 0.
overinvestment. For B < 0,
incentives due to a reduction in risk aversion lowers this
and an increase in incentives due to a reduction in risk aversion

This expression relates the optimal

The manager is derinvesting

increases investment, thereby reducing underinvestment.

firm performance, a2. If we replace r with 2 in the above
The intuition is
hold r and B constant, we get similar results.

Next consider the variance of
derivation (equations 12, 13) and

lowers incentives so as to insulate
identical. Increasing the exogenous variance of firm performance
increase overinvestment.
the manager from risk. In the case of private benefits, lower incentives
incentives decrease the level of investment, thereby increasing
In the case of private costs, lower
reported in the second and fourth columns of the top
underinvestment. These predictions are

row of Table 1.

optimal level of investment
costs of investment, B. The
Now consider the private benefits or
changes due to private benefits or costs through two effects:
01*

B

1

a*

Oa*

(&f 0B

(14)

level of

is the direct effect of a change in private benefits on the
the manager will increase
investment itself. If the manager derives more benefits from investing,
is due to the effect of private benefits
second
effect
in
equation
(14)
the level of investment. The
invest
will increase incentives to offset the manager's propensity to
on incentives. Shareholders
the increase in incentives will not
incentives
is
costly
for
shareholders,
more. Because increasing
benefits. The intuition is
due to the manager's greater private
fully offset the higher investment
costs of investment.
the same for a change in the private
while holding a2 and r constant yields:
Dividing equation (14) through by fA
2_as
1
B
(15)
1 1
01*

The first effect in equation (14)

0a5

a

(a)2

2 (cf)2 (1 — a)

and (11) to simplify the expression. This equation relates
where we have used equations (8)
incentives given a change in private
the optimal level of investment to the optimal amount of
11

benefits or costs of investment. For B > 0, ff9 > 0. If there are private benefits, an increase in
incentives is associated with an increase in investment. This result may seem paradoxical. The
manager is overinvesting, and yet the increase in incentives seems to increase this overinvestment.

However, incentives are not an exogenous variable that determine investment. The increases in
incentives arid investment are both equilibrium responses to the manager's higher private benefits.

Although incentives increase in response to the increase in private benefits, incentives do not
increase sufficiently to prevent the manager from overinvesting more. This prediction is exactly in

line with the intuition from the entrenchment literature. In that literature, managers with higher
incentives (ownership) engage in more wasteful activities (overinvest) because their ownership

entrenches them. Here we give an optimal contracting and equilibrium interpretation to the
entrenchment intuition.

For B <

0, 9

C

0. If there are private costs, an increase itt incentives is associated with

a decrease in investment. The intuition is similar to the private benefits case. As B becomes
more negative, the manager has more private costs and so the amount of incentives a that are
optimally provided to the manager increases. Although incentives increase to offset the greater
private costs, incentives do not increase sufficiently to prevent the manager from investing even

less, thereby increasing miderinvestment. These results are reported in the second and fourth
columns of the bottom row of Table 1.

2.3 Firm Performance and Incentives
Now we turn to the profit predictions. Recall from equation (1) that it = ml — I2 + e. It is
clear that profits depend on the exogenous parameters r, a2, and B only through their impact

on investment I. We take the derivative of it with respect to the exogenous parameters and
then show how it varies with a*, given a change in the exogenous parameter. For any exogenous

parameter, x, where it {r, a2, B}:
(16)

Dividing both sides by j9 while holding the other parameters constant yields:

BOI

3cx

12

a Oa*

(17)

Equation (17) shows that the sign of j

depends

managers have private benefits, B is positive and

on the sign of B and the sign of . If
will have the opposite sign of -g-.

firm is already overinvesting and investment increases, profits will decrease.

will have the same sign as g.

private costs, B is negative and

If the

If managers have

If the firm is underinvesting

and investment increases, profits will increase.

First, consider changes in r and o2.

Increases

in risk aversion or the variance of firm per-

formance reduce incentives. If there are private benefits, reduced incentives increase investment,
thereby reducing firm profits. Therefore, the reduction in incentives is associated with a reduction
in profits, or

> 0. If there are private costs, reduced incentives decrease investment, thereby

reducing firm profits.
profits, or

Therefore, the reduction in incentives is associated with a reduction in

> 0. Both the private benefits and private costs models yield the prediction that

firm performance is increasing in incentives if the underlying source of exogenous variation is risk

aversion or the variance of firm performance. These results are reported in the first and third
columns of the top row of Table 1.

Next consider changes in the magnitude of private benefits or costs of investment. If there
are private benefits of investment, an increase in those private benefits leads, in equilibrium, to

an increase in incentives. However, the increase in incentives does not fully offset the higher
investment due to higher private benefits, so the level of investment increases.
manager is overinvesting, the increase in investment decreases firm performance.

Because the
Therefore,

higher incentives will be associated with lower firm performance. This is the most prominent
feature of stories of managerial entrenchment. Similarly, if there are private costs of investment,
an increase in the absolute value of private costs leads, in equilibrium, to an increase in incentives

and a reduction in investment. Because the manager is underinvesting, the decrease in investment

decreases firm performance.

Therefore, higher incentives will be associated with lower firm

performance. Both the private benefits and private costs models yield the prediction that firm
performance is decreasing in incentives if the underlying source of exogenous variation is the

magnitude of the private benefits or costs. These results are reported in the first and third
columns of the bottom row of Table 1.
Studies in the entrenchment literature typically focus on the reduced form relationship between

13

firm performance and ownership. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) find a negative relationship

over an intermediate range of the data and view this result as support for the entrenchment
hypothesis and overinvestment. Our comparative statics results show that this conclusion is not
warranted. A finding that firm performance decreases in incentives is not sufficient to conclude
that there are private benefits rather than private costs. Such a finding is also consistent with the
private costs model (where there is no entrenchment) when the underlying source of variation is
the magnitude of those private costs.

2.4 Summary
Table 1 summarizes the predictions between firm performance and investment and incentives,

which are observable in our data.

According to the theory, differences in firm performance,

investment, and incentives must be the result of differences in the three underlying parameters—
risk aversion, the variance of firm performance, or private benefits or costs.

First, consider the predictions for firm performance (the first and third columns). Finding
that firm performance is increasing in incentives is consistent with both the private benefits and
private costs models if the underlying source of variation is risk aversion or the variance of firm

performance. Similarly, finding that firm performance is decreasing in incentives is consistent
with both models if the underlying source of variation is in the magnitude of the private benefits

or costs.

Analyzing the relationship between firm performance and incentives in isolation is

insufficient to determine whether managers face private benefits or private costs of investment.

Second, consider the predictions for investment (the second and fourth columns). Finding
that investment increases with incentives would be consistent with the private costs model if the
underlying source of variation is risk aversion or the variance of firm performance. A finding that

investment increases with incentives would also be consistent with the private benefits model if
the underlying source of variation is the magnitude of the private benefits. Conversely, a finding
that investment decreases with incentives would be consistent with the private costs model if the

underlying source of variation is the magnitude of the private costs. It would also be consistent
with the private benefits model if the underlying source of variation is risk aversion or the variance
of firm performance.

Using both the investment predictions and the firm performance predictions will allow us
14

to identify which model is generating the data. Table 1 shows that each of the four possible
combinations of the signs of the derivatives will identify a model and a source of exogenous
variation. If performance and investment move in the same direction given a change in incentives,
then the correct model is private costs. If performance and investment move in opposite directions

given a change in incentives, then the correct model is private benefits. When we empirically
examine these relationships, finding, for example, that investment increases with incentives and
firm performance increases with incentives would rule out the private benefits model and suggest

that either risk aversion or the variance of firm performance is the source of variation. These
comparative static predictions are what we test.

3.

Data

This section describes the data sources that we use to test the comparative static predictions of our

principal-agent modeL We use Standard and Poor's ExecuComp dataset to construct our measure

of managerial incentives. ExecuComp contains data on all aspects of compensation forthe top
five executives (ranked annually by salary and bonus) at each of the firms in the S&P 500, S&P

Midcap 400, and S&P SmallCap 600. Due to enhanced federal reporting requirements for fiscal
years ending after December 15, 1992, we can measure incentives from 1993 to 1997. Financial
and operating data for the ExecuComp sample companies are drawn from the Compustatdataset.

Monthly measures of stock returns from the Center for Research on SecurityPrices (CRSP) are
utilized in calculations of the variance of returns.
Managers can receive pay-performance incentives from a variety of sources. The vast majority

of these incentives are due to ownership of stock and stock options. Jensen and Murphy (1990)
carefully aggregate pay-performance incentives into a single pay-performance sensitivity. They

find that the typical CEO receives approximately $3.25 of compensation per thousand dollar
increase in shareholder wealth. Of this amount, $2.50 is due to the median CEO's holdings of
stock in the firm and $0.15 is due to ownership of stock options. Increases in the present value
of current and future compensation and decreases in the probability of dismissal are responsible
for $0.30 each. Hall and Liebman (1998) show that incentives from stock and particularly stock
The ExecuComp data are collected directly from the companies' proxy statements and related filings with the
Securities Exchange Commission. Our analysis in this paper uses data from the October 1998 release of the data.
See Standard and Poor's (1995) for further documentation.

15

options have grown

substantiallY since the sample period

used by Jensen and Murphy (1990).

show that incentives from stock and options are roughly twenty
and
aual compensation as a source of incentives for both CEOs

Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a)

times more important than

sensitivities based on stock and option
other top managers. Thus, our use of payperformance
of the managerial entrenchment literature
ownership captures the bulk of total incentives. Much

of incentives is more inclusive in
stock ownership. Our measure
has focused on incentives from
explanatoly variable "PPS" rather than
For this reason, we call our
that it also covers options.
measure of incentives.
"ownership." It is a more comprehensive
of stock in their own companies and
data
on
executives'
holdings
ExecuComp contains precise
is simply the
the payperformance sensitivity
grants of options during the current year. For stock,
0utstanding
executive owns. A CEO who holds 3 percent of the stock
fraction of the firm that the
shareholder wealth. For options, the
thousand dollar change in
in her firm will receive $30 per
is the fraction of the firm's stock on which the options are
payperformance sensitivity

itten

multiplied by the options' deltas.
report the number of securities, the
current year, companies must
For options granted in the
and Poor's (1995), we assume that
date.
Following
Standard
exercise price, and the exercise
through their
70 percent (1995 and later)
options will be exercised 80 percent (up to 1994) or
corresponding 8 and 7 year zero-coupon Treasury
10
years.
We
use
the
term, which is usually
interest rates used for 1992 through
bond rates as the risk-free rates of return. The risk-free
respectively. In applyg the Black-Scholes
6.30, and 6.29 percent,
1997 are 7.19, 5.86, 7.17, 6.50,
ExecuComp and calculate the
for
the
company
reported
by
formula, we use the dividend yield
We use
stock returns for each company using data from CRSP.
standard deviation of monthly
variances. If a firm did not have at least
monthly returns to compute
up to five years of prior
the variance.4 We multiply this value
for
a
given
year,
we
impute
twelve prior monthly returns
annual returns (volatility).
of continuously compounded
to
get
the
standard
deviation
by
the proxy statement reports only the aggregate number
For options granted in previous years,
The intrinsic
"intrinsic value" of the options that are in the money.
of securities and the aggregate
exercise price.
stock price at the end of the fiscal year less the option's available year's
value of each option is the
the variance of the next

dar1an for some years, we use

For firms that were missingmissing data on variance in all years, we use the ssmple's average
returns. For firms that had
change our results.
observations does not significantly

year. Omitting these

16

variance in each

Following Murphy (1998), we

treat all existing options as a

single grant with a five year remaining

value of all options is equal to that reported on
such
that
the
intrinsic
term and an exercise price
remaining until
from having to impute the exercise price and years
the proxy statement. Apart
years is the same as for current option
for
options
anted
in
previous
exercise, the methodolo

grants.

the incentives to the top management
sampling frame and examine
We exploit ExecuComP's
and pertains to the executive who held that
directly in ExecuComP
team. CEO status is reported
sensitivity for the top management
of
the
year.
The
payperformance
position for the majority
times the average PPS of the other executives
PPS
for
the
CEO
plus
four
team is defined as the
the size
is reported in a given year. This convention standardizes
at the firm whose information
for some executives or more than five
firms even if data are missing

of the team at five for all

executives are reported in a given year.

statistics on the payperformanea sensitivities
The first two rows of Table 2 present descriptive
management
and the CEO for the &ms in our sample. The mean top
of the top management team
5ensitivity equal to 6.76 percent of the firm. The interpre-

team has a combined payperforma1

wealth increased by $1000 over the course
if
the
value
of
shareholder
tation of this number is that
team would
holdings of the top management
of
the
stock
and
option
of a year, then the value
incentives across firms is skewed to the right,
distribution of management
increase by $67.60. The
The CEO of each firm has incentives
5bstantially lower at 2.93 percent.
with median incentives
percentiles of the
at the mean and 1.23 percent at the median. Other
of 3.89 percent of the firm
variation in incentives in the ExecuComp
showing
considerable
distributions are also reported,

sample.

variables that we use in our analysis,

2 pert aln to the o dependent
The next two rows of Table
is equal to
calculated from Compustat. Tobin's Q
Investment,
both
of
whià
are
Tobin's Q and
the book lue of debt to the book value of
market
value
of
equity
and
the ratio of the sum of the
(Morck, Shleifer,
of firm profitability and performance
commonly
used
as
a
measure
assets. Q is
immelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999)).
and Ses (1990), and
and Vishny (1988), McCounell
of taxes on firm lue. In our
and abstracts from the effect
Q
Our calculation reflects average
sample, the mean and median values of Q

are 2.00 and 1.57, respectively.

17

The middle 80 percent

Investment is equal to capital expenditures
between 1.06 and 3.34.
of the firms have Q values
and equipment.
equipment divided by the stock of net property, plant,
for property, plant, and
of the
at the mean and 20 percent at the median. Ten percent
Investment rates are 24 percent
than 46.5 percent.
firms invest less than 7.8 percent and ten percent invest more
for other variables that we control
The remainder of Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics
Investment. We include the natural log of sales
specifications for Q or
for in our econometric
include the ratio of capital (net property, plant,
in firm size. We also
to account for differences
In the regressions presented below, we
control
for
asset
turnover.
and equipment) to sales to
We include the ratio of cash flow to capital
of
these
two
variables.
also include the squares
and Petersen (1988) have shown
the
work
of
Fazzari,
Hubbard,
because many studies based on
investment. The effect of leverage is captured by the ratio
between cash flow and
a relationship
deviation of dollar returns to shareholders
We
include
the
standard
of long-term debt to assets.
for the effect of risk on profitability and
described above) to account
(calculated from CRSP, as
capital and
controls for the ratio of research and development to
investment. Finally, we include
advertising to capital.5

sensitivity, investthose firm-years in which team pay-performance
We restrict our sample to
1494 firms, the last
constructed. Within that sample of 5665 firm-years for
ment, and Q can be
observations, as shown inthe first column of
for several hundred or more
four variables are missing
for observations
work below, we set the values of these variables to zero
Table 2. In the empirical
for whether the data were originally missing.
include a dummy variable
where they are missing and

4. Empirical Results
We begin by examining

incentives on both Tobin's Q and Investment.

the effect of managerial

For ease of exposition, we

first present our results

without controlling for the full set of covariates

found in Table 2.

4.1 Performance and Incentives—Initial

Results

between firm performance and managerial incenincentives need not be
between
performance
and
observed relationship

Our model predicts an eqthlibrium relationship

tives. In the data, the

These variables are the same

Palia (1999).
control varLables used by Himmelberg, Hubbard, and

18

linear or even monotonic. We choose an

empirical specification that is flexible enough to allow

which the bendpoints corfor these possibilities. We estimate a piecewise linear specification in
distribution. Table 2 reports that the median PPS is 2.9281,
respond to the quartiles of the
linear specificawith first and third quartiles of 1.0114 and 7.5885, respectivelY. The piecewise
incentives that
tion generates a continuous relationship between firm performance and managerial
have a different slope, and the slope of any segment
consists of four segments. Each segment can
of the following form:
can be positive or negative. We estimate a spline regression

Qt = + $1PPS1t + fi2PPS2t + 3PPS3ii + 4PPS4 + t=94
Ia this equation, the dependent variable is Tobin's Q.
to payperformance incentives along

Ut + x +

(18)

The four PPS terms are the increments

each segment. The coefficients on the PPS terms correspond

data.6 The estimated relationship

to the slopes of the segments in each of the four quartiles of the
the
managerial incentives will be monotonic only if all four coefficients on
and
between Tobin's Q
Therefore, this specification allows for nonmonotonicities to

PPS terms have the same sign.
The specification also includes year
appear if they are in fact the best description of the data.
effects, denoted by G, and firm level fixed effects, denoted by )q.
estimates of the parameters in equation (18). The OLS
Table 3 presents the econometric
in the first column. These results omit the fixed effects.
estimates of the coefficients are presented
smaller in
The coefficients on the four PPS terms are estimated to be positive. The slopes are
PPS. The slopes of the first three segments, corresponding to
magnitude at higher levels of the
significantly different from zero. The slope of the top

the bottom 75 percent of the data, are
from zero. The second column of Table 3 presents the fixed
segment is insignificantly different

effects results. As in the OLS regression,

be positive, and the slopes are lower

the coefficients on the four PPS terms are estimated to

at higher levels of the PPS. In the fixed effects regression,
different from zero at the 5 percent level. The bottom

the slopes of all segments are significantly

two rows of the table report the p-values
6 Denoting paypeH

for two tests. The first is that the four PPS coefficients

Tincemcent1V5Yt1 the variables in the spline regression are defined as:

PPSlit = inin(ait,I.0114)
—
pPS25 = max(O,min(ait,2.9281) — 1.0114)
PPS3tt = max(0,mia(ait,7.5885) 2.9281)
PPS4tt = max(0, nit — 7.5885).

19

are jointly equal to zero. If the null hypothesis is not rejected, thew Tobin's Q is unrelated to
managerial incentives. The second is that the four PPS coefficients are jointly equal to each other.

This is a test for linearity. If the null hypothesis is not rejected, then the relationship between
Tobin's Q and managerial incentives is linear. Both null hypotheses are rejected for both the
OLS and fixed effect specifications.

Observed changes in managerial incentives and firm performance are equilibrium responses

to changes in exogenous parameters. Therefore, the coefficients on the PPS terms in Table 3
do not represent the marginal effect of an exogenous change in managerial incentives on firm

performance. For example, the slope coefficient on the first segment in the fixed effect regression

is 0.2387. Suppose that the top management team at a given firm is observed to have incentives
of 0.25 percent in the form of stock and options. Increasing this team's incentives to 0.75 percent
will not increase the value of Tobin's Q by (0.75—0.25)*0.2387 = 0.1193. Managerial incentives of

0.25 percent are set in equilibrium, based on the exogenous parameters r, cr2, and B. Increasing
managerial incentives from the optimal level of 0.25 percent will lower the returns to shareholders

at this firm.7

Instead, the coefficient of 0.2387 implies that at a firm in which it was optimal to

set managerial incentives to 0.25 percent, Tobin's Q is expected to be 0.1193 lower than at a firm

in which it was optimal to set managerial incentives to 0.75 percent. The values of exogenous
parameters vary across firms and within firms over time. The firm in which managerial incentives

of 0.75 percent are optimal either has lower variance of firm performance or has managers with
lower risk aversion. Differences in the underlying parameters generate the observed variation in
both incentives and firm performance.
The fixed effects regression provides a more robust test of the comparative statics predictions

of the model. Including a dummy variable for each firm removes the effect of any firm-specific
characteristic that may affect both performance and incentives in a way not specified by our modeL

The fixed effects regression establishes a relationship between performance and incentives based

only on changes within firms over time. The OLS regression establishes a relationship between
performance and incentives based on comparisons both within and across firms. If firms are not
When incentives are set optimally, shareholders have traded off the benefits of reduced agency problems against
the cost of compensating the manager. Higher-than-optimal incentives inefficiently expose managers to risk, deprive

them of private benefits of investment, or force them to incur private costs of greater investment. Shareholders
must then compensate managers for these added burdens, thereby lowering shareholders' returns relative to the
optimum.

20

otherwise identical, the OLS regression will be biased by unobserved, firm-specific factors whereas

the fixed effect regression will not. Comparing the 112 from the two regressions, the inclusion

of the fixed effects absorbs a substantial amount of the variation (increasing the proportion of
variance explained from 0.0474 to 0.8475), but the fixed effects do not change the basic shape of
the predicted relationship. The differences between the OLS and fixed effect regressions are shown

in Figure 1. The plot consists of the predicted values for each regression using the intercept for
the 1993 sample year. The values from the fixed effect regression have a higher intercept, a lower

initial slope, but a more modest decline in slopes thereafter. Overall, the two graphs are quite
similar. To the extent that there are unobserved, firm-specific factors that determine Tobin's Q,
they do not appear to be highly correlated with managerial incentives in our data.

There are two important features of our findings on the relationship between Tobin's Q and

managerial incentives. The first is that in neither regression do we find an intermediate range
of incentives over which Tobin's Q decreases with higher levels of the PPS. This contrasts with

the earliest papers that investigated this relationship (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) and
McConnell and Servaes (1990)). Recall that this negative relationship was the basis for the early

literature's conclusion that managerial entrenchment and overinvestment are important features
of large corporations. Our results, using more comprehensive data and including fixed effects, do

not support this conclusion.

The second feature is that at all levels of incentives, greater incentives are associated with
higher firm performance as measured by Tobin's Q. To date, there has been no general finding
that performance is increasing in incentives. Our result contrasts with Himmelberg, Hubbard, and
Palia (1999), who found essentially no relationship between Tobin's Q and managerial ownership

in a fixed effects specification. Although they do not draw this conclusion, their results reject
standard principal-agent models such as Holmstrom (1979) and Holrnstrom and Milgrom (1987),

which predict that performance will be increasing in incentives in equilibrium. Our finding of
a positive relationship may therefore be viewed as support for standard principal-agent models,
quite apart from the implications of this result for our models of over- or underinvestment.

We can also conclude from our estimate of a positive relationship that the underlying source

of variation, both within and across firms, is risk aversion or the variance of firm performance

21

(see Table 1). If risk aversion or variance decreases, then shareholders will increase incentives

provided to managers. Greater incentives reduce the agency problem due to private costs or
benefits of investment and thereby increase firm performance.

In contrast, if the underlying

source of variation were the magnitude of private costs or benefits, then higher incentives would

reflect an attempt to offset the higher private benefits or costs. Higher private benefits or costs
lower firm performance. Based on the positive relationship between performance and incentives,
we conclude that any variations in the magnitude of B are small in comparison with the variation
in risk aversion or the variance of firm performance.

4.2 Investment and Incentives—Initial Results
Our results on the relationship between Tobin's Q and managerial incentives enable us to identify

the underlying source of variation but not the nature of the agency problem—private benefits or

private costs. As shown in Table 1, we must also consider the relationship between investment
and incentives in order to identify which model is generating the data. We estimate an analogous
spline regression for investment:

(I/K) = $0 + $1PPS1 + fl2PPS2 + $3PPS3 + $4PPS4 + G + A + E.

(19)

t=94

In this equation, the dependent variable is firm investment divided by capital. Both investment
and capital are defined in terms of net property, plant, and equipment. As in the Q regression,
the PPS terms reflect the slopes of the segments in each of the four quartiles of the data, theyear
effects are denoted by O, and the firm level fixed effects are
Table 4 presents the results of the OLS and fixed effect estimates of the coefficients in equation

(19). In the OLS regression, shown in the first column, the coefficients on the first three PPS
terms are positive and significantly different from zero at the one percent level.

The fourth

PPS term, corresponding to the slope of the top segment, is negative and significant. However,
as in the regressions for Tobin's Q in Table 3, the magnitude of the top segment's coefficient is
extremely small and reflects an essentially fiat relationship between investment and incentives.

The fixed effect results in the second column show a different pattern. In this regression, the
slopes of the first two segments are positive but insignificant. The slope of the third segment
is negative but extremely small and statistically insignificant. The slope of the top segment is
22

positive and statistically significant at the one percent level. The test for the joint significance
of the four PPS terms rejects the null hypothesis that all coefficients are zero with a p-value of
0.0228. The PPS terms have significant explanatory power for investment. The p-value for the
test that the coefficients on all four PPS terms are equal to each other is 0.6416, indicating that a
linear specification would capture the relationship between investment and managerial incentives
as well as the spline does. The predicted values for both regressions are graphed in Figure 2 using

the intercepts for the 1993 sample year. Figure 2 shows that the relationship between investment
and incentives is positive.

Combined with the positive slope of the relationship between Tobin's Q and incentives, the
finding that investment is increasing in incentives allows us to identify which model, private costs

or benefits of investment, is generating the data. Table 1 shows that if investment and firm
performance move in the same direction when incentives change, then the model must be one

of private costs of investment. The reason is intuitive: if risk aversion or the variance of firm
performance declines, so that it is less expensive to compensate the manager through incentives,
then shareholders will take advantage of the opportunity to increase incentives, thereby increasing
investment toward its optimal level (in the absence of an agency problem) and raising the value of

the firm. Our results do not support a model of overinvestment. If overinvestment were a feature
of the data, then increases in firm performance associated with increases in incentives would also
be associated with lower, not higher, levels of investment.

To summarize our results, we can uniquely identify the model that generates the data from the

alternatives in the four cells of Table 1 based on two findings. Because the equilibrium values of
Tobin's Q and investment move together in response to changes in incentives, the model must be

one of private costs rather than private benefits of investment. Because this direction is positive,

the underlying source of variation across the equilibrium outcomes must be risk aversion or the
variance of firm performance rather than the magnitude of the private costs of investment.

4.3 Additional Specifications
Our initial regressions in Tables 3 and 4 focus on the relationships between managerial incentives

and both Tobin's Q and investment. In principle, there may be other determinants of investment

and firm performance that are not explicitly related to managerial incentives. The inclusion of
23

fixed effects and year effects controls for a substantial amount of variation in these other factors.

Firm-specific factors that do not vary over time are absorbed by the fixed effects. Firm-specific
factors that change linearly over time are absorbed by the combination of the fixed effects and the

year effects. Economy-wide factors that affect all firms equally but vary over time are absorbed
by the year effects.

To futher demonstrate the robustness of our initial estimates, we augment our fixed effects
specifications to include potential determinants of Tobin's Q and investment that vary both across
firms and within firms over time. We use the full set of covariates described in Table 2 to estimate
the following two regressions:

= /3 + /91PPS1ft + $2PPS2 + $3PPS3 + !34PPS4

+>
k=1

(I/K) =

fib

at

+A

t=94

+ fi1PPSL + fi2PPS2 + /33PPS3 + fi4PPS41

+ 8kX +
k=1

(20)

(21)

Ut + A + Ej.
t=94

In these regressions, the other covariates are denoted by 4. The results are presented in Table
5.

The inclusion of the additional covarmates does not change the pattern of the coefficients on
the PPS terms in either regression. In the regression for Tobin's Q, all slopes are estimated to be
positive and are somewhat smaller than the estimates in Table 3. The p-values for the statistical
significance of the slope of each segment are 0.030, 0.058, 0.146, and 0.058. The p-value for their

joint significance is 0.0001. In the regression for investment with the additional covariates, the
estimated coefficient for the slope of the top segment is 0.0027 with a standard error of 0.0010.
These match the coefficient and significance of the top segment in Table 4, which did not control

for the additional covariates. The estimated coefficients for the bottom three slopes are slightly
lower and of comparable significance to those in Table 4. The p-value for the joint significance of

the FF8 terms is now 0.0323. The p-value for the equality of the FF8 coefficients is 0.6010, again
suggesting a linear specification would be sufficient to capture the relationship between incentives

and investment.
24

For the additional covariates, we find that greater variance of returns is associated with lower

values of Tobin's Q and investment. All of the other variables in the investment regression are
insignificant, including cash flow and leverage, which are often cited as determinants of investment.

In the regressions for Tobin's Q, there are several significant results. Firm size, as measured by
the logarithm of sales, has a decreasing then increasing effect on Tobin's Q. The same is true for

the ratio of capital to sales. Higher leverage is associated with lower values of Tobin's Q. This
result contradicts hypotheses that greater leverage improves firm performance, as in other private
benefits models such as Jensen (1986), Stulz (1990), Hart and Moore (1995), and Zwiebel (1996).

Firms with more advertising expenditures tend to have lower values of Tobin's Q. Dividend yield

is not significantly related to either investment or Tobin's Q.

These regressions show that the increasing relationships between incentives and both firm
performance and investment are robust features of the data. As an alternative specification, in
Table 6, we estimate the fixed effect regressions with a single linear term in managerial incentives,

denoted by ct.

=

(I/K)1 =

$o+$laj+6k4+
O+Aj+g1±
k=1
t=94
fib

+ fia + 5kx + O + A1 +&.
1=1

In effect, we are imposing the constraints that fi =

(22)
(23)

1=94

= fi = fi in our original spline specifica-

tions.

For both Tobin's Q and investment, the coefficient on managerial incentives is positive and
statistically significant. For Tobin's Q, the magnitude of the coefficient on incentives, 0.0121, is
intermediate between the slopes of the third and fourth segments of the spline regression estimates

in Table 5. For investment, the magnitude of the coefficient on incentives is very similar to that
of the top segment in Table 5. In the linear specifications, both firm performance and investment
are increasing in incentives, as predicted by the private costs of investment model.

4.4 Discussion
The results of our empirical estimates suggest a positive, concave relationship between Tobin's Q

and incentives and a positive, linear relationship between investment and incentives. Based on
the theoretical predictions detailed in Table 1, these results support a model in which managers
25

face private costs of investment (B < 0) and the underlying source of variation across equilibrium

outcomes is risk aversion or the variance of firm performance. The private costs model predicts
that we will observe underinvestment.

Our results reject principal-agent models based on private benefits of investment (empirebuilding, managerial entrenchment, perquisites consumption). Both investment and firm performance move in the same direction in response to changes in incentives, not in opposite directions.

We also show that earlier empirical findings, based solely on the relationship between firm performance and managerial ownership, are insufficient to identify whether the agency problem is

one of private costs or private benefits of investment. 'While there is surely anecdotal evidence
of overinvestment problems at individual firms, our results suggest that they are not, on average,
significant problems at a broad cross-section of U.S. corporations.

Overinvestment problems have received extensive attention, starting with Jensen's (1986) discussion of overinvestment due to free cash flow. Jensen suggests that debt, dividends, takeovers,

and board monitoring could all serve as mechanisms to curtail overinvestment. Our private
benefits model shows that managerial incentives can serve the same purpose. Mechanisms such

as takeovers and board intervention require substantial, disruptive change. Given the relative
ease with which incentives from compensation can be adjusted, the compensation contract is the
natural mechanism to alleviate agency problems.
Additionally, there is evidence to suggest that these alternative mechanisms are not effective.
Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998) show that takeover activity has decreased markedly in response

to antitakeover legislation. They also show that compensation incentives have partially offset the

reduction in incentives from takeovers. Jensen (1993) and Yermack (1996) suggest that boards,

and in particular larger boards, are ineffective at raising firm value. In our regressions from
Tables 5 and 6, we include both debt and dividends as explanatory variables. The coefficients on
dividends are insignificant in the regressions for both firm performance and investment. Although
the coefficient on debt is negative and significant in the investment regression, the coefficient is also

negative and significant in the Tobin's Q regression. This is inconsistent with debt constraining
overinvestment problems,

In principle, our empirical results on underinvestment could be explained by factors other than

26

the principal-agent concerns discussed here. To take one example, suppose that managers have
private information about their own firms' quality. Then, in a dividend signaling model (Miller
and Rock (1985)), managers will cut investment to pay a dividend that signals their firms' quality.

In the Miller and Rock model, managers care about both the fundamental value of the firm and

the short-term stock price. The higher dividend increases the short-term stock price. If greater
management incentives cause managers to put greater weight on the fundamental value of the
firm, then managers will be less inclined to signal. Investment will increase (underinvestment
will decrease) and firm performance (fundamental value) wifi increase. As in our private costs
model, greater incentives are associated with higher investment and higher firm performance. It
is worth noting that, empirically, we find that both firm performance and investment are unrelated

to dividends. Further, controlling for dividends, greater incentives are associated with higher firm

performance and investment. These results cast doubt on the dividend signaling explanation.

Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a, b) provide further support for the general principal-agent
framework by showing that incentives are declining in the variance of firm returns. While the
dividend signaling model and other alternative explanations may predict underinvestment, they do
not explain why incentives are declining in the variance of firm returns. Such a finding requires an

incentives-insurance tradeoff. Our private costs model can reconcile all three empirical findings:
investment is increasing in incentives; firm performance is increasing in incentives; and incentives

are decreasing in the variance of firm returns.
Other models of the incentives-insurance tradeoff are also consistent with some of our findings.

In the Holrnstrom and Milgrom (1987) model, managers take actions such as exerting effort rather

than choosing the level of investment. In equilibrium, firm performance is increasing in the level
of incentives and incentives are decreasing in the variance of firm performance. Their model is not
designed to study the relationship between investment and incentives. However, the interpretation

of our underinvestment model is similar to that of their model if the private costs of investment
come from managers needing to exert effort to monitor investment. Our three findings provide
strong support for principal-agent models in which shareholders provide incentives for managers
to choose higher values of the action, whether investment or effort. Although the Holmstrom and
Milgrom (1987) model generates similar predictions to those of our underinvestment model, their

27

model is not sufficient to study overinvestment problems, which is the other main focus of our
study.

5. Conclusion
We examine how the separation of ownership and control affects investment and firm performance.

We consider two variants of the principal-agent problem. In the first variant, managers have
private benefits of investment and therefore overinvest. In the second variant, managers have
private costs of investment and therefore underinvest. We show how compensation contracts will

be designed to ameliorate over- or underinvestment problems. Given the optimal contracts we
derive, we then test several implications of the theory.

For all specifications, we find that both investment and firm performance are increasing in
incentives. These results are consistent with the presence of private costs and underinvestment.
These results also suggest that the primary differences within and across firms are in risk aversion

or the variance of firm performance. In our framework, incentives are an endogenous variable
and our tests are based on the equilibrium predictions of the model. Increases in incentives come

from decreases in risk aversion or the variance of firm performance. The equilibrium increase
in incentives then yields higher investment and better performance. Without any change in the
underlying exogenous variables (risk aversion, variance), an increase in incentives would lower net

returns to shareholders and is therefore not optimal.
Overall, we find little support for the idea that managers systematically overinvest. Our main
empirical contribution to the literature is to demonstrate that investment and performance increase

in response to increases in incentives. The implications of this result are straightforward. How
can there be an overinvestment problem due to agency concerns if greater incentives—the cure for

agency concerns—results in greater investment arid better firm performance? We find support

for the idea that managers underinvest. To the extent that they do, the positive relationship
between investment and incentives suggests that contracts are structured to address this problem.

Therefore, our results support the idea that contracts are set in equilibrium to optimally address
shirking problems in firms.

28

REFERENCES
Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick (1999a). "The Other Side of the Eftadeoff: The
Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation." Journal of Political Economy. 107: 65-105.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick (1999b). "Performance Incentives Within
Firms: The Effect of Managerial Responsibility." Dartmouth College Working Paper.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (1998). "Executive Compensation and Incentives: The Impact of Takeover Legislation." National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 6830.

Burrough, Bryan and John Helyar (1990). Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco.
New York: Harper & Row.

Chang, Chun (1993). "Payout Policy, Capital Structure, and Compensation Contracts when
Managers Value Control." Review of Financial Studies. 6: 911-33.
Denis, David, Diane Denis and Atulya Sarin (1997). "Agency Problems, Equity Ownership,
and Corporate Diversification." Journal of Finance. 52: 135-60.

Fazzari Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen (1988). "Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment." Brookinys Papers on Economic Activity. (1) 141-195.
Hadlock, Charles (1998). "Ownership, Liquidity, and Investment." RAND Journal of Economics. 29: 487-508.

Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman (1998). "Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: (3) 653-691.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1995). "Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard
Claims in Constraining Management." American Economic Review. 85: 567-85.

Himmelberg, Charles, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia (1999). "Understanding the
Determinants of Managerial Ownership and the Link Between Ownership andPerformance."
Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Holmstrom, Bengt (1979). "Moral Hazard and Observabiity." Bell Journal of Economics.
10: 74-91.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1987). "Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision
of Intertemporal Incentives." Econometrica. 55: 303-28.

Jensen, Michael C. (1986). "Agency Costs of Three Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers." American Economic Review. 76: 323-329.

Jensen, Michael C. (1993). "The Modern Industrial Revoution, Eidt, and the Failure of
Internal Control Systems." Journal of Finance. 48: 831-880.
Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy (1990). "Performance Pay and Top Management
Incentives." Journal of Political Economy. 98: 225-64.

Kaplan, Steven (1989). "The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance
and Value." Journal of Financial Economics. 24: 217-254.
McConnell, John J. and Chris J. Muscareila (1985). "Corporate Capital Expenditure Decisions and the Market Value of the Firm." Journal of Financial Economics. 14: 399-422.
29

McConnell, John J. and Henri Servaes (1990). "Additional Evidence on Equity Ownership
and Corporate Value." Journal of Financial Economics. 27: 595-6 12.

Miller, Merton and Kevin Rock (1985). "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric Information."
Journal of Finance. 40 (4): 1031-51.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1988). "Management Ownership and
Market Valuation—An Empirical Analysis." Journal of Financial Economics. 20: 293-315.
Murphy, Kevin J. (1998). "Executive Compensation," Forthcoming in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 3, North Holland.

Myers, Stewart C. (1977). "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing." Journal of Financial
Economics. .

5:

146-175.

Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984). "Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have." Journal of Financial

Economics. 13: 187-22.
Palia, Darius (1998). "The Endogeneity of Managerial Compensation in Firm Valuation: A
Solution." Columbia Business School Working Paper.
Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers (1995). "A CEO Survey of U.S. Companies' Time
Horizons and Hurdle Rates." Sloan Management Review. 37: 43-53.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1989). "Management Entrenchment—The Case of
Manager-Specific Investments." Journal of Financial Economics. 25: (1) 123-139.

Stulz, Rene M. (1990). "Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies." Journal
of Financial Economics. 26: (1) 3-27.
Standard and Poor's (1995). S&P Compustat ExecuComp: The Executive Compensation
Database. Englewood, CO: McGraw-Hill, November.

Zwiebel, Jeff (1996). "Dynamic Capital Structure Under Managerial Entrenchment." American Economic Review. 86: 1197-1215.

30

Figure 1

Effect of Top Management Incentives on Tobin's C
2.5

Fixed Effect

0
Co

-o

OLS

2.0

0

I—

1.5

0

20
Top Management PPS
10

15

31

25

30

Figure 2

Effect of Top Management Incentives on Investment
OLS

0.30 -

a)

0.25 -

Fixed Effect

U)

>

0.20 0.15 0

5

15
20
10
Top Management PPS

32

25

30

Table 1

Comparative Static Predictions

Private Benefits
of Investment

Private Costs
of Investment

(B>O)

(B<O)

Parameter Providing the
Source of Variation

Sign of

Sign of

aI/a

Sign of

Sign of

aic/a

Risk Aversion (r) or
Variance of Returns (&)

+

—

+

+

—

+

—

—

Private Benefit or Cost
of Investment (B)

t/aa

IIJa

Notes:
1) Each cell in the table represents the predicted sign of the change in profits or
investment when managerial incentives change.
2) Each row specifies a different underlying (exogenous) parameter of the model in
Section 2 that could be changing to generate the shifts in equilibrium incentives (a),
investment (I), and profits (it).
3) See Section 2 for a discussion and derivation of the comparative static predictions.

33

Mean
6.7580
3.8863
2.0018
0.2439
1.6159
6.9543
0.6044
0.8521
0.2399
611.02
0.3890
0.3439

5665
5665
5665
5665
5665
5665
5665
5665
5641
5385
2920
1099

10.4414
7.0932
1.3877
0.1716
2.3086
1.5994
0.9595
3.0791
0.1797
1314.05
1.1606
0.9762

Standard
Deviation

1.2281

0.1305
0.0000
5.9504
0.1471
0.2163
0.0954
98.83
0.0254
0.0478

1.0630

1.0114
0.3980

Percentile

25th

0.0780
0.0000
5.0460
0.0750
0.1369
0.0071
57.68
0.0000
0.0213

0.3786
0.1275

Percentile

10th

1.5684
0.2023
1.0260
6.9156
0.2932
0.4482
0.2329
214.62
0.1048
0.1140

2.9281
1.2286

Median

2.5010
8.0332
0.6792
0.8816
0.3519
555.05
0.3663
0.3110

0.3 136

7.5885
3.6608
2.2087

Percentile

75th

0.4654
4.3240
9.0356
1.6544
1.7413
0.4550
1300.48
0.9386
0.6497

10.5905
3.3403

17.9307

Percentile

90th

34

Notes:
1) Pay-perfonnance sensitivities (PPS) represent incentives provided by direct ownership of stock and stock options for each top
management team or chief executive officer (CEO). They are expressed as percentages ofthe firm, from 0 to 100.
2) Pay-performance sensitivities are calculated from ExecuComp. The standard deviation of monthly returns is based on dollar
returns calculated from CRSP, expressed in millions. All other variables are calculated from Compustat.
3) The PPS for the top management team includes the PPS for the CEO plus four times the average PPS for all other executives for
whom data are available.
4) All dollar values are in millions ofconstant 1997 dollars.
5) The sample is comprised of 1494 finns observed annually from 1993 to 1997.

Advertising/Capital

R&D/Capital

StdDevofReturns

InvestmentlCapital
Dividend Yield
Ln(sales)
Capital/Sales
Cash Flow/Capital
Debt/Assets

Tobin Q

CEO PPS

TeamPPS

Variable

Number of
Observations

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics for Variables Used in

Table 3
Regressions ofTobin's Q on Top Management Incentives, by Estimation Method
Variable
Fixed Effect
OLS
1.4846
1.6590
Intercept
(0.0499)
(0.0680)
0.3694
0.2387
PPS [0— 1.0114]
(0.0562)
(0.0700)
0.0735
0.0943
PPS [1.0114—2.9281]
(0.0350)
(0.0352)
0.0691
0.0406
PPS [2.9281 —7.5885]
(0.0167)
(0.0196)
0.0021
0.0093
PPS[7.S885andup]
(0.0027)
(0.0046)
Year= 1994
-0.21 13
-0.2329
(0.03 14)
(0.0544)
Year= 1995
-0.0541
-0.0654
(0.0583)
(0.0322)
Year= 1996
0.0203
-0.0630
(0.033 1)
(0.0599)
Year= 1997
-0.0036
0.1983
(0.0371)
(0.0653)
0.0474
0.8475
R-Squared
P-value for PPS terms:
0.0000
0.0000
Joint Significance
0.0000
0.0000
Equality
Notes
1) Each regression pertains to our sample of 1494 firms and 5665 firm-years.
2) The Fixed Effects specification includes a dummy variable for each sample firm.
3) Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses beneath each
coefficient.

35

Table 4
Regressions of Investment on Top Management Incentives, by Estimation Method
Fixed Effect
OLS
Variable
0.233 1
0. 1238
Intercept
(0.0118)
(0.0064)
0.0 136
0.0822
PPS [0—1.01141
(0.0 130)
(0.0070)
0.0041
0.0268
PPS [1.0114—2.9281]
(0.0050)
(0.0039)
-0.0002
PPS [2.9281 — 7.5885]
0.0135
(0.0027)
(0.00 19)
0.0026
-0.0008
PPS [7.5885 and up]
(0.00 10)
(0.0003)
-0.0 110
Year= 1994
-0.0066
(0.0047)
(0.0068)
-0.0 129
-0.0065
Year= 1995
(0.0046)
(0.0068)
-0.0 189
-0.0046
Year= 1996
(0.0049)
(0.0073)
-0.02 17
Year= 1997
0.0037
(0.0072)
(0.0052)
0.7582
0.1185
R-squared
P-value for PPS terms:
0.0228
0.0000
Joint Significance
0.6416
0.0000
Equality

Notes
1) Each regression pertains to our sample of 1494 firms and 5665 firm-years.
2) The Fixed Effects specification includes a dummy variable for each sample firm.
3) Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses beneath each
coefficient.

36

Table 5
Fixed Effect Regressions ofTobin Q and Investment on Incentives, Spline Terms
Variable
Dep. Variable Is Tobin Q
Dep. Variable Is Investment
5.1210
0.3387
Intercept
(1.0319)
(0.1285)
0.1520
0.0108
PPS [0— 1.0114]
(0.0701)
(0.0133)
0.0659
0.0016
PPS [1.0114—2.9281]
(0.0348)
(0.0052)
0.0267
-0.0010
PPS [2.9281 —7.5885]
(0.0183)
(0.0027)
0.0086
0.0027
PPS [7.5885 and up]
(0.0045)
(0.0010)
Dividend Yield
-0.0089
-0.00003
(0.0124)
(0.00066)
-0.6703
-0.006 1
Ln(sales)
(0.2576)
(0.0392)
0.04 19
-0.0003
Ln(sales)2
(0.0170)
(0.0032)
-0.3040
0.0120
Capital/Sales
(0.0736)
(0.0 144)
0.0060
-0.0005
(Capital/Sales)2
(0.0022)
(0.0004)
0.0589
0.0059
Cash Flow/Capital
(0.0204)
(0.0046)
Debt/Assets
-0.9206
-0.0744
(0.1766)
(0.0265)
-0.7729
-0.0013
Missing D/A
(0.5014)
(0.0373)
CDF of Std Dev
-1.1210
-0.0880
(0.2599)
(0.0412)
Missing Std Dev
-0.3851
-0.0165
(0.1887)
(0.0350)
R & D/Capitai
0.0263
-0.0029
(0.0751)
(0.0102)
0.0536
0.0249
Missing R&D/K
(0.0906)
(0.0174)
-0.0253
-0. 1289
Advertising/Capital
(0.0152)
(0.0628)
0.0673
-0.0124
Missing Adv/K
(0.0608)
(0.0083)
0.7617
0.8563
R-squared
P-value for PPS terms:
0.0001
0.0323
Joint Significance
0.0222
0.6010
Equality

Notes
1) Each regression pertains to our sample of 1494 firms and 5665 firm-years.
2) Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses beneath each
coefficient.
3) Each regression also includes year effects (not reported).
37

Table 6
Fixed Effect Regressions ofTobin Q and Investment on Incentives, Linear Term
Variable
Dep. Variable Is Tobin Q
Dep. Variable Is Investment
5.4071
Intercept
0.3346
(1.0331)
(0. 1279)
0.0 12 1
PPS [linear term]
0.0023
(0.0037)
(0.0007)
Dividend Yield
-0.0097
-0.00002
(0.0127)
(0.00066)
-0.6802
-0.0052
Ln(sales)
(0.2587)
(0.0394)
0.04 18
Ln(salesf
-0.0003
(0.017 1)
(0.0032)
-0.3 101
Capital/Sales
0.0121
(0.0733)
(0.0144)
0.0062
-0.0005
(Capital/Sales)2
(0.0022)
(0.0004)
0.0601
Cash Flow/Capital
0.005 8
(0.0204)
(0.0046)
Debt/Assets
-0.9259
-0.0745
(0. 1764)
(0.0266)
-0.7752
Missing D/A
-0.0026
(0.50 12)
(0.0376)
CDF of Std Dev
-1.1607
-0.0850
(0.2586)
(0.0404)
Missing Std Dev
-0.4234
-0.0 14 1
(0.1889)
(0.0345)
R & D/Capital
0.0246
-0.0028
(0.075 1)
(0.0101)
Missing R&D/K
0.0585
0.0247

Advertising/Capital
Missing AdvIK

(0.09 11)
-0. 1347
(0.0627)

0.0695

(0.0 174)

-0.0250
(0.0 152)
-0.0 125

(0.0083)
0.8560
R-sguared
0.7616
Notes:
1) Each regression pertains to our sample of 1494 firms and 5665 firm-years.
2) Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors are reported in parentheses beneath each
coefficient.
3) Each regression also includes year effects (not reported).

38

