                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE DETERMINANTS OF CROSS-
                                    BORDER EQUITY FLOWS

                                              Richard Portes
                                               Hélène Rey

                                           Working Paper 7336
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7336


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 1999




We have received outstanding research assistance from Gino Cateau, Yonghyup Oh and Chris Walters, and
additional help from HaYan Lee, Daniel Halmer, and Elisabetta Falcetti. Angela Cozzini of Cross Border
Capital very kindly provided the data on equity investment flows. Zvi Eckstein, Thomas Gehrig, Stéphane
Grégoir, Vassilis Hajivassiliou, John Helliwell, Boyan Jovanovic, Paul Krugman, Philip Lane, Philippe Martin,
Andy Rose, Giovanni Urga and Holger Wolf gave helpful comments, and we have benefited from seminars
at MIT, Berkeley, the Centre for Financial Studies (Frankfurt), DELTA (Paris), and the CEPR European
Summer Symposium in Macroeconomics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Richard Portes and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows
Richard Portes and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 7336
September 1999
JEL No. F3, F21, F12
                                          ABSTRACT

        We apply a new approach to a new panel data set on bilateral gross cross-border equity flows
between 14 countries, 1989-96. The remarkably good results have strong implications for theories of asset
trade. We find that the geography of information heavily determines the pattern of international transactions.
        Our model integrates elements of the finance literature on portfolio composition and the international
macroeconomics and asset trade literature. Gross asset flows depend on market size in both source and
destination country as well as trading costs, in which both information and the transaction technology play
a role. The resulting augmented ‘gravity’ equation has equity market capitalisation representing market size
and distance proxying some informational asymmetries, as well as a variable representing openness of each
economy. But other variables explicitly represent information transmission (telephone call traffic and
multinational bank branches), an information asymmetry between domestic and foreign investors (degree
of insider trading), and the efficiency of transactions (‘financial market sophistication’).
        This equation accounts for almost 70% of the variance of the transaction flows. Dummy variables
(adjacency, language, currency or trade bloc, and a ‘major financial centre’ effect) do not improve the
results, nor does a variable representing destination country stock market returns. The key role of
informational asymmetries is confirmed. Our information transmission variables also substantially improve
standard gravity equations for trade in goods.


Richard Portes                                   Hélène Rey
Department of Economics                                  Center for Economic Performance
London Business School                                   London School of Economics
Sussex Place                                             Houghton Street
Regent’s Park                                            London WC2A 2AE
London NW1 4SA                                           UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM                                           h.m.rey@lse.ac.uk
and NBER
rportes@lbs.ac.uk
1. Introduction


There are very few well-established results on the determinants of trade in assets,
especially securities. Such work has been impeded by data problems, and there is little
theory behind it. The literature on portfolio investment focuses on portfolio choice and the
determinants of returns.


We now have a set of data on cross-border equity transaction flows. These are exceptional
insofar as they give a panel of observations of cross-border purchases and sales of equities.
They include all major equity markets (Europe, United States, Asia). They are annual
bilateral (source and destination) gross portfolio equity flows, 1989-96.


We provide new, clear-cut evidence on the determinants of these flows: we explain 70%
of their variance with a parsimonious set of variables. Our results demonstrate that market
size, openness, efficiency of transactions, and distance are the most important
determinants of transaction flows. The very significant negative impact of distance on
transactions is at first sight quite puzzling: unlike goods, assets are ‘weightless’, and
distance cannot proxy transportation costs. Moreover, if investors seek to diversify their
portfolios, they may want to buy many equities in distant countries whose business cycles
have a low or negative correlation with their own country’s cycle. If that were the case,
distance could have potentially a positive effect on asset trade because of the
diversification motive1.


We show that distance is largely a proxy for information asymmetries: we use in particular
telephone call traffic and multinational bank branches to account for information
transmission, and an index of the degree of insider trading for information asymmetries
between domestic and foreign investors. All these variables are highly significant2. In our

1
  Note however that our data are for transactions, not asset holdings, so this argument is valid only if there is
a positive relationship between flows and stocks. Frankel and Rose (1998) show that trade between country
pairs is positively related to the correlation of their business cycles; since trade decreases with distance,
business cycle correlation does as well. Imbs (1999) provides direct evidence that correlations of business
cycles decrease with distance.
2
  It is also remarkable that our information transmission variables perform very well for a comparable panel
of goods trade (Section 5). This suggests to us that the empirical goods trade literature overestimates the
importance of transportation costs (proxied by distance) and considerably underestimates the importance of
information asymmetries (also proxied by distance).

                                                                                                      -1-
sample, the diversification motive is therefore completely dominated by the information
effect. The geography of information appears central for the distribution of asset flows.


Our empirical results suggest that theoretical modelling of asset trade should embark on
the same type of radical change that we have seen in the literature on goods trade: it
should shift away partly from models based on factor endowments, comparative advantage
and autarky prices3 towards models including differentiated assets, transaction costs and
information asymmetries.


The finance literature has emphasised information asymmetries much more than the asset
trade literature, but it has largely focused on portfolio choice and asset pricing, rather than
transaction volumes for trade in equities. Yet there are very interesting, important issues
here.


First, understanding flows may tell us something about stocks, i.e. about the determinants
of portfolio composition. On this issue, the effort to relate theory to the data has led to an
impasse represented by the ‘home bias puzzle’ (Tesar and Werner, 1995; Lewis, 1998).
We use ‘home bias’ in a very general sense, referring to the evidence that residents of a
given country invest much less abroad than portfolio allocation models would appear to
suggest as optimal diversification. There is continuing controversy over whether this home
bias is due to transaction costs, including informational asymmetries. Our analysis and
results throw some light on these questions.


Second, the equity portfolio flows that we study are a substantial component of the huge
international capital flows that feature in 'globalisation’. These are at the centre of current
macroeconomic policy concerns. A better understanding of their determinants may help
us, for example, to interpret herding behaviour and contagion effects.


Third, financial market integration (e.g., in the euro area, as discussed in Portes-Rey
1998a, Martin-Rey 1999b) will have a wide range of consequences for asset trade.
Improvements in our knowledge about a major dimension of this trade could help us to



3
    See Helpman and Razin (1978), Svensson (1988).

                                                                                       -2-
analyse how the various aspects of integration will affect international transactions in
securities.


Section 2 discusses the existing theoretical and empirical literature and draws some
conclusions about how to model equity flows. We take a new direction that brings insights
from the finance literature to a perspective based on international macroeconomics and
trade. We sketch a simple model which leads to our basic estimating equation. In Section
3, we describe our data and discuss the evolution of the equity investment flows in a three-
region aggregation. Section 4 examines the determinants of portfolio equity investment
flows. A simple specification analogous to the gravity model for goods trade performs
well for equity flows, but we can do much better by incorporating innovations suggested
by the finance approach. Thus we develop the specification by using a new variable to
represent market size and employing variables directly representing information flows and
transaction efficiency. Section 5 shows that our informational variables enter significantly
in a standard gravity equation for goods trade, with a consequent reduction of the effect of
distance. Section 6 concludes.




                                                                                    -3-
2. The explanation of gross cross-border equity portfolio flows


There are two perspectives from which one can view the determinants of cross-border
equity flows. The first comes out of the finance literature on portfolio composition, while
the second arises from international macroeconomics and trade.


The finance viewpoint focuses on portfolio adjustment, information, and the relationship
of flows to returns. It features the home bias puzzle and offers several insights but no clear
conclusions, even regarding the appropriate theoretical framework for modelling flows.


The literature starts from theories and observations on portfolio stocks. Cooper and
Kaplanis (1994) show that neither deviations from PPP nor the deadweight costs of
foreign investing could be sufficient to explain the observed portfolio allocations. Tesar
and Werner (1995) distinguish between ‘fixed barriers’ such as ‘language, institutional
and regulatory differences and the cost of obtaining information about foreign markets’ (p.
479) and variable transaction costs. They argue that if the latter were important, we should
observe foreign investors following ‘buy-and-hold’ strategies – but they observe that
turnover on US residents’ holdings of foreign equity is much higher than on their holdings
of US equity. Since many of the ‘fixed barriers’ appear to be related to distance, they
conclude that ‘geographic proximity seems to be an important ingredient in the
international portfolio allocation decision’ (p. 485).


Gehrig (1993) and Kang and Stulz (1994) derive home bias from asymmetric information
between domestic and foreign investors: the former are better informed about payoffs on
their own market. Brennan and Cao (1997) move from stocks to flows, accepting this
foreign-local asymmetry. They construct a model in which purchases of foreign equities
are found to be an increasing function of the return on the foreign equity market index, if
the foreign investors have a cumulative information disadvantage. A public signal moves
investors to revise their priors and hence change their portfolios; the less well informed
foreign investors revise the means of their distributions more than do the better informed
locals, so price moves simultaneously in the same direction as foreign purchases.


This is an intuitively appealing story, but their empirical support for it is very weak. They
find a preponderance of positive correlations between flows from the US to other countries
                                                                                     -4-
and contemporaneous returns on the destination countries’ equities, but (i) the significance
levels are low; (ii) this result does not hold for foreign purchases of US equities; (iii) a
positive correlation could be the result of an exogenous shift in US demand unrelated to
new information; (iv) as they acknowledge, even when the coefficients were positive, they
were not saying much – ‘our model is able to explain only a small proportion of the
variance of international equity portfolio flows’ (p. 1876). Brennan and Aranda (1999),
however, obtain stronger results on the returns variable in a study of international flows of
debt and equity capital during the Asian crisis 4. This work further supports the hypothesis
that foreign investors are less well informed than domestic investors.5


Froot et al. (1998) also find a contemporaneous correlation between flows and returns, as
well as effects that they interpret as arising from private information (on emerging but not
developed country markets). They reject, however, the central Brennan-Cao contention
that the covariance of returns and inflows is due to an informational disadvantage for
international investors. They find a strong regional component in this relationship, and the
remaining country-specific portion of flows is not significantly associated with returns.


Gehrig (1998) treats information in a specifically geographical context. He notes that ‘pure
equity…constitutes a security with high (maximal) informational complexity’. He then
focuses on the role of financial centres in processing information and suggests that the
intensity of that activity is related to the concentration of branches of multinational banks
in such centres.6 The role of bank branches as informational links has been suggested by
Choi et al. (1986, 1996) and Jeger et al. (1992). Gehrig’s model implies that ‘in markets
for information-sensitive assets, complex local information and straightforward public
information could behave like complements, in which case incentives to form information
networks are reinforced by technological improvements [that cut communication costs and
thereby increase general public information].’ (p.32) He concludes that ‘face-to-face




4
  Tesar (1998) finds that an ‘expected returns’ variable performs well in explaining monthly data for US
investors’ net purchases of equities in 22 foreign countries.
5
  Kim and Wei (1999) study equity investors’ trading behaviour before and during the Korean crisis of 1997-
98. Their results on both positive feedback trading and herd behaviour support the view that non-resident
investors are at an informational disadvantage. So do the results of Frankel and Schmukler (1996), who find
that local residents ‘led’ non-residents in exit behaviour during the Mexican crisis of 1994-95.
6
  Brennan and Cao (1997) find the UK does not behave in accordance with their model and conjecture that
‘the major US banking presence in London is what distinguishes the results for the UK…’ (p. 1865).

                                                                                                -5-
communication within a financial centre and telecommunication are complements (p. 35).’
He does not, however, relate this to transactions flows.


Hau (1999) explores informational asymmetries across the trader population. He finds that
traders located outside Germany in non-German speaking financial centres but with
similar market access show significantly lower proprietary trading profits. His results
indicate “an important role for asymmetric information for the geographic distribution of
market-making activity and possibly international portfolio management”. He does not
study trading volumes.


The very different viewpoint from the international economics literature starts from trade
in goods. There are at least three ways to proceed. The first arises from the risk-sharing
literature (summarised by Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996), which implies that trade in equities
will mirror trade in goods (equities of traded goods firms are traded in equilibrium but not
those of firms in the non-traded sector) 7. It has long been recognised, however, that the
gravity model is a reliable and robust tool for explaining trade (e.g., Leamer and
Levinsohn, 1995; Evenett and Keller, 1998). Thus the gravity model should explain equity
trade irrespective of informational asymmetries on assets. Unfortunately, the theoretical
result requires additively separable utility functions in traded and non-traded goods;
moreover, we do in fact observe trade in equities of firms producing non-traded goods. So
without refinements, this line of reasoning seems problematic.


An alternative argument for a gravity model of equity trade starts from the observed
complementarity between trade and FDI flows. The latter are in turn related to portfolio
equity flows (in part, simply in the data, where equity trade includes part of M&A). There
is no theory here8, but the argument is suggestive. Ghosh and Wolf (1998) make a case
along these lines and also appeal to informational asymmetries that increase with distance.
De Ménil (1999) finds that a gravity model accounts well for FDI flows among European
countries.




7
    The authors are grateful to Ken Rogoff for this point.
8
    Baldwin and Ottaviano (1999) propose a model in which FDI induces complementary trade flows.

                                                                                              -6-
A third route begins with Helpman’s (1998) argument that product differentiation is the
best rationale for the gravity model. By analogy, one could regard equities as highly
differentiated products.


Martin and Rey (1999a) have analysed a model of asset trade from which a gravity
equation emerges naturally. The two key elements that are required to generate such an
equation are: 1) that assets are imperfect substitutes because they insure against different
risks; 2) that cross-border asset trade entails some transaction or information costs. In their
model, risk-averse agents develop different projects that correspond to different assets,
which are traded on markets. Hence the number of assets is proportional to the number of
agents in the country. Like Arrow-Debreu assets, each project/asset pays off in only one
state of nature so that they are imperfect substitutes. The aggregate demand for country A
assets from country B is then:
TAB = nA nB sBA pA
where nA is the number of agents in country A and is therefore a measure of the number of
different projects/assets developed and traded in this country. n B is the number of agents
of country B who demand assets of country A. s BA is the representative demand of an asset
of A by an agent in B and pA is the price of such an asset9. The demand of an asset of A by
an agent of B (sBA ) depends itself negatively on the transaction and information cost
between A and B (τAB ). For a given supply of the asset, higher transaction costs generate
(through lower demand) a lower price of the asset. Higher aggregate demand from B
(higher nB ) also implies (for a given supply of the asset) a higher asset price. Hence, the
log of the asset flows from A to B can be written as:
Log TAB = log (constant) + log (nA nB ) + log (τAB ).
Note that this equation is very similar to the standard gravity equations derived in the
literature of international goods trade: the second term from the left is a product of a
measure of the sizes of countries A and B, the third is the trading cost term (usually
proxied by distance).


When going to the data, we interpret the trading cost both as an information cost and as an
indicator of the efficiency of the transaction technology. We would expect information

9
  In their model, all assets of a given country have the same price because each state of nature is
equiprobable and the dividend is identical across assets.


                                                                                                      -7-
costs to be positively correlated with distance: the cost of travelling is higher for long
distance, cultural differences may also be stronger, business links weaker. Hence we
capture the informational dimension first by using distance, second by using explicit
variables for information transmission (like telephone calls, number of bank branch
subsidiaries) and variables measuring directly the degree of asymmetry between domestic
and foreign investors (an index of insider trading). We find evidence that information sets
have indeed a strong geographical component10. As far as the transaction technology is
concerned, we have an index of sophistication of financial markets.


The model of Martin and Rey (1999a) suggests population or GDP as the size variable.
GDP does perform acceptably in this role; population is normally used with it in the goods
trade literature to represent ‘openness’. In our preferred specification, however, we use a
measure of size which is more directly related to financial markets: market capitalisation.
Finally, we will experiment with various dummies (trading blocs, cultural blocs, main
financial centres, country-specific dummies etc…) and cyclical variables (returns, growth
rates, time dummies, etc…) to account for the time-series dimension of our data. But our
preferred specification will turn out to be a very parsimonious one.


To summarise, the estimating equation arising out of this analysis takes the following
form:


Log(TAB,t) = .1 log(mcapA,t) + .2 log(mcapB,t) + .3 log(distanceAB,t) + .4 information
variables + .5 transaction technology variables + .6 cyclical variables + }AB,t




10
  We document this (perhaps surprising) result further within Europe by analysing the geographical
coverage of main European newspapers – see Section 4 – as suggested to us by Shan-Jin Wei.

                                                                                                -8-
3. Portfolio equity investment flows


Our equity transactions flow data come from Cross-Border Capital (London). There are
eight years of the panel, 1989-96. These are annual data, whereas Brennan-Cao use
quarterly data, while Froot et al. have daily data. The former, however, are restricted to
US bilateral transactions with four developed and 16 emerging market countries. The latter
use a subset of aggregate (not bilateral) flows into and out of 46 countries. Our data are
bilateral flows, so the set of 14 source (country i) and destination (country j) countries is
identical. The cross-sectional dimension is the most important in our panel. These are
transactions data: they record total activity (purchases and sales) by residents of country i
(source) in the portfolio equity markets of country j (destination).


Western Hemisphere: United States, Canada (dummy variable: wh)
East Asia: Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore (dummy variable: easia)
EU Europe: UK, Germany, France, Netherlands, Spain, Italy, Scandinavia (dummy
variable: eu for trade, nonscan for equity flows, because the Scandinavian countries were
not subject to EU capital market integration measures before 1995)
Non-EU Europe: Switzerland
Australia


The share of these countries in global equity market capitalisation in 1996 was 86.6 per
cent (Tesar, 1998). We also have data for trade flows of manufactures between the same
countries. And we use several variables representing information flows and transactions
costs:


telij = volume of telephone call traffic from country i to country j in each year (available
annually, only for 1989-95)
banksij = number of branches in country j of banks headquartered in country i (available
annually)
judeff = efficiency of the judicial system (from La Porta, et al., 1997)
legal = effectiveness of the legal system in enforcing commercial contracts (World
Competitiveness Report, 1997)
istr = absence of insider trading in stock markets (World Competitiveness Report, 1996)
soph = sophistication of financial markets (World Competitiveness Report, 1996)
                                                                                      -9-
Note that judeff, legal, istr, and soph are each available only for a single year in our
sample and are therefore time-invariant in our regressions.


The equity investment and trade data exhibit a few striking features, which we discuss in
more detail in a previous paper (Portes and Rey, 1998b):
•   There is a sharp increase in international equity flows after 1992 for the US and EU15
    but not for Asia.
•   International equity transactions are very asymmetric across blocs.
•   Trade in goods and in equities shows different patterns both over time and on a cross-
    sectional basis.


International trade flows increase more or less steadily but slowly for the period 1989-
1996 between all the blocs, without exhibiting any particular idiosyncratic trend. But the
pattern is very different for equity flows. Investment in equities from the US and EU15
into the other blocs increased much faster after 1991-92. Equity flows between EU15 and
the US were almost three times bigger in 1996 than in 1992. This surge of cross-border
equity flows may have resulted partly from the loosening of capital controls in the EU at
the beginning of the 1990s. Portfolio equity investment of the Asian bloc remains quite
stagnant over the period.


The EU15 invests heavily both in the US and in Asia (37% and 24% respectively of its
total cross-border investments in equity). On the other hand, US investors provide 47% of
the capital inflows due to EU15 equity sales, but Asian investors amount to only 7% of
this total. Asian exports of manufactures to the US dwarf capital flows (in the form of
equity purchases) from Asia to the US. For the US and EU15, however, equity flows tend
to be bigger than trade flows.


Thus trade in goods and trade in equities differ both in geographical structure and in their
evolution over time. Nevertheless, as we shall see, some factors may play similar roles in
explaining both.




                                                                                     - 10 -
4. The determinants of portfolio equity investment flows


4.1. A baseline model


We now proceed to model equity flows empirically. We begin with a specification closely
related to the estimating equation at the end of Section 2, which is similar to the gravity
model for goods trade. The dependent variable equityij is the flow from country i (source
investor) to country j (destination market). The estimates for the full panel are given in
Table 1. Initially, we use GDP to represent market size. ‘Openness’ is represented here by
population (we expect a negative coefficient). The overall OECD GDP growth rate
represents cyclical conditions, and we include regional dummy variables (with a modified
European Union dummy, nonsc, that omits the Scandinavian countries). All variables are
in logs (except growth and the regional dummies), and the estimation procedure gives
‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent) standard errors.


Both GDP variables and both country size variables enter with the expected signs and with
generally well-determined coefficients. Distance is also appropriately negatively signed
and is significant at the 5 per cent level. The cyclical variable and all three regional
dummies are positively signed and estimated with reasonable precision. Overall, this
straightforward, simple gravity regression is satisfactory and informative.


This is not merely useful, but also perhaps somewhat surprising. We would expect
portfolio allocation to be influenced strongly by other variables that we have not included,
like expectations of equity returns and the covariances of these returns. This is the first
indication that the transactions flow data do not behave as one would expect portfolio
stock data to behave.


The results in Table 1 have one peculiar feature: the 95% confidence intervals for the
absolute values of the estimated coefficients on gdpi and popi overlap, and so (almost) do
those for gdpj and popj. Since the coefficients are of opposite sign (and the variables are in
logs), this suggests we could substitute per capita GDP for the separate GDP and
population variables. But that would imply that the volume of cross-border equity
transactions is independent of the size (either GDP or population) of source and


                                                                                     - 11 -
destination countries, but rather varies only with per capita GDP and the other variables in
the regression. This is not plausible, and we shall find it does not hold in the results below.


We do not initially introduce country-specific (or country-pair-specific) fixed effects,
because we have a strong prior that the distance variable should be a major determinant of
the flows. By construction, the distance variable (which is constant over all observations
for a given country pair) will pick up some of the fixed effects. Conversely, with fixed-
effects panel data estimation, we cannot use any time-invariant variable (thus including
regional bloc dummies and some of our information variables), because any such variable
is spanned by the individual dummies representing the fixed effects.11 Thus most of our
estimation simply pools the time-series and cross-section data. We did, however, estimate
a fixed-effects model without our time-invariant variables.


We ran this fixed-effects regression, with GDP, population, OECD GDP growth, and a
returns variable. The results were very poor indeed. There was no need for a formal test to
confirm that pooling was the correct approach.12


Although it is theoretically unjustified, for completeness we ran a random-effects
estimation on our initial equation. We found that the coefficient estimates were very close
indeed to those of Table 1, as well as the goodness-of-fit statistics. The panel estimation
permitted us to distinguish between the relative roles of ‘within’ (time-series) and
‘between’ (cross-section) variation in ‘explaining’ equity flows, and the latter clearly
dominated. We repeated this exercise for other specifications, with the same results.


We also do not use dummy variables representing geographical adjacency or common
language (both used by Ghosh and Wolf, 1998). Adjacency is strongly collinear with the

11
   Nor is random effects panel estimation appropriate for our data, which are not drawn randomly from a
larger population (on these points, see Baltagi, 1995).
12
   It is, however, appropriate to ask whether the data are ‘poolable’. Unfortunately, it is not possible to test
poolability across years formally for a number of technical reasons. A Wald test for equality of parameters
over years fails because of the Behrens-Fisher problem, that is, a failure to satisfy the assumption of
independent annual subsamples. A standard Chow F-test of parameter stability fails because variances of
the subsamples are not equal over years. And it is not possible to perform the Generalised Chow test because
a consistent estimate of the country- and time-specific variance components with which to weight the data
can only be obtained from the within-groups (fixed effects) estimator - an estimator which is not able to
estimate the effect of time-invariant variables like distance. Inspection and comparison of the results by
years does, however, suggest considerable stability of the key coefficients (except insofar as we report
otherwise – see below).

                                                                                                    - 12 -
regional bloc dummies in our sample; common language applies to only the US, Canada,
the UK and Australia, and the Western Hemisphere dummy picks up US-Canada (as well
as adjacency). We did nevertheless run regressions with language and adjacency dummies;
there was no improvement, but it was satisfying that the coefficients on the market size,
openness and distance variables were quite stable.


We then sought to allow both for a currency bloc effect and for what we call a ‘major
financial centre’ effect. Frankel and Wei (1998) used a continuous variable for currency
volatility within blocs. We proceeded differently, constructing a ‘currency stability’
dummy variable for each bilateral relationship in our sample (e.g., this variable is unity for
US-Hong Kong, unity for intra-ERM [EMS Exchange Rate Mechanism] currencies, zero
for all Australian, Canadian, Singaporean, Swiss, and Japanese bilateral relations, etc.).
Inspection of the data and of residuals from the initial regression show that equity
investment flows into and out of the US, UK and Japan are much higher than that initial
regression would predict. This is hardly surprising. We represented this effect by
constructing variables such as usin, which takes the value unity when the flow is purchase
of US equities by any other country, zero otherwise, and usout, which takes the value
unity for purchases by US investors in any other country, and zero otherwise.


Adding these two sets of variables to the initial specification eliminates the influence of
the regional bloc dummy variables. We therefore dropped them and ran the equation
which is shown in Table 2. The elasticity with respect to distance rises, to -0.71. The
currency bloc variable enters positively and significantly, as do all the ‘major financial
centre’ variables. The coefficient on the cyclical variable is virtually unchanged; those on
the GDP and population variables move somewhat, but there is overlap between two-
standard-error intervals around the initial set of results and these new coefficients. The
overall goodness of fit of this equation rises dramatically too: from the initial R2 = 0.36
(Table1) to R2 = 0.60 (recall we have over 1400 degrees of freedom, with 182 cross-
section observations for each of eight years). Inspection of the residuals shows that
heteroskedasticity decreases as a consequence of introducing the financial centre
dummies, and there is no apparent serial correlation.


We therefore use the model of Table 2 as our baseline for a move further away from the
conventional gravity specification.
                                                                                     - 13 -
4.2. Market capitalisation as a measure of market size


Whereas GDP is doubtless the appropriate market size variable as a determinant of trade
flows, equity market capitalisation is a more plausible determinant of investment flows.10
We use beginning-of-period market capitalisation to avoid endogeneity11.


Substituting market capitalisation for GDP noticeably improves the estimates. Not only
does the overall goodness of fit improve going from Table 2 to Table 3, but also the
dummy variables do much less of the work. Indeed, the currency bloc dummy variable
disappears, and Table 3 therefore reports a regression that omits it. Moreover, one of the
financial centre variables now appears with the ‘wrong’ sign. In fact, when we include
explicit informational variables, as in the next sub-section, we discover that the
coefficients on these financial centre dummies fall further in size and become very
unstable (often taking negative signs) in individual annual cross-sections. We therefore
drop them as well for the next stage. Note that the elasticity on distance here is higher
even than in Table 2 (and substantially higher than is common in goods trade gravity
equations).




4.3. Information flows and transactions costs


Broadly interpreted, trading costs may include both acquisition of information and the
transactions technology. We have already proxied information with distance. Here we
introduce three new explicit information variables. The first is telij (log of telephone call
volume from country i to country j – we have observations only through 1995 for this
variable). The second is a variable we constructed, banksij, that gives the number of
branches in country j of banks headquartered in country i. The third is an index of ‘the
absence of insider trading in the stock market’, istrj (this is relevant only for the

10
   Boyan Jovanovic suggested to us an alternative route to the use of destination market capitalisation to
explain capital inflows, starting from the q-theory of investment.
11
   We also ran this equation and the extensions below instrumenting for the market capitalisation variables,
with very little effect on their estimated coefficients. We used GDP and degree of sophistication of financial
markets as instruments.

                                                                                                  - 14 -
‘destination’ country) constructed from questionnaire data (World Competitiveness Report,
1996). We also include a variable representing the transactions technology, soph, an index
of the ‘sophistication of financial markets’, again constructed from questionnaire data.
The telephone call traffic and banks data are available annually; the insider trading and
financial market sophistication variables are available only for one year in our sample.


We also at this stage introduce a new variable to represent ‘openness’. Population is not in
principle a very satisfactory variable for this purpose, and now that we have taken GDP
out of the estimating equation, we can without any complications use the ratio of total
trade to GDP to measure a country’s overall openness to external transactions.


The results are reported in Table 4. They are not directly comparable with Table 3,
because we have had to drop observations for 1996, and we substituted the new ‘openness’
variable. For comparison, however, running the regression of Table 3 for 1989-95 gives no
significant change in any of the coefficients (in particular, the elasticity on distance,
at –0.8298, and R2 = .6752 are virtually identical). But the newly augmented equation is
strikingly different.


The elasticity on source country market capitalisation falls somewhat, and that on
destination country market capitalisation rises, but not significantly; the former is still
considerably larger than the latter. The destination country ‘openness’ variable is now
insignificant (and wrongly signed); this is equally true if we go back to using population
rather than trade as a measure of openness in this specification. The coefficient on the
cyclical variable rises, but not significantly.


Much more important is the fall by half in the size of the elasticity on distance – which
was apparently representing quite a lot that is now seen to be the effects of the information
and transactions technology variables. These are all remarkably successful: correctly
signed and well determined. With no dummy variables, the equation still accounts for
almost 70 per cent of the variance. It is particularly pleasing to find that the ‘ad hocery’ of
dummy variables is superfluous.


This equation is quite robust. We ran it for annual cross-sections, where the R2s ranged
from 0.64 to 0.78, with a mean of 0.72 – exceptionally high for a cross-section regression
                                                                                      - 15 -
with nine explanatory variables. We found here some evidence of substitutability between
the distance variable and the telephone traffic and banks variables; the size and precision
of the estimated coefficient on the former increase in the later years, while those of the
latter fall, but both are consistently there with appropriate signs. Another indication of the
substitute relationship between distance and telephone traffic came when we ran the
equation of Table 4 for the full period 1989-96 without telij; despite the additional
observations, there is very little difference in the estimated coefficients, except that the
elasticity on distance (and on banks) is significantly larger. The changing roles of these
variables might also be related to the overall surge in the volume of cross-border equity
flows after 1992, noted in Section 3.


The interplay between distance and the telephone traffic and banks variables itself
suggests that both represent information, but in somewhat different dimensions. For
example, one interpretation might be that different classes of agents have different
information sets. Telephone calls, for example, might represent the information gathering
of the broad population and the cross-country networks associated with migration, cultural
ties, past colonial relationships, etc; while traders might be more influenced by their
information about fundamentals which are more closely correlated, the closer is a pair of
countries geographically (which appears to be an empirical regularity, partly mediated
through trade flows). The argument is highly speculative, but the heterogeneity of
information sets might leave room for several distinct ‘information variables’.


We tried re-introducing the regional bloc effects. Two of the three are negative, and they
do not change the estimated coefficients of other variables noticeably. The ‘sophistication
of financial markets’ variable for the destination country is insignificant. We tried two
different variables representing the effectiveness of the legal system. In our sample,
however, the ‘judicial efficiency’ variable of La Porta et al. (1997) is negatively correlated
with the ‘effectiveness of the legal system in enforcing commercial contracts’ index in the
World Competitiveness Report. Perhaps it is not surprising, therefore, that when both are
present, the former is insignificant and the latter takes a negative sign. When we include
them individually, their coefficients are unstable and often wrongly signed in the annual
cross-sections.




                                                                                     - 16 -
It has been argued that the most general form of a gravity model should include country
dummy variables (for both source and destination) and time dummies (Matyas, 1997).
Running the equation of Table 4 with all such dummies reduces the coefficients on market
capitalisation, raises those on openness, and – most importantly – has little effect on those
of distance, telephone call traffic, and banks.


Since our transactions data record the sum of purchases and sales of equities of country j
by country i, we would expect that high volatility of the stock returns of countries i and j
should increase asset flows, as investors have to readjust their portfolios more often. We
find that the variance of the destination country stock index is indeed significant with the
correct sign (positive); the variance of the source country stock index is not significant.


To compare our work with Brennan and Cao (1997), and others cited earlier, we also ran
our regressions using gross purchases and gross sales of equities separately as dependant
variables (instead of the sum of the two). It is further confirmation of our stress on the
transactions dimension of our data that all our results so far are unaffected: estimated
coefficients are well within the confidence intervals found in the aggregate equation,
although not surprisingly they are in general somewhat less well determined. It might be
thought appropriate, taking purchases and sales separately, to allow also for investors’
expectations by including a variable measuring the percentage increase in the destination
country’s stock price index during the year (both contemporaneous and lagged). This
variable appeared in the equation for purchases with a coefficient that was positive and
marginally significant but of very small absolute value; it was not significant in the
equation for sales.


We also tried net flows as the dependent variable on the market returns variable alone and
in variants of our preferred specification; the only significant explanatory variables were
market capitalisation, and they pick up less than 15% of the variance. The lack of success
with the returns variable, in contrast to Brennan and Cao (1997), Brennan and Aranda
(1999), and Froot et al. (1998), may simply be a consequence of using data of different
frequency – the effect may show up in quarterly or daily data, but not in the annual data
we use.


                                                                                    - 17 -
We also ran our preferred regressions on the European subsample of our panel. All our
results were still valid, in particular regarding the roles of the distance and information
variables. Even within Europe, therefore, the information sets of the various countries
appear quite different. To document this effect further, we studied the geographical
coverage of some of the main European newspapers. We compared Le Monde, The
Guardian, La Stampa and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (main ‘general interest’
newspapers); and we looked separately at the Financial Times, Les Echos and Il Sole 24
Ore (main financial newspapers)12. We used FT Profile to search for keywords like
France, French, etc… in the headlines of all these newspapers. Table 7 shows for each
newspaper the fraction of its headlines devoted to a given country. The results are
suggestive: there is a much broader coverage of Spain and Italy by French newspapers
compared to that of the British and to a lesser extent the German press. On the other hand,
Switzerland is followed much more closely by Germany than by the UK (or France).
France and Germany are likely to be more informed about each other than about the UK.
Italian newspapers tend to write more about France than about Germany and the UK (in
that order), and they do not say much about the Netherlands13.


5. Information and the gravity model for manufactures trade flows


For comparison with the equity flows, we also estimate gravity equations for trade flows
(manufactures) over the same period. The specification is standard (see, e.g., Hamilton
and Winters, 1992). We use as dependent variable the average of exports reported by
country i to country j and imports reported by country j from country i (this is not an
average of i’s imports and exports to j, but rather averages the same flow as recorded by
the source and destination country, in order to deal with the well-known ‘mirror statistics’
discrepancies). Explanatory variables are GDP for both source and destination country
(market size), population of both countries (‘openness’), distance, the OECD GDP growth
rate, and dummy variables for Western Hemisphere, European Union, and East Asia.
Again, the specification is log-linear, and the estimation procedure gives ‘White-
corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent) standard errors.




12
     The choice of countries considered and periods has been dictated by data availability.
13
     These results are illustrative rather than claiming to be general.

                                                                                              - 18 -
The results for the full panel are shown in Table 5. We see that the market size (gdpi,
gdpj) and openness (popi, popj) variables perform as expected, except for the population
variable proxying openness of the destination country, which appears with the wrong sign,
but a relatively small coefficient with only marginal significance. Trade varies positively
with the cycle (growth), as expected, and also with the regional dummies (wh, eu, easia),
although the EU dummy is insignificant. As for equity flows, the effects of EU
membership may be picked up partly by the distance variable, since in our sample of
countries, the EU members form a geographically contiguous bloc.


Note that the elasticity on the source country market size variable is substantially greater
than one (and greater than that for the destination country). This is a common ‘home
market effect’ in equations for trade in goods (large countries have high demand, more
producers, produce to avoid transport costs, and export the surplus – see Feenstra,
Markusen and Rose, 1998). Our estimates for equity flows exhibited a similar feature (the
coefficient on mcapi always exceeds that on mcapj), but there was no particular rationale
for this effect on the equity flows.


Frankel and Wei (1998) estimate a gravity model of trade, including both regional and
currency bloc variables. They find strong evidence of the importance of trading blocs and
weak effects for currency blocs. The coefficients they obtain for distance in their trade
regressions are very close to our own. Indeed, Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) cite a
‘consensus elasticity’ of –0.6; our point estimate of –0.54 in Table 3 is one standard
deviation away from this.


The picture changes dramatically, however, when we include explicit information
variables alongside distance in the trade flow equation. Among the variables we used to
explain equity flows, both telephone call traffic and bank branches are a priori plausible
candidates to represent direct information flows between trading partners. Including them
gives the results reported in Table 6. The information variables do indeed enter with
sizeable, very well-determined coefficients; the proportion of the variance explained rises
substantially; and, perhaps most interestingly, the coefficient on distance falls sharply. 14

14
  Table 6 excludes 1996, because telij was not available to us for that year. For a direct comparison, we ran
the regression of Table 5 for 1989-95 only. It was in all respects very close to that of Table 5: in particular,
the elasticity with respect to distance was –0.56 (se = 0.05), with R2 = 0.71.

                                                                                                     - 19 -
The elasticity is now only –0.20! Thus here too, in the workhorse gravity model of goods
trade, distance appears to be proxying for information flows. The trade literature does not
in fact justify convincingly the role of distance in the gravity equation, except by general
reference to transport costs. It seems that information flows may be at least as important.
These results suggest obvious directions for developing and refining the gravity model. 15,16




15
   There has been some movement in this direction. For example, Anderson and Marcouiller (1999) find that
‘corruption and imperfect contract enforcement dramatically reduce trade’. Rauch (1996) presents ‘evidence
that supports the view that proximity and common language/colonial ties are more important for
differentiated products than for products traded on organized exchanges in matching international buyers and
sellers, and that search barriers to trade are higher for differentiated than for homogeneous products’.
16
   If in turn we use trade flows as one of the explanatory variables for equity flows, it enters significantly and
positively. Not surprisingly, it reduces the coefficients on distance, telephone calls, and banks, but it does not
drive out any of them. Thus trade flows may incorporate (or be influenced by) some of the information flows
that appear to explain equity flows, but there may still be common influences on both that we have not yet
succeeded in modelling explicitly.

                                                                                                     - 20 -
6. Conclusion


We apply a new approach to a new panel data set on bilateral gross cross-border equity
flows between 14 countries, 1989-96. The results are remarkably good and have strong
implications for theories of asset trade.


We integrate elements from the finance literature on portfolio composition and the
international macroeconomics and asset trade literature. Theory suggests that gross asset
flows should depend on market size in both source and destination country as well as
trading costs, in which both information and the transaction technology play a role. The
resulting estimating equation, with equity market capitalisation representing market size
and distance proxying some informational asymmetries, as well as a variable representing
openness of each economy, is similar to the gravity model of goods trade. But we also
include variables that explicitly represent information transmission (telephone call traffic
and multinational bank branches), an information asymmetry between domestic and
foreign investors (degree of insider trading in the stock market), and the efficiency of
transactions (an index of financial market sophistication).


This equation accounts for almost 70% of the variance of the transaction flows, much
more than in any previous work. Various dummy variables (adjacency, language, currency
or trade bloc, and a ‘major financial centre’ effect) do not improve the results, nor does a
variable representing destination country stock market returns. The key role of
informational asymmetries appears to be confirmed. We also find that our information
transmission variables substantially improve standard gravity equations for trade in goods:
the importance of information asymmetries has been considerably underestimated in the
empirical trade literature.




With almost 1500 observations on bilateral cross-border equity flows, we conjecture that
these results are likely to be qualitatively robust. The various dummy variables we tried
turned out to be unstable. But market size and cyclical conditions seem secure. The time-
varying information variables are strong and robust. And the effect of distance on cross-
country transaction flows remains strong, even in the presence of explicit information
variables.
                                                                                   - 21 -
These results also seem to have considerable implications for the ‘home bias’ literature.
Tesar and Werner (1995), studying securities transactions flows across five of the G7
countries (all in our sample), conclude that geographical proximity, trade linkages and
language seemed to matter more than portfolio diversification motives. Lewis (1998)
discusses another aspect of the home bias puzzle, ‘consumption home bias’. Related to this
is the finding of Lane (1999) that ‘positive gross international investment positions are not
associated with income smoothing at business-cycle frequencies’, which also leads him to
remark that ‘international investment decisions are heavily influenced by factors other
than risk/return and smoothing considerations’. Our empirical work is rather strong
evidence that there is a very important geographical component in international asset
flows. Countries have different information sets, which heavily influence their
international transactions.




                                                                                   - 22 -
References


Anderson, J., and D. Marcouiller, 1999, ‘Trade, insecurity, and home bias: an empirical
investigation’, NBER WP 7000.
Baldwin, R., and G. Ottaviano, 1999, ‘Multiproduct multinationals and reciprocal FDI
dumping’, manuscript (revised version of CEPR DP 1851).
Baltagi, B., 1995, Econometric Analysis of Panel Data (Chichester: Wiley).
Brennan, M. J., and C Aranda, 1999, ‘What makes hot money hot? The relative volatility
of international flows of debt and equity capital’, Anderson School UCLA WP 14-99.
Brennan, M. J., and H. H. Cao, 1997, ‘International portfolio investment flows’, Journal
of Finance 52, 1851-1880.
Choi, S.-R., et al., 1986, ‘Banks and the world’s major financial centers, 1970-1980’,
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 122.
Choi, S.-R., et al., 1996, ‘Banks and the world’s major financial centers, 1990’,
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 132.
Cooper, I.A., and E. Kaplanis, 1994, ‘Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedging,
and international capital market equilibrium’, Review of Financial Studies 7, 45-60.
de Ménil, G., 1999, ‘Real capital market integration in the EU’, Economic Policy 28
(April), 167-204.
Deardorff, A., 1998, ‘Determinants of bilateral trade: does gravity work in a neoclassical
world?’, in J.A. Frankel (ed.), The Regionalization of the World Economy (Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press).
Evenett, S., and W. Keller, 1998, ‘On theories explaining the success of the gravity
equation’, NBER WP 6529.
Feenstra, R., J. Markusen and A. Rose, 1998, ‘Understanding the home market effect and
the gravity equation: the role of differentiating goods’, NBER WP 6804.
Frankel, J., and A. Rose, 1998, ‘The endogeneity of the optimum currency area criteria’,
Economic Journal 108, 1009-1025.
Frankel, J., and S Schmukler, 1996, ‘Country fund discounts, asymmetric information and
the Mexican crisis of l994: Did local investors turn pessimistic before international
investors’, NBER WP 5714.
Frankel, J., and S.-J. Wei, 1998, ‘Regionalization of world trade and currencies:
economics and politics’, in J. Frankel, ed., The Regionalization of the World Economy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), pp. 189-219.
                                                                                    - 23 -
Froot, K., P. O’Connell, and M. Seasholes, 1998, ‘The portfolio flows of international
investors’, NBER WP 6687.
Gehrig, T., 1993, ‘An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international
equity investment’, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 97-109.
Gehrig, T., 1998, ‘Cities and the geography of financial centres’, CEPR DP 1894.
Ghosh, S., and H. Wolf, 1998, ‘The spatial properties of capital flows: is location
destiny?’, paper for CEPR/World Bank conference on Financial Crises, London, 8/9 May.
Hamilton, C., and L. A. Winters, 1992, ‘Opening up international trade with Eastern
Europe’, Economic Policy 14 (April), pp. 77-116.
Hau, H., 1999, ‘Evidence on the information geography of a stock market’, manuscript.
Helpman, E., 1998, ‘The structure of foreign trade’, NBER WP 6752.
Helpman, E., and A. Razin, 1978, A Theory of International Trade Under Uncertainty
(Academic Press: New York).
Imbs, J., 1999, ‘Co-fluctuations’, manuscript.
Jeger, M., et al., 1992, ‘On the attractiveness of financial centers’, in Blattner et al. (eds.),
Competitiveness in Banking.
Kang, J.-K., and R.M. Stulz, 1994, ‘Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign
portfolio equity ownership in Japan’, Journal of Financial Economics.
Kim, W., and S.-J. Wei, 1999, ‘Foreign portfolio investors before and during a crisis’,
NBER WP 6968.
La Porta, R., et al., 1997, ‘Legal determinants of external finance’, Journal of Finance 52,
1131-1150.
Lane, P., 1999, ‘Do international investment flows smooth income?’, CEPR DP 2123.
Leamer, E., and J. Levinsohn, 1995, ‘International trade theory: the evidence’, in G.
Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3 (Elsevier),
pp. 1339-1394.
Lewis, K., 1998, ‘International home bias in international finance and business cycles’,
NBER WP 6351.
Martin, P., and H. Rey, 1999a, ‘Financial supermarkets: size matters for asset trade’,
forthcoming CEPR DP.
Martin, P., and H. Rey, 1999b, ‘Financial integration and asset returns’, forthcoming
CEPR DP.
Matyas, L., 1997, ‘Proper econometric specification of the gravity model’, The World
Economy 20, 363-369.
                                                                                       - 24 -
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of International Macroeconomics (MIT
Press).
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 1998a, ‘The emergence of the euro as an international currency’,
Economic Policy 26 (April), pp. 307-343.
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 1998b, ‘The euro and international equity flows’, Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies 12, 406-423.
Rauch, J., 1996, ‘Networks versus markets in international trade’, NBER Working Paper
No. 5617.
Svensson, L., 1988, ‘Trade in risky assets’, American Economic Review 8, 375-394.
Tesar, L., 1998, ‘The role of equity in international capital flows’, manuscript.
Tesar, L., and I. Werner, 1995, ‘Home bias and high turnover’, Journal of International
Money and Finance 14, 467-92.
World Competitiveness Report, World Economic Forum.




                                                                                    - 25 -
</ref_section>
Data Sources and definitions
Bilateral trade in manufactures: OECD Bilateral Trade Data Base
Trade between blocs: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics
Bilateral equity investment flows: Cross Border Capital
Distance, adjacency, language: www.ksg.harvard.edu/people/sjwei/
GDP, population, GDP growth rates: International Financial Statistics (IMF) and OECD
Equity price indices: IMF, International Financial Statistics; www.yardeni.com
Telephone call traffic: Direction of traffic – Trends in international Telephone Tariffs
1996, International Telecommunications Union
Equity market capitalisation: Datastream
Bank branches: Bankers Almanac
Foreign equity investment has three main conduits: (1) The purchase of a substantial share
of the equity of a company (normally taken to be 30%), or the outright purchase
of physical assets, such as plant, equipment, land or buildings. These transactions are
deemed to be direct investments. They are differentiated from indirect, or portfolio,
transactions. (2) The purchase or sale of an equity security on a stock exchange local to
the issuing company for the benefit of a non-resident investor. In this instance, a UK fund
manager’s purchase of IBM stock in New York would be defined as a cross-border
transaction. (3) The purchase or sale of a foreign equity on a stock exchange local to the
investor. A UK fund manager’s sale of IBM stock via SEAQ International in
London would be recorded as a cross-exchange transaction. A distinction is made between
the value of foreign equity trading (gross flows) and the value of new money flows (net
flows) into foreign equities.
· Gross equity flows are the sum of all purchases and all sales of foreign equity.
· Net equity investment is the difference between the purchases and the sales of foreign
equity.

The data are principally derived from three sources: national balance of payments
statistics; official national stock exchange transactions; published evidence of
international asset switches by major fund management groups. While these data sources
complement one another and allow for cross-checks, there are limitations:
The threshold percentage distinguishing portfolio from direct varies from country to
country but is around 20%-30% generally. The data are national balance of payments
statistics, recording transactions between (for example) UK residents and overseas
securities, or UK securities and overseas residents. That means a transfer of a UK
equity held by a UK resident to a German resident, not the transfer of any foreign equity
held by a UK resident to a German resident. Thus they do not include transactions
between a German resident and US resident in a UK security. Likewise the German BoP
statistics show the transfer of domestic equity held by a German resident to a US resident
and not the transfer of any foreign equity held by a German resident to a US
resident. Once the UK security is in the foreign domain and being transferred between
foreign investors it will no longer show up in the BoP statistics.

(Source: Cross-Border Capital, direct communication from Angela Cozzini)


                                                                                   - 26 -
                        Table 1 – Bilateral equity flows 1989-96


equityij               coefficient         standard                P > |t|
                                           error


gdpi                   2.219               0.202                   0.000
gdpj                   1.355               0.190                   0.000
popi                   -1.711              0.208                   0.000
popj                   -0.558              0.199                   0.005
distij                 -0.198              0.095                   0.037
growth                 0.429               0.074                   0.000
wh                     2.451               0.238                   0.000
nonsc                  0.653               0.262                   0.013
easia                  2.851               0.240                   0.000




N = 1456
R² = 0.3648
F (9, 1446) = 201.90



All variables except growth and the dummy variables are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                             - 27 -
      Table 2 – Bilateral equity flows with currency bloc and ‘major financial centre’
                                       effects 1989-96


equityij                coefficient          standard             P > |t|
                                             error


gdpi                    2.316                0.186                0.000
gdpj                    0.683                0.177                0.000
popi                    -2.652               0.176                0.000
popj                    -0.635               0.172                0.000
distij                  -0.711               0.047                0.000
growth                  0.405                0.060                0.000
currency                0.517                0.136                0.000
ukin                    1.965                0.167                0.000
ukout                   3.765                0.143                0.000
usin                    3.930                0.193                0.000
usout                   4.882                0.189                0.000
jin                     2.725                0.240                0.000
jout                    1.514                0.225                0.000



N = 1456
R² = 0.6043
F (13, 1442) = 259.40



All variables except growth and the dummy variables are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                               - 28 -
      Table 3 – Bilateral equity flows with market capitalisation and ‘major financial
                                  centre’ variables 1989-96


equityij                coefficient          standard             P > |t|
                                             error



mcapi                   1.368                0.082                0.000
mcapj                   0.647                0.074                0.000
popi                    -0.778               0.052                0.000
popj                    -0.152               0.053                0.004
distij                  -0.845               0.039                0.000
growth                  0.337                0.055                0.000
usout                   1.982                0.264                0.000
usin                    2.500                0.261                0.000
ukout                   1.252                0.166                0.000
ukin                    0.785                0.189                0.000
jout                    -0.794               0.268                0.003
jin                     1.461                0.268                0.000




N = 1456
R² = 0.6762
F (12, 1443) = 347.34




All variables except growth and the dummy variables are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                               - 29 -
                        Table 4 – Bilateral equity flows 1989-95


equityij                      coefficient           standard             P > |t|
                                                    error


mcapi                         1.020                 0.048                0.000
mcapj                         0.714                 0.056                0.000
tgdpi                         0.655                 0.082                0.000
tgdpj                         -0.052                0.076                0.491
distij                        -0.440                0.049                0.000
telij                         0.408                 0.058                0.000
banksij                       0.208                 0.056                0.000
sophi                         2.936                 0.294                0.000
insidersj                     1.940                 0.332                0.000
growth                        0.493                 0.056                0.000




N = 1250
R² = 0.6874
F (10,1239) = 345.46



All variables except growth are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                                   - 30 -
                Table 5 – Bilateral manufactures trade flows 1989-96


tradeij                      coefficient          standard              P > |t|
                                                  error


gdpi                         1.039                0.076                 0.000
gdpj                         0.328                0.079                 0.000
popi                         -0.502               0.079                 0.000
popj                         0.159                0.084                 0.058
distij                       -0.544               0.047                 0.000
growth                       0.0520               0.027                 0.055
wh                           1.469                0.124                 0.000
eu                           0.028                0.113                 0.800
easia                        1.486                0.113                 0.000




N = 1456
R² = 0.7111
F (9, 1446) = 549.94




All variables except growth and the dummy variables are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                                  - 31 -
     Table 6 – Bilateral manufactures trade flows with information variables 1989-95


tradeij                coefficient          standard             P > |t|
                                            error


gdpi                   0.995                0.076                0.000
gdpj                   0.218                0.081                0.007
popi                   -0.682               0.081                0.000
popj                   0.132                0.090                0.141
distij                 -0.195               0.055                0.000
telij                  0.252                0.024                0.000
banksij                0.221                0.026                0.000
growth                 0.108                0.027                0.000
wh                     1.243                0.112                0.000
eu                     0.486                0.116                0.000
easia                  1.221                0.098                0.000




N = 1250
R² = 0.7713
F (11, 1238) = 565.5



All variables except growth and the dummy variables are measured in logs.
Standard errors are ‘White-corrected’ (heteroskedasticity-consistent).




                                                                             - 32 -
                        Table 7 - National Information Sets


Geographical coverage of Le Monde, The Guardian, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung,
La Stampa (1996-1998)


Le Monde      UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
%             17            27          8         7        15      17        9
The           UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
Guardian
%                  46       15          6         5        9       13        6
Frankfurter   UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
%             17   29                   5         12       13      15        9
La Stampa     UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
%             22   30       22          4         6        11                5


Geographical coverage of the Financial Times, Les Echos and Il Sole 24 Ore (1993-
1998)


Fin. Times    UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
%                  30       25          7         6        9       12        11
Les Echos     UK   France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
%             29            29          5         6        10      13        7
Il Sole 24 UK      France   Germany     Nether.   Switz.   Spain   Italy     Scand.
Ore
%             22   31       27          3         6        7                 4




                                                                           - 33 -
