                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  IMPORT DIVERSION UNDER
                               EUROPEAN ANTIDUMPING POLICY

                                         Hylke Vandenbussche
                                            Jozef Konings
                                           Linda Springael

                                           Working Paper 7340
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7340


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1999




This paper benefited from presentations at a CEPR workshop in London, an NBER workshop in Boston, at
the University of Leuven. Forthcoming in NBER-ISIT conference volume. We thank Filip Abraham, Jim
Anderson, Damien Neven, Richard Baldwin, Rod Falvey, Wilfried Pauwels, Patrick van Cayseele, and Marno
Verbeek for constructive comments on an earlier version. H. Vandenbussche is grateful for financial support
provided by the Belgian Fund for Scientific Research (FWO). We are also grateful to the FWO project F41-
U-P-DSE-PO2. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Hylke Vandenbussche, Jozef Konings, and Linda Springael. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy
Hylke Vandenbussche, Jozef Konings, and Linda Springael
NBER Working Paper No. 7340
September 1999
JEL No. F13, L5, L13

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper is the first to study empirically the effects of European antidumping actions on import
diversion from importers ‘named’ in an antidumping investigation, and potentially subject to protectionist
measures, to countries ‘not named’ in the investigation. For this purpose we use a unique data set at the
8-digit product level. The amount of import diversion can be regarded as an indication of the effectiveness
of antidumping policy which is used to protect the home industry from foreign imports. We find that -- in
contrast to the US -- trade diversion in the European Union caused by antidumping actions is rather limited.
This result holds even after controlling for selection-bias in the antidumping investigation procedure. We
offer a number of explanations for the difference between Europe and the US regarding trade diversion.


Hylke Vandenbussche                           Jozef Konings
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
University of Leuven (KUL)                              University of Leuven (KUL)
Naamsestraat 69                                         Naamsestraat 69
3000 Leuven                                             3000 Leuven
Belgium                                                 Belgium
                                                        Jozef.konings@econ.kuleuven.ac.be

Linda Springael
University of Antwerp
Department of Economics
Prinsstraat 13
B-2000 Antwerpen
Belgium
linda.springael@ufsia.ac.be
I.       Introduction



     Consecutive multilateral trade talks at the level of the WTO have resulted in a

general reduction of tariffs and VERs on trade between member countries. Coinciding

with the fall in the traditional trade policy tools, a rise in new forms of protection has

occurred. Especially the use of antidumping measures seems at least in part to have

replaced the tariffs and VERs. One important distinction between the traditional and

the new forms of trade protection is that the latter are generally felt to be more

selective and less transparent (Ethier and Fischer, 1990).

     Antidumping protection can only be imposed on products coming from countries

'named' by the import competing home industry as alleged dumpers. The purpose of

this paper is to analyse empirically the pattern of import flows of 'named' versus

'non-named' importers in European (EU) antidumping cases that were initiated

between 1985 and 1990. This paper is motivated by the relatively low number of

empirical studies which stands in sharp contrast with the many theoretical
contributions in recent years.

     In particular, one class of theoretical models analyses the effects on trade flows as

a result of strategic actions of firms induced by the threat of having an antidumping

measure imposed on them. Fischer (1992), Reitzes (1993), Prusa (1994) and more

recently Pauwels et al. (1997) have all used dynamic (two-period) duopoly models

with a home and a foreign firm competing for the home market to show that a foreign

firm can strategically reduce its first period exports to the home market to lower the

probability of second period antidumping duties levied by the home country. This

theoretical prediction has been empirically confirmed in a number of studies for the

US (Moore,1992; Hansen and Prusa, 1997). In addition, Staiger and Wolak (1994)
have shown the existence of an 'investigation effect' where foreign firms already

under investigation (but before the decision of protection is taken) significantly

reduce their exports to the US.

  A different class of model argues that an increase in foreign imports in anticipation

of future protection is also possible. Anderson (1992, 1993), for example, shows that

foreign firms will increase their dumped imports when there is a positive probability

that dumping will give rise to a future quantitative restriction on exports (VER),

allocated through licences. The increase in dumped imports are aimed at securing

future export licences. Blonigen and Ohno (1998) argue that foreign firms can display

diverse reactions when facing potential antidumping protection. They develop a two

period model consisting of two foreign firms belonging to different countries

exporting to the US market with the possibility to engage in foreign direct investment

(FDI) in period two. The model shows the existence of a 'protection building

equilibrium' where the foreign firm that intends to engage in second period FDI

(while the other does not), increases its first period exports in order to increase the

probability of protection facing the other foreign firm in period two. The other foreign

firm will reduce its first period exports in an attempt to lower the second period

probability of protection. Blonigen and Ohno (1998) report case evidence for the US

consistent with this type of trade diversion from one foreign exporter to another.

  The body of theoretical work described above suggests that antidumping measures

have an effect on trade flows. However, relatively few models have looked at trade

diversion from named to non-named firms after the initiation of a case. In most of the

duopoly models discussed above, the second period is one where protection prevails

or not depending on first period reactions by a home and a foreign firm. In the case of

protection, the foreign firm reduces its exports, while in the absence of protection the
foreign firm's price and imports are the free trade ones2. Hence the foreign firm is

either named or non-named which makes these models unsuitable for testing

predictions on import diversion from named to non-named firms. The issue of import

diversion is therefore still very much an empirical issue.

        Staiger and Wolak (1994) find evidence of trade diversion for the US on SIC

data (four digit) during the investigation period whereby overall imports are restricted

by about one third to one half as much as imports from named countries are restricted.

Prusa (1997) using more disaggregated data (TSUSA seven digit data) finds a larger

amount of trade diversion for the US. When considering a period of six years after the

year of initiation, Prusa (1997) finds that most of the protective effect of antidumping

duties is offset by increased imports from non-named countries.

   The purpose of this paper is a first attempt to measure — and contrast with the US —

the effects of European antidumping measures on import flows. This is particularly

useful as the European antidumping legislation deviates from the US one in a number

of respects. First, the level of antidumping protection in the EU is limited to the injury

margin provided it is smaller than the dumping margin. In the US, the duty is always

based on the dumping margin which results in higher duty levels (Belderbos, 1997).

Second, the EU besides duties often imposes price undertakings which can be

compared to 'voluntary price restraints'3 (Laird, 1999). Third, duties in the EU are

levied prospectively, this means only after a positive dumping and injury finding. The

US has a retrospective duty system where a bond has to be deposited before the

   2
    A recent theoretical paper by Springael and Vandenbussche (1999) including a named and a non-
named foreign firm shows that while antidumping protection both in the case of a duty and a price-
undertaking reduces the import values of the named, can also raise the import values of the non-named
firm.
 A price-undertaking is a commitment by the foreign importer to eliminate injury by pulling up its
price in the European market. This commitment is imposed and closely monitored by the Commission
outcome of an investigation is known but which is paid back in case the alleged

dumper is not found guilty4. Fourth, withdrawals by the complainants hardly ever

occur in the EU. The majority of terminated cases in the EU are cases where 'no

measures' are imposed because the accused is not found guilty5. Finally, the EU

Sunset clause stipulates that antidumping measures automatically lapse after 5 years,

in contrast to the US where measures only lapse if the foreign importer shows

dumping has stopped.

    This paper has also relevance for policy. In particular, by investigating the amount

of trade diversion induced by antidumping we are able to assess the effectiveness of

antidumping policy as a tool for protection. This may be important for competition

and trade policy and future negotiations at the WTO level6.

    We find evidence that - in contrast to the US - import diversion in the European

Union is low. This qualitative result holds irrespective of the estimation method and

econometric model that we use. However, the magnitude of the effects of
antidumping measures varies according to the method and model used and therefore

caution is needed for interpreting the size of the estimated coefficients.

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section II we describe the data and

show the pattern of trade flows for named and non-named countries. Section III

discusses the econometric approach, section IV gives and discusses the empirical

results. Section V is a concluding one.




and in case of violation heavily penalized. Price-undertakings are shown to be facilitating practices for
'
home and foreign firms involved in EU antidumping cases (see Veugelers and Vandenbussche 1999).
 A refund of duty revenue in the EU is possible in principle but in practice very difficult to obtain.
Refunds have only occurred in very few cases and may take up to ten years after the period of
           Interest over this period is never refunded (Bellis, 1990).
    Over the period we considered (1985-90) of the 80 products for which the investigation was
terminated, only 5 refer to withdrawals and only 2 are suspensions.
II.     Data



        The data set we use consists of all European AD-investigations7 initiated

between 1985 and 1990. This resulted in 246 cases8 of which 105 ended in the

imposition of duties (42 %), 61 in price-undertakings (25%) and in 80 cases the

investigation was terminated by the Commission (33%). For each investigated

product, annual import trade data of the EU by source country were collected from

the EUROSTAT trade statistics. Up to 1988 Eurostat reports data using the Nimexe 6

digit product codes, while after 1988 the 8 digit Harmonised System (HS) codes are

used to identify products. In order to construct full time series for certain cases the

Nimexe 6-digit and the HS 8-digit codes were correlated using correspondence tables.

For each product, import values by country of origin were collected for nine
consecutive years9 starting two years before the initiation of an antidumping

investigation by the European Commission10. The year of initiation is indicated by t0.

The period of investigation following the initiation of a case lasts on average twelve

months and usually corresponds with time t1 during which the outcome of an

investigation is still uncertain. Antidumping protection in the EU is prospective in the

sense that measures are imposed for five years if the investigation is concluded

affirmatively. Hence , the period of protection usually runs from t1 to t6              In order to




6 A new round of WTO talks is planned to start in the Fall of 1999.
 Source: various issues of the Official Journal of the European Community.
 Each case involves one product. After dropping cases for which no complete time-series could be
constructed we were left with 246 products.
 A correction was applied to Eastern European countries that either stopped to exist after 1990
(German Democratic Republic) or that were split into separate countries or regions like
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the Sovjet Union.
tO Since we consider antidumping cases initiated between 1985-90, total data requirements run from
1983 to 1996.
  Exceptionally measures can already apply in and t1.
compare the import values'2 over time, the time series were deflated using GNP-price

deflators.

           Between 1985 and 1990, a total of 48 countries were subject to European AD-

investigations. Table 1 shows the geographical spread of countries accused of

dumping in the EU market over this period. About 70% of all antidumping cases are

against low cost countries (category 2 and 3). One potential reason for this
phenomenon is that developing countries and non-market economies are less

competitive and more monopolized than the European market. This makes these

countries more prone to a violation of the dumping condition which stipulates that

export prices should not be lower than prices in the country of origin (Bhagwati,

1989). Another plausible explanation for the high frequency with which low cost

countries occur in the antidumping cases is that these countries violate the injury

conditions more easily as shown by Veugelers and Vandenbussche (1999): in a

differentiated duopoly model a cost advantage for an importer results in foreign price

undercutting on the European market, which is an important determinant of injury.

           The pattern of named countries described in table 1 is very similar to the US,

where most antidumping cases are also initiated against low wage countries (Prusa,

1997). Messerlin and Reed (1995) and Belderbos (1997) point at the similarity of the

EU and US in terms of the type of sectors and products occurring in antidumping

cases. This suggests the absence of a country and sector bias specific to one of the two

trade blocs.

           In table 2 we list the European sectors (NACE 2 digit classification) most

frequently filing dumping complaints to the EU Commission. Especially the chemical

industry (magnesite, copper sulphate, urea), and to a lesser extent the Processing of


12
     Import values were used which involve the unit price times the quantity shipped to the EU.
Metals Industry (iron and steel and non-ferrous metals), Mechanical Engineering

(transmission equipment like ball bearings and roller chains) and Electric engineering

(typewriters, printers, copiers) seem to trigger AD-investigations.

       In table 3 we show summary statistics on the import values and import growth

that characterize our dataset. Both the mean and the median values for the named,

non-named and overall import values at to, the year of initiation, are shown. First, it

can be noted that the mean and median import size are lower in named than in non-

named countries. Indeed, the average share of named countries' imports in total

imports at to is 26% while 74% for the non-named countries. In addition, named

countries' import values often show very high import growth rates at the time of

initiation as shown in the last two rows of table 3. The average growth for the named

countries at to is almost 2000%. This extremely high mean value is due to a number of

outliers in the data. To give just one example. In 1985 the Commission started a

dumping investigation against typewriters' imports from Taiwan. While Taiwanese
import values were still zero two years prior to to, they rose from a 1000 ECU in the

year before to to 4 259 000 ECU in the year to. Cases like this one are an illustration

that these outliers are often new importers entering the EU market aggressively with

very high import growth rates. The median growth rate in the data is more
representative however and is similar for named and non-named countries, 0 and —2%

respectively.

       A first indication of whether import diversion in response to European

antidumping cases takes place can be found in figure 1, where we show the evolution

of import values at the product level averaged over all AD-cases distinguishing

between named and non-named countries (including outliers) imports' share.
Observations above the horizontal axis reflect an increase in the share of import
values relative to to, while observations below the horizontal axis represent the

opposite namely a reduction in the share of import values relative to to. The different

effects on the named countries imports' share relative to the share of the non-named

become immediately apparent from figure 1. All the lines that lie below the horizontal

axis after to show the evolution of the named countries' import share, while all the

lines above the horizontal axis represent the non-named countries' import share

relative to total imports. For the named countries, the effects of a duty and a price-

undertaking on the imports share appear to be more negative than under a termination.

However, even in the case of the latter, when the demand for protection is rejected,

imports from named countries continue to be restricted. They do not rebound to the

levels at the time of initiation. For the non-named countries, the share in total import

values on average goes up relative to to. This increase appears to be stronger in duty

and price-undertaking cases than in terminated cases. The distance between the

upward sloping curves for the non-named and the downward sloping curves for the

named countries gives us a first rough idea of the amount of import diversion from the

named to the non-named countries which will be tested for more rigorously in the

next section controlling for outliers, sector and business cycle effects. Based on

figure 1, it seems that import diversion is not sufficient to mitigate the effects of

antidumping actions.
III.    Econometric Approach



        The main objective in this section is to test whether import diversion in

Europe is sufficient to mitigate the effects of antidumping actions as it is the case in

the US, after taking into account other factors which might influence import flows. To

this end, we experimented with a variety of econometric methods and models, which

allows us to assess the robustness of the estimates.

        The basic econometric model we seek to estimate is a reduced form with the

following general specification which allows us to test a number of hypotheses. In

particular,



ln importit = ao + a' ln imp itO - i +a2Dl, + a3UI1 +a4T
                                                                              (1)
+ asDccN + a6UIOCNI + aTxN + ccsNum + a9NumixNI + aioN + So



where ln itnportit stands for the natural log of imports for case i (i =l,..246) at time t

(t=O,. . .6). D is a dummy equal to 1 if there is a duty for case i at time t, U is a dummy

equal to 1 if there is a price undertaking for case i at time t, T is a dummy equal to 1 if

there is a termination for case i at time t. A dummy N is included for named countries

(equal to 1 for named countries in case i and equal to 0 for non-named). This dummy

is also used to interact with the policy variables to capture the effects of antidumping

actions on the named countries (DxN, UxN, TxIV). The variable Num proxies for the

number of named countries in a case and is the log number of countries that are

named in an investigation. Num captures the effect that trade diversion will be lower

when many countries are named as in Prusa (1997). Finally, subscript toj refers to the

year prior to to, the year of initiation. The import value for to_i is included to control

for initial import size effects and for the evolution of imports prior to an antidumping
investigation.This may be important as the average total import value for named

countries is smaller than the one for non-named countries as shown in table 3.

       In estimating equation (1) we also take into account year dummies to control

for aggregate shocks'3. This can be relevant as firms may have incentives to file a

complaint in recessions when dumping and injury are more likely to be demonstrated

(Das, 1992). In addition, we control for unobserved fixed effects by including 3-digit

NACE-seetor dummies. These sector dummies control for unobserved sector

heterogeneity, such as sunk costs, the life cycle of the sector (mature versus young),

etc. and hence these dummies can capture to some extent a possible selection bias . In

particular, it might be the case that there exist certain sector charateristics which

trigger antidumping investigations more easily than others. By controlling for
narrowly defined sector dummies, we can control for these unobservable fixed

characteristics.

        The effects of import diversion can be read off by comparing the effects of

duties (D), undertakings (U) and terminations (T) with the same variables interacted

with a dummy equal to 1 for named countries (N), DxN, UxN and TxN. To illustrate

how this equation should be interpreted, the effect of duties (D) on the import values

of the non-named countries is measured by coefficienta2 and for the named countries

by the sum of a2         and   as. Equation (1) implies that we impose some more
restrictions on some variables in the model. For example, equation (1) assumes that

the effects of the initial import levels are the same for named and non-named

countries. We therefore also report the results based on split samples (named versus

non-named), however, we found very similar qualitative results.


13
  We also experimented with interacting time dummies with the AD measures, in addition to intercept
dummies, however, this imposes high multicoillinearity and we therefore do not report these results.
Moreover, figure 1 suggests that the effects of AD-measures are linear which renders the inclusion of
slope dummies useless.
        There are some technical considerations to be made in estimating (1). A first

consideration is that observations within a case, but over time, are not independent,

while the observations across cases are. To take this into account we estimate the

model with OLS white consistent standard errors in which clusters are considered

based on the case under consideration'4. In other words, the observations for each

case are considered as one cluster, which is taken into account when estimating the

standard errors.

        A second consideration is related to the nature of the data. As already
illustrated in the summary statistics of table 3 there are a number of outliers in terms

of import growth in the sample, due to the fact that some importers are newcomers on

the EU market. The number and position of the outliers are shown in figure 4 where

we plot log imports in to_i on the horizontal axis and log imports in to on the vertical

axis. The deviation from the 45°-degree line shows the growth rate in imports

between t0, and to. In view of the considerable number of outliers, which questions

the normality assumption required for OLS and which can affect the average estimate

in the regression analysis in a spurious way, we use a robust regression technique

(Hamilton, 1991) to obtain a robust estimate of the average effect. The intuition

behind this technique is that outliers are given a lower weight in the estimation

relative to observations which are closer to the mean. In particular, observations with

small residuals receive weights of 1, while observations with larger residuals receive

gradually smaller weights. These are called Huber weights (Huber, 1964) and are

implemented iteratively. We will report both the results based on OLS, adjusted for

the clustering in the data, and the results based on robust regression techniques.



14
  An alternative is to use a random effects model for panel data, which imposes strong assumptions on
the error term. We experimented with random effects models as an alternative, but the results were
very similar, so we do not report them here.
       A final consideration is related to a concern about selection bias. The fact that

a country is named in an investigation might be triggered by high import growth prior

to the initiation of a case. There may also exist other unobservable reasons (sector

effects or other) which lead to a selection bias between named and non-named

countries. We therefore also report results based on a Heckman two-step estimation

method (Heckman, 1976; Greene, 1993) and test whether sample selection bias is

important.



IV.    Results and Discussion

       Results

       In tables 4a,b and c we show the regression results of estimating equation (1)

under the different specifications discussed above. The first column of table 4a shows

OLS results with heteroscedastic consistent standard errors, based on clusters of the

case numbers. The second column of table 4a shows the results of a robust regression

which controls for outliers. In column 1 we find no statistically significant effect of

antidumping actions on imports from the non-named countries. In contrast, imports

for the named countries are reduced with 67% in case a duty is imposed and 53% in

case a price undertaking is imposed. Since measures are imposed for a period of 5

years this is equivalent to an average annual reduction in imports from the named

countries of about 13% and 10% respectively. The magnitude of these effects come

across as rather high. Nevertheless, the negative sign of the duty and price
undertaking measures on named countries' import values is the expected one since

duties and price undertakings raise consumer prices on the European market which

reduces demand for imports from the named countries. Based on the estimates in

column (1) of table 4a we find that there is no statistically significant effect that
indicates a presence of import diversion from the named to the non-named countries.

However, as noted earlier, there are a considerable number of outliers in the data,

which might spuriously affect the results under OLS. It is therefore useful to compare

the results in column (1) with those in column (2), where we properly control for

outliers by using a robust regression technique.

       Overall, the magnitude of the effects under robust regression are —as expected-

smaller. In particular, we find that import values from the non-named countries are

now increased by 13% when a duty is imposed, albeit at the 10% significance level.

The imports from the named countries are reduced by 31% (-0.44+0.13) when a duty

is imposed. This effect is almost half of the one found in column (1). In addition, a

price-undertaking has a negative effect on import values of the named countries of

38% without significantly affecting the imports of the non-named. In contrast to the

results in column (1), the coefficient on terminations for the named countries is —17%

and statistically significant at the 10% level. This negative effect on named countries'

imports, even when the demand for protection is rejected, could be an indication of

how much 'being under investigation' restricts imports of the named countries. While

Staiger and Wolak (1994) and Harrison (1991) for the US find that being named

disciplines imports as much as imposing a duty, the coefficient on terminations

suggests an investigation effect that is somewhat smaller than the effects of actual

protection. It is interesting to note that the effect of terminations becomes statistically

significant once we control for outliers. Since the outliers presumably capture new

aggressive entrants in the EU market, the robust regression could be interpreted more

as representative for the traditional importers. This suggests that if traditional
importers are under investigation, they will behave in a more careful way to avoid
protection. In contrast, new and aggressive importers are not affected by being under

investigation, perhaps because they anticipate protection in any case.

        Based on the estimates of column (2) in table 4a we find that a duty increases

imports from the non-named countries compared to to on average per case with 8.7

Million ECU, while imports from the named ones decrease on average per case with

11.9 Million ECU. For price undertakings there is no statistically significant effect

for non-named countries, while for named countries the estimates suggest an average

decrease in imports of 14.6 Million ECU per case. Since 25% of all cases end in price

undertakings, we may conclude that, as already suggested by the results of column

(1), import diversion in the European Union is rather limited. This contrasts with the

findings of Prusa (1997) for the US where import diversion is substantial enough to

offset most of the negative effects on named countries.

        In columns (1) and (2) of table 4b we report similar results, but for the split

samples of named versus non-named countries, again we report both OLS adjusted for

clusters and robust regression results. Irrespective of the estimation method we find

only statistically significant effects of the antidumping measures for the named

countries, while we find no statistically significant positive effect for the non-named

ones. The split regressions suggest that antidumping measures are effective and that

there is no import diversion taking place. The magnitude of the effects of antidumping

measures is smaller than the magnitudes in table 4a. In the split regressions we allow

all the variables in the regression to have different effects according to being named

or not. The qualitative results, however, that import diversion is lower than in the US,

persists.

        In columns (1) and (2) of table 4c we test whether our results are subject to

selection bias. In particular, we test whether 'being named' in an AD-investigation is
random or not. If it is the case that certain characteristics of the group of named

countries trigger them into this category, the regression estimates will be biased. This

calls for the use of a two step Heckman procedure to correct for selection bias (see

also appendix). The key feature of this procedure is to use an observable variable

which is likely to affect selection into the group of named versus non-named, but

which is not included in explaining the regression of interest. For this purpose we

selected the variable 'import growth of named (non-named) countries prior to the year

of initiation', (import growth t01) as well as the 'log of import value two years prior to

the year of initiation' (ln(import) toz). These variables are chosen because at to the

average import value of named countries is smaller than for non-named countries and

by the fact that the outliers suggest that many of the named countries are new

importers in the EU who enter aggressively and hence would have a high import

growth rate prior to to.

        In column (1) of table 4c we show the results for named countries, adjusted

for potential selection bias, while column (2) shows the results for non-named

countries. In the second part of the column (1) and (2) we also show the associated

probit equation of estimating the probability of being named (non-named). After

controlling for selection bias via the Heckman procedure in column (I), we find that

duties reduce the import values of the named countries by 37% or an annual average

reduction of 7%. The effect of price-undertakings is smaller, -23% or an annual

average reduction of 5%. In column (2) we show the results for the non-named

countries, controlling for potential selection bias. We find that only price-
undertakings have a positive and statistically significant effect of 17% on the imports

of non-named countries over the period of protection or an annual average increase of

4%. The effects of duties are not statistically significant. Again the magnitude of the
coefficients and standard errors is different than in the other specifications, however,

our qualitative result of low import diversion still holds.

       In the second part of columns (1) and (2) we report the results of the first step

of the Heckman procedure, a probit equation estimating the probability of named. It

can be noticed that import growth and the import value at to2 are both statistically

significant in explaining the probability of being named (non-named). In particular,

import growth has a positive and statistically significant effect for named countries,

but a negative effect for the group of non-named ones. Also import size has a negative

effect for named countries, but a positive one for non-named. This means that if the

growth rate of imports is high before a case is initiated there is a higher probability of

being named. Likewise, if the total import value of countries is high before a case is

initiated there is a lower probability of being named. For the non-named group we

find, as expected the opposite result: the higher the import growth before a case is

initiated, the lower the probability of being in the non-named group. Likewise, the

higher the total import value at to2, the more likely a country will belong to the non-

named group. These findings are consistent with the fact that new aggressive

importers, with relatively low initial levels of total imports are likely to end up in an

AD investigation.

        The results based on the Heckman correction model confirm our earlier results

that import diversion in the European Union as a result of antidumping actions is

rather limited compared to the US. This also suggests that the potential selection bias

in the previous regressions is not very serious. Nevertheless, a test statistic is reported

at the bottom of table 4c, A,, which tests for the correlation between the selection

equation (step 1) and the actual equation of interest (step 2). This statistic, X, gives an

indication whether there is a statistical reason to believe selection bias is important
(appendix). We find that ) is statistically significant, which suggests that selection

bias is present. However, whether we control for selection bias or not yields

qualitatively the same results, only the quantitative effects are slightly different.




           Discussion of the results

           One reason why import diversion in the EU is smaller than in the US could be

the lower duty levels imposed by the EU as a result of injury margin protection which

puts a limit on the potential benefits of antidumping protection for non-named

importers. Another reason for the lower amount of import diversion in the EU could

be the greater extent of uncertainty and information asymmetries surrounding the EU

decision making process. Comparative political economy studies in this area have

shown that antidumping decisions in the US are more of a 'technical nature' (Finger,

Hall and Nelson, 1982; Baldwin and Steagall, 1994) while those in the EU are subject

to greater political influence (Tharakan and Waelbroeck, 1994). The lower degree of

transparency and predictability in the EU could be one of the possible explanations

for the more prudent reaction of non-named importers in terms of increasing their

import values15.

           A third reason could be related to the effects of AD-actions on decisions of

firms to engage in foreign direct investment. Belderbos (1997) using firm level data of

the Japanese electronics industry subject to European and American antidumping

investigations, finds that Japanese firms are more likely to switch to tariff jumping


15
     For example the retrospective system in the US gives importers, both named and non-named, an idea
of the magnitude of the duty that will have to be paid by the named countries in the case of an
affirmative finding. With the prospective system in the EU, the uncertainty regarding the duty lasts
longer in particular for the non-named countries. Moreover, when price-undertakings are imposed the
extent to which named countries have to pull up their prices is never revealed by the Commission in the
Official Journal reports.
FDI in response to European AD-actions than compared to the US. In the case of

'antidumping jumping 'FDI in Europe, imports from named countries are replaced by

local production, which could explain the lower benefits to non-named countries

through import diversion in Europe compared to the US.

       Another possible explanation may be provided by the nature of competition as

suggested by some theoretical models (Staiger and Wolak, 1992; Veugelers and

Vandenbussche, 1999, Vandenbussche and Wauthy, 1999). The effects of import

diversion in highly concentrated markets (or markets with imperfect competition) can

go in different directions. First, in highly concentrated sectors we might expect entry

barriers and oligopolistic reactions to be important. In this case, import diversion from

named to non-named countries might be expected. On the other hand, in highly

concentrated sectors we may also expect that import diversion is going to be less

important since the elasticity of product demand is likely going to be low. Hence a

price increase due to a duty or an undertaking will have small effects on the quantity

sold. In this case, we might expect less import diversion in highly concentrated

sectors and thus more in lowly concentrated ones. In addition, in lowly concentrated

sectors, where there exists a lot of competition, we may expect that entry is easy so

that non-named countries will find it easier to increase their imports in response to

antidumping measures imposed on named countries, unless it is the domestic sector

which fills the market niche. As an experiment we test whether market structure

matters at all in explaining import diversion. In table 5 we report the results of import

diversion in lowly versus highly concentrated industries. The split of highly versus

lowly concentrated industries is based on the average C5 production concentration

ratio for the EU, defined at the three digit NACE sector level (Davies and Lyons,

1996). Sectors with a concentration ratio higher than the average of 37% are classified
as highly concentrated sectors. It turned out that almost 50% of our sample was

characterised by above average concentration and 50% below average. We also

experimented with other cut-off levels, but the main results persisted.

        The results of the OLS clustered technique reported in column (1) of table 5

indicate very large negative effects on imports from the named countries. These

effects are somewhat reduced if we consider the robust regressions in column (2). In

particular, from column (2) we find that in highly concentrated sectors duties increase

imports from the non-named countries by 27% on average, while undertakings

increase imports from the non-named countries by 34% on average. Duties reduce

imports from named countries by 61% (-0.88+0.27), while undertakings reduce

imports by 18% (-0.52+0.34). This suggests that in highly concentrated sectors there

exists strong import diversion from named to non-named countries for both duties and

price-undertakings. The average import value at to in highly concentrated sectors for

named countries is 60.7 Million ECU and for non-named ones 88.9 Million ECU.

These figures and the estimated coefficients suggest that the effects of AD-actions on

named countries are substantially, but not entirely, offset by increased imports from

the non-named countries16.

        The results for highly concentrated industries stand in sharp contrasts with the

results for the lowly concentrated sectors shown in column (3) and (4) of table 5. For

lowly concentrated sectors under robust regression analysis in column (4), we find

negative effects of antidumping protection in the named countries (-18% for duties



16
  Based on the estimates of column (2) duties increase imports from the non-named countries by 24
Million ECU on average per case, while imports from the named countries are reduced by 37 Million
ECU on average per case. Undertakings increase imports from the non-named countries with 30.2
Million ECU on average per case and reduce imports from the named ones with 10.9 Million ECU on
average per case. In this latter case the increase in imports from the non-named countries more than
offsets the reduction in imports from the named ones, however, only 25% of the cases are affected by
price undertakings.
and —23% for price-undertakings) but no significant increases in the import values of

the non-named, hence no trade diversion is occurring.

        As suggested before, a priori many things can happen in case of imperfect

competition. The experiment that we reported in table 5               suggests   that concentration

might be an important factor in explaining import diversion. A possible explanation

for strong trade diversion in highly concentrated sectors is that the effects of

antidumping policy are offset by strategic rivalry, rendering antidumping policy
largely ineffective in industries where the players are large and their number is

limited. Tn particular, it has been shown by Sutton (1991), Lyons et al. (1999) among

others that highly concentrated sectors are often associated with vertically
differentiated products, i.e. products which are characterised by quality differences.

European antidumping cases can involve imports where the foreign product is of a

lower quality than the European 'like product' as was shown in a recent paper by

Vandenbussche and Wauthy (1999) ' When antidumping cases involve vertically

differentiated products and the Commission, through the imposition of a duty or a

price-undertaking, does not allow the foreign products of lower quality to be sold at a

lower price than the European price, it effectively denies foreign importers a positive

market share in the EU. Injury margin protection, which is specific to the EU context,

implies that the duty level or the price-undertaking imposed is aimed at forcing the

foreign importer to meet the price set by the European industry. Vandenbussche and

Wauthy (1999) argue that when the foreign importer is forced to sell its lower quality

product at the higher price of the European product, the demand for the low quality

foreign product will drop drastically. Hence, given that the equilibrium market

17
  Examples of Antidumping cases where vertically differentiated products are regarded as similar' by
the Commission are the Standardized Electric Motors case against Central European importers
(Official Journal L 83 p4, 27.3.1987), the Japanese dot matrix printers case (Official Journal L317 p33-
structure of vertically differentiated industries is one where the number of firms is

limited (Sutton, 1991), we would expect antidumping protection in highly
concentrated industries to result in large reductions of named countries' imports to the

benefit of non-named countries.

        The extent to which the larger amount of trade diversion for the US as

reported by Prusa (1997), can be explained through concentration ratios seems worth

investigating. In particular, as shown by Lyons et al. (1999), while the average C4

concentration level for Europe is estimated at 20%, the average for the US is 31%.

One reason for the lower concentration level in Europe could be related to the fact

that markets in Europe are more segmented than in the US, which leads to the

potential of some firms to have a dominant market position in some countries, but not

at the European level.




44, 24.11.1988) and the polyester yarn case from the US, Mexico, Taiwan and Korea (Official Journal
L348 p49-55, 17.13.1988)
V. Conclusion



       This paper studied how European antidumping policy affects import flows into

the EU at the 8-digit product level from countries that were under investigation and

either faced a duty, price-undertaking or a termination versus countries that were also

importing the same product but that were not under investigation. In contrast to

findings for the US, our results do not show strong import diversion effects suggesting

that antidumping policy is more effective in Europe. These results hold even after we

control for potential sample selection bias. Depending on the estimation method and

model that is used we estimate different magnitudes of the effects of antidumping

measures on import values of named and non-named countries. Some of these effects

come across as rather high, which might be due to a number of outliers. The key

message, however, that there is little or no trade diversion in the European Union

persists, irrespective of the estimation method that is used.

        We also find European antidumping policy to be most effective in competitive

sectors, characterised by low concentration levels, while in highly concentrated

sectors we found that trade diversion is substantial and offsets the effects of
antidumping measures on named countries to the benefit of non-named ones.

Differences in concentration levels could be one explanation why trade diversion

appears to be stronger for the US than for Europe. However, this result needs further

investigation.

        The lower amount of import diversion in Europe could also be due to the

lower duty levels as a result of injury margin protection, as opposed to dumping

margin protection for the US, which limits the benefits of protection for the non-

named countries. An additional reason could be the lack of transparency and the
greater extent of uncertainty regarding the actual levels of protection in Europe in

comparison to the US which could explain the relatively small effect on non-named

countries' imports into the EU.
Appendix:

The Heckman selection model assumes that a potential observation j is observed if


zIY+U1j >0,


where uij has a standard normal distribution. Simultaneously, there is another
regression equation


  = xiJ3 +CU2j


where   142]   also has a standard normal distribution, but is potentially correlated with

the error term of the first equation, with correlation r. If this is the case, standard

regression techniques applied to the second equation (which in our case is equation

(1)) yield biased results. Heckman (1976) proses a solution to estimate such a model

simultaneously with maximum likelihood (see Greene, 1993). One test statistic, which

is often reported is A. = ar.   If 2c is statistically different from zero, then selection bias

is important.
References

Anderson.J.E. 1992. Domino dumping I: Competitive exporters. American Economic
Review 82.65-83.
Anderson.J.E.1993. Domino dumping II: Antidumping. Journal of International
Economics. 35.133-150.
                                        analysis    of     1TC      decisions     in
Baldwin.R.E..Steagall.J.W.1994.An
                               duty    and    safeguard   cases .Weltwirtschaftliches
antidumping.countervailiflg
Archiv. 130.290-308.
Belderbos.R.1997.AntidUmpiflg and tariff jumping: Japanese DFI in the EU and
US.working paper University of Sussex.
Bellis.J.F.1990.The EEC Antidumping System. In Jackson J.H..E.A.Vermulst (Eds.)
Antidumping Law and Practice.Harvester Wheatsheaf.41-98.
Bhagwati .J. 1 989.Protectionism.MIT Press. 145
Blonigen. B.A..Ohno.Y.1999. Endogenous Protection, foreign direct investment and
protection-building trade. Journal of International Economics 46.205-227.
Das.S.1992. Market Uncertainties and cyclical dumping. European Economic
Review. 36.
Davies, S. and Lyons.B.1996. Industrial Organization in the European Union, Oxford
 University Press.
 Ethier.W.. Fischer.R.1987. The New Protectionism. Journal of Economic Integration
 2.1-11.
 Feenstra.R.C.l995. Estimating the effect of Trade Policy. In Grossman G..K.Rogoff
 (Eds.).Handbook of International Economics.vol.III.NOrth-Hollafld. 1553-1595.

 Finger.M..Hall.K..NelsOn.D.1982.The Political       Economy of Administered
 Protection.American Economic Review.vol 72. 1-26.
 Greene, W. H. (1993). Econometric Analysis. Macmillan Publishing, New York.
 Hamilton.L.C..1991.How robust is Robust Regression ?. Stata Technical Bulletin
 2.21-26.
 Hansen.W..Prusa.T.1996.CUmUlation and 1TC decision making:The sum of the parts
 is greater than the whole.Economic Inquiry.34.746-769.
 Harrison.A.1991.The new trade protection: price effects of antidumping and
 countervailing measures in the US.World Bank Working Paper.Washington D.C.

                                                                                   r% F'
Heckman (1976), J. The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,
Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such
Models, Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5, pp. 475-492.
Huber.P.J.. I 964.Robust Estimation of a Location parameter.Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 35.73-101.
Konings.J..Vandenbussche.H..Veugelers.R.1998. Union wage bargaining and
European Antidumping Policy. CEPR discussion paper n° 1860. London.
Laird.S.1999.Patterns of Protection and Approaches to Liberalization,mimeo, CEPR
conference 19/20 February 1999.
Lyons, B., Matraves, C. and Moffatt, P. (1999). Industrial Concentration and Market
Integration in the European Union, mimeo University of East Anglia, Norwich.
Messerlin.P.A..Reed.G.1995. Antidumping policies in the United States and the
European Community. The Economic Journal.105. 1565-1575.
Moore.M.. 1992.Rules or Politics '1 An empirical analysis of ITC antidumping
decisions.Economic Inquiry.30.449-466.
Fisher.R.. 1992.Endogenous Probability of Protection and firm behavior.Journal of
International Economics.32. 149-163.
Pauwels.W. .Vandenbussche.H..Weverbergh.M. 1 998.Strategic       Behavior      under
European Antidumping Duties.CEPR discussion paper n°1565.London.
Prusa.T.1994.Why are so many antidumping petitions withdrawn ? Journal of
International Economics.33. 1-20.
Prusa.T. 1997. The Trade Effects of US Antidumping Actions. In Feenstra R.C. (Ed.)
The Effects of U.S. Trade Protectjon and Promotion Policies. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago.II. 191-214.
Reitzes.J.. 1993. Antidumping Policy. International Economic Review.vol. 34.
Springael L..Vandenbussche. H. (1998). A model of trade diversion induced by
European antidumping policy. mimeo University of Antwerp (UFSIA). Belgium.
Staiger.R.W..Wolak.F.A. 1992.The effect of domestic antidumping law in the
presence of foreign monopoly.Journal of International Economics 32.265-287.
Staiger.R.W..Wolak.F.A.1994. Measuring Industry-Specific Protection: Antidumping
in the United States. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics. 51-
118.
Sutton.J.1991.Sunk Cost and Market Structure, MIT press.
Tharakan.P.K.M..Waelbroeck.J.1994. Antidumping and Countervailing duty decisions
in the BC and in the US: an experiment in comparative political economy European
Economic Review.38.171-193.
Vandenbussche.H..Wauthy.X.1999.European Antidumping Policy and Firms'
Strategic choice of Quality.CORE-DP.9916. Université Catholique de Louvain.
Veugelers.R..Vandenbussche.H.1999.European Antidumping Policy and the
Proditability of National and International Collusion. European Economic Review
43/1. 1-28.
</ref_section>
Figure 1: Import Diversion from Named to Non-Named Countries Under EU
                            Antidumping Policy

15,00%

10,00%




                                                  - — - - Undertakings NonnarrEd
 -5,00%
                                                          Undertakings Naned
-10,00%
                                                      — Ternations Nonnad
1500%                            '-...            ————Terrmnations Narred




-30,00%
           Figure 2: Correlation between in import values of and


      15 -                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                        0

                                                                                        0
                                                                                0
                                                       0           0                        0
a)    10                                                       0
E                                                      0                                                0
                                                                                            0
                 0            00                   0
                                                                           0
                                                                                    0
                                                                                        8       0
                              0                                                     0   0
I-                                                                                                  0
0
a
E
                      0                0
                                                   0
                                                   0i'' 0
                                                        0 0
                                                                           8
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    0
                                                                                        0
                                                                                                0   0
                                      o60 0 0
0      5                      0                00
                                                       0
                                                           0
                                                                       0
                                                                                        0

                     0°
                     0
                                  00       0
                                               0
                                                           0
                          0       0
                                                               0                        0

       0                                                   0

             0                         5                                   10                                   15
                                               log import to-i
correlation log import at time tO and log import at time to-i
                     Table 1: AD-cases by Economic Status of Country



        Type of country'                          Number of cases (% of TOTAL)

        Industrialised countries (1)              30.75%

        Developing countries (2)                  29.33%

        Non-Market economies (3)                   39.92%




(1) Efta, Portugal, Spain, GDR, USA, Canada, Japan, Turkey, Austria, Finland, Russia, Sweden
(2) Hong-Kong, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Singapore, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, OPEC, Egypt, India,
Macao, Malaysia, South Africa, Trinidad, Tobago, Israel
(3) Belarus, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Czech Republic, Former Jug. Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Ukraine, USSR, Yugoslavia, China
     Table 2: EU sectors most frequently involved in AD-cases between 1985-90


Sector (NACE 2digit)                 %   of Sector (NACE 2digit)                         % of
                                     cases                                               cases
Chemical industry                    26.54    Manufacture of metal articles Instrument 3.09
                                              engineering
Production     and       preliminary 16.05
processing of metals                          Processing of rubber and plastics          2.47


Mechanical engineering                12.35   Manufacture of paper and paper products    1.85


Electrical engineering                8.64    Footwear and clothing industry             1.85


Manufacture of office machinery 4.94          Other manufacturing industries             1.85
and data-processing machinery
                                              Extraction of minerals other than          1.23
                                              metalliferous    and    energy-producing
Man-made fibres industry             4.94
                                              minerals

Manufacture        of    non-metallic 4.94    Extraction     and     preparation    of
mineral products                              metalliferous ores                         0.62


Textile industry                      4.32


Timber and wooden furniture 3.70
industries
                      Table3: Sununary Statistics on Import Values at

Variable                              Statistic   Overall   Named       Non-named

Import values at to                   Mean:       53,941    38,487      67,259

(x 1000 ECUs)                         Median:     12,127    6,228       18,258

Import growth rates from t0-lto to    Mean:       9.2       19.9        -0.02

                                      Median:     -0.01     0.005       -0.02
                   Table 4a: Effects of European AD-actions on imports


                                             (1) OLS                   (2) Robust
Ln (import) to-I                    0.75*        (0.05)        0.85           (0.01)
Duty (D)                            0.12         (0.10)        0.13**         (0.07)
Undertaking (U)                     0.17         (0.13)        0.10           (0.08)
Termination (T)                     0.04         (0.14)       -0.02           (0.07)
Duty x Named (DxN)                 0.67*         (0.15)       0.44*           (0.09)
Undertaking x Named (UxN)          0.53*         (0.14)       0.38*           (0.10)
Termination x Named (TxN)          -0.20         (0.16)       0.17**          (0.09)
Number (Num)                        0.10         (0.10)        8.02           (0.04)
Number x Named (NumxN)              0.25*        (0.10)        0.19*          (0.05)
Named (N)                          0.32*         (0.11)       0.29*           (0.08)
Year dummies                                   yes                         yes
Sector dummies                                 yes                         yes
F                                             255.5                       244.9
R2                                            0.72                          -
Number of observations                        2997                         2997

Note: In brackets are heteroskedastic consistent standard errors, * denotes significant at
       the 5% level, ** at the 10% level.
                  Table 4b: Effects of European AD-actions on imports


                                          (1) Named               (2) Non-named
                                       OLS       Robust          OLS         Robust
Ln (import)oi                       0.09*          0.8*        0.82*          0.92*
                                   (0.08)        (0.01)       (0.04)         (0.01)

Duty (D)                           0.44*         0.19*         0.04          -0.01
                                   (0.15)            (0.1)    (0.09)         (0.06)

Undertaking (U)                    0.36*         0.24*         0.15           0.01
                                   (0.17)            (0.1)    (0.14)         (0.06)

Termination (T)                     0.33         -0.02        -0.09          -0.08
                                   (0.19)            (0.1)    (0.13)         (0.06)

Number (Num)                        0.46*         0.30*        0.03           0.04
                                   (0.17)        (0.06)       (0.10)         (0.03)

Year dummies                                   yes                         yes
Sector dummies                                 yes                         yes

R2                                  0.67                -      0.78              -

F-test                             4442          89.54          352          180.3

Number of observartions             1351          1351         1646           1646

Note: In brackets are heteroskedastic consistent standard errors, * denotes significant at
       the 5% level, ** at the 10% level.
                  Table 4c: Effects of European AD-actions on imports


                                         (1) Heckman                (2) Heckman
                                     Correction for named     Correction for non-named
Ln (import)oi                     0.06*         (0.02)         0.74*       (0.01)
Duty(D)                           O.37*         (0.11)         0.07        (0.07)
Undertaking (U)                   0.23*         (0.11)         0.17*       (0.07)
Termination (T)                   -0.13         (0.11)        -0.03        (0.07)
Number (Num)                      0.30*         (0.07)         0.01        (0.04)
Year dummies                                   yes                         yes
Sector dummies                                 yes                         yes
Probit:
Import growth (t-1)               0.07*         (0.03)        0.13*        (0.03)
Ln(import)t-2                     0.30*         (0.01)         0.28*       (0.01)
Year dummies                                   yes                         yes
Sector dummies                                 yes                         yes
                                   1.04*        (0.10)        0.91*        (0.04)
number of observations            2997                         2997

Note: In brackets are heteroskedastic consistent standard errors, * denotes significant at
       the 5% level, ** at the 10% level.
          Table 5: Effects in Highly Concentrated versus Lowly Concentrated Sectors


                                  (1) High C5       (2) High C5          (3) Low CS        (4) Low C5
                                      OLS              Robust                OLS             Robust

Ln (import)oi                      0.68*              0.79*               0.81*              0.88*
                                  (0.08)             (0.01)               (0.05)            (0.01)

Duty(D)                            0.14               0.27**               0.05             -0.01
                                  (0.17)             (0.15)               (0.12)            (0.07)

Undertaking (U)                    0.33               0.34*               -0.03             -0.09
                                  (0.24)             (0.15)               (0.13)            (0.08)

Termination (T)                   -0.13              -0.09                 0.09              0.02
                                  (0.19)             (0.15)               (0.16)            (0.08)

Duty x Named (DxN)                0.87*              0.88*                0.56*             0.17*
                                  (0.19)             (0.19)               (0.21)            (0.09)

Undertaking x Named (UxN)         0.68*              0.52*                0.30**            0.23*
                                  (0.21)             (0.20)               (0.20)            (0.10)

Termination x Named (TxN)         -0.24              0.27*                -0.27             -0.09
                                  (0.21)             (0.20)               (0.23)            (0.09)

Number (Num)                       0.26               0.10                 0.01              0.07
                                  (0.20)             (0.09)               (0.13)            (0.04)

Number x Named (NumxN)             0.54*              0.50*                0.09              0.04
                                  (0.18)             (0.13)               (0.12)            (0.04)

Named (N)                         0.46*              0.43*                -0.20             -0.20
                                  (0.18)              (0.16)              (0.16)            (0.07)

Year dummies                           yes                 yes                yes                yes
Sector dummies                         yes                 yes                yes                yes
F                                 80.67              131.8                130.9           222.02

R2                                 0.69                   -                0.76


Note: In brackets are heteroskedastic consistent standard errors, * denotes significant at the 5% level,
       ** at the 10% level.
