                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE WEALTH OF THE UNEMPLOYED:
                                ADEQUACY AND IMPLICATIONS
                               FOR UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

                                              Jonathan Gruber

                                            Working Paper 7348
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7348


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 1999




I am grateful to Julie Berry Cullen and Kevin Frisch for research assistance, to Julie Berry Cullen for helpful
comments, and to the Department of Labor for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Wealth of the Unemployed:
Adequacy and Implications for Unemployment Insurance
Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 7348
September 1999
JEL No. J6, H3
                                        ABSTRACT

        While there has been considerable discussion of the adequacy of unemployment insurance (UI)
benefits as a form of income replacement, there is little evidence on the other resources that the unemployed
have to finance their unemployment spells. In this paper I focus on focus on one form of resources, own
wealth holdings. I find that the median worker has financial assets sufficient to finance roughly two-thirds
of the income loss from an unemployment spell, but that there is tremendous heterogeneity in wealth
holdings; almost one-third of workers can’t even replace 10% of their income loss. Most strikingly, ex-ante
wealth holdings decline precipitously with realized unemployment durations, both absolutely and
(especially) relative to ex-post income loss, suggesting that adequacy could be increased if UI benefits were
targeted to those with longer spells. I also find strong evidence that individuals who are eligible for more
generous UI draw down their wealth more slowly during unemployment spells. This demonstrates that
wealth is used as a consumption smoothing device alongside UI to cope with the income loss from
unemployment.


Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 0242-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
        A central question for the design of the unemployment insurance (UI) program is the

adequacy of UI benefits, in terms of maintaining the standard of living of recipients while

unemployed. A number of studies have examined the level of UI benefits relative to the previous

earnings of the unemployed, and the distribution of this replacement rate, as a measure of adequacy

of the system. But this literature has not generally recognized that the extent to which UI benefits

are adequate will be a function of the private resources that individuals have available to finance their

unemployment spells. If individuals have little assets available when they lose their job, then UI

benefits may be an integral part of their effort to maintain their standard of living; but if individuals

who lose their jobs have substantial assets, then the generosity of UI benefits is of little relevance to

adequacy. Indeed, private savings plays a critical role in theories of both the optimal level of UI

benefits (Baily, 1978), and their optimal time pattern (Shavell and Weiss, 1979). Surprisingly,

however, there is little previous evidence on the wealth holdings of those becoming unemployed, and

the role that UI plays in determining wealth decumulation during unemployment spells.

        In this paper I remedy this deficiency by using data from the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is a large nationally representative survey which follows households

over a period of 2-3 years. These longitudinal data allow one to measure both pre and post-

separation characteristics of those becoming unemployed. Most importantly, the SIPP also collects

information from two points in time (one year apart) on the wealth holdings of households. This

allows me to examine both the ex-ante wealth levels of those becoming unemployed, as well as how

they use their wealth while unemployed.

        I use these data to address three questions about the wealth of the unemployed. First, how

large are wealth holdings relative to the income risk from unemployment? This goes directly to the

question of UI benefit adequacy. Second, how does the adequacy of ex-ante wealth holdings vary
                                                  3

with the characteristics of the unemployed? Identifying the key correlates of wealth adequacy can

be important for thinking about more effectively targeting UI spending. Third, how does the use of

wealth by the unemployed interact with the generosity of the UI system? It can be argued that one

role of UI is to reduce the need for individuals to force themselves into destitution by selling all of

their assets. Do unemployed persons rely less on their own wealth, and more on the UI system, to

finance their unemployment spells where UI is more generous?

       To summarize, I have four key findings. First, for the median worker, savings appears largely

adequate to finance most of the income loss from a single unemployment spell. The typical worker

has gross financial assets that can replace 73% of their realized income loss from unemployment. At

the same time, almost one-third of workers can’t even replace 10% of their income loss. On the other

hand, total asset holdings, including (potentially) illiquid assets such as housing wealth, are much

larger than the realized income loss from the spell.

       Second, ex-ante wealth holdings of those becoming unemployed vary in important and

systematic ways across the population. Older and white workers have gross financial asset holdings

which are roughly equal to their income loss during unemployment spells, and those on temporary

layoff have ex-ante wealth holdings which substantially exceed their ex-post income loss. Most

strikingly, ex-ante wealth holdings decline precipitously with realized unemployment durations, both

absolutely and (especially) relative to ex-post income loss. These findings suggest that adequacy

could be greatly enhanced by targeting UI benefits more towards those likely to have longer spells.

       Finally, there is strong evidence that individuals who are eligible for more generous UI draw

down their wealth more slowly during unemployment spells. This demonstrates that wealth is used

as a consumption smoothing device alongside UI to cope with the income loss from unemployment.
                                                  4

       The paper proceeds as follows. In Part I, I provide some background on the literature

focusing on the adequacy of UI benefits. In Part II, I describe my data source and discuss the

methodological issues involved with answering the questions posed above. In Part III, I present the

results on ex-ante adequacy. Part IV analyzes the use of wealth during unemployment spells, and

how this interacts with the UI system. Part V concludes by considering the policy implications of my

findings.



                                Part I: Background on Adequacy

       The study of UI benefits adequacy has a long history; see O'Leary (1996) for an excellent

review. Previous studies have generally been of three types. The first computes the distribution of

income replacement rates from UI benefits; for example, these studies assess the share of the

workforce for which UI benefits replaced at least one-half of their foregone income. The second type

compares UI benefits instead to previous consumption expenditures, particularly expenditures on

"necessities". The advantage of this approach is that the goal of the UI program is explicitly to

maintain living standards, not necessarily income levels.

       But both of these approaches have an important weakness: they assume that there is no

offsetting response of other resource flows to differences in UI generosity. That is, individuals may

have a variety of private mechanisms upon which they can draw to finance their consumption when

they have an unemployment spell. To the extent that these other resources are available, increases

in UI benefits will simply crowd them out, reducing the direct impact of UI on well-being. In the

limit, if individuals held complete private insurance against unemployment spells, then UI would have

no effect: for each dollar of increased UI benefits entitlement, individuals would hold one dollar less
                                                      5

of private insurance, so that their total coverage was unchanged.

        There are a number of potential sources of private insurance against unemployment spells.

The most obvious is individual wealth accumulation. Particularly for individuals who can anticipate

having regular unemployment spells, own savings can serve as a consumption smoothing device that

substitutes for the income that is not replaced by UI. Another mechanism is family labor supply; if

the head of the household loses his job, his wife (or other family members) may be able to increase

their labor earnings to compensate for the income reduction. Other mechanisms include private

supplemental unemployment insurance, other government transfer programs (such as food stamps),

and transfers from other family members or charitable institutions.

        The fact that UI may "crowd out" these other forms of insurance leads to an alternative metric

for assessing adequacy: the extent to which UI benefits are reflected in consumption behavior. This

question is studied by Browning and Crossley (1996), Gruber (1997), and Hamermesh and Slesnick

(1996). Gruber and Hamermesh and Slesnick's findings suggest that UI benefits are fairly adequate,

in that the consumption of the unemployed in the U.S. falls little given the existence of UI, but would

fall substantially if UI were not present. Browning and Crossley, using Canadian data, find that UI

is not very adequate, in that the consumption of the unemployed falls substantially and UI plays little

consumption smoothing role.1

        The estimates in Gruber (1997) illustrate that increases in UI benefits are not translated

directly to increased consumption; he finds that consumption rises by only 27 cents for each dollar



   1
    The differences between this study and the U.S. based studies probably arise from (a) the fact that
Browning and Crossley focus only on the long-term unemployed (6 months or more), and (b) the fact that
there is little variation in the UI replacement rate in Canada, where UI benefits are determined by a national
program, relative to the US, where there is variation from state to state.
                                                   6

of UI eligibility. This implies that there are other resources being used by the unemployed to smooth

their spells. One resource, as noted above, is the labor supply of spouses, and the interaction between

UI and spousal labor supply is investigated directly by Cullen and Gruber (forthcoming). This paper

finds that the labor supply of the wives of unemployed husbands is very responsive to the

unemployment compensation received by those husbands: for each dollar of UI for which a husband

is eligible, his wife earns approximately 36 cents less.

       A second resource is drawing down own savings to finance unemployment spells.

Unfortunately, however, we know very little about the wealth holdings of the unemployed; while

there has been much distributional analysis of the unemployed population, to my knowledge no

previous study has assessed their wealth holdings. Yet, for thinking about adequacy, it is critical to

measure the wealth that the unemployed can tap during their unemployment spells. That is the

purpose of this paper.

       A closely related analysis is that of Engen and Gruber (forthcoming), which examines the

extent to which UI generosity affects the wealth accumulation of the employed. In fact, the authors

find a very large percentage crowd out of savings by UI: for each 10 percent increase in UI generosity

savings falls by 2.8%. But, since that paper focused on the employed, it did not measure specifically

the asset holdings of those becoming unemployed. As well, it did not study how wealth was used

during unemployment spells. Of course, a natural implication of a response of wealth holdings to UI

generosity is that wealth changes during the unemployment spell will be a function of UI as well; if

more generous UI reduces wealth levels, it should most likely also reduce use of wealth as a financing

mechanism during the spell. That hypothesis is tested below.
                                                     7

                                   Part II: Data and Methodology

Data

        The data for this analysis are from the SIPP panels for 1984-1992. The SIPP follows

respondent households for 2-3 years, with interviews every four months. At those interviews,

respondents are asked retrospective questions about their income and labor force behavior over the

previous four months. As a result, the SIPP therefore provides monthly data on income and weekly

data on labor force status.2

        At two points in most SIPP panel (generally waves 4 and 7), respondents are interviewed

about their wealth holdings. Data are collected on a wide inventory of assets. For the purposes of

this analysis, I focus on three measures of assets. Two, gross and net financial assets, measure liquid

wealth: gross financial assets consist of interest earning assets in banking and other institutions,

household equity in stocks and mutual funds, and other assets such as bonds and checking accounts;

net assets subtracts off unsecured debt from this total. The third, total net worth, measures the sum

of all household assets, liquid and illiquid, including (in addition to those previously mentioned) equity

in retirement savings accounts, homes, vehicles, and personal businesses.

        There are advantages and disadvantages to each of these different measures. Gross asset

holdings most closely approximate the steady state stock of accumulated precautionary savings,

whereas net assets also reflect short run smoothing through consumption loans. Furthermore, debt




   2
    In practice, there is a large amount of "seam bias" whereby individuals propagate their status at the
point of the interview back through the previous four months. This problem is more important for income
and government transfer receipt than for labor force status. This will lend some imprecision to the analysis
here, but should not impose any systematic bias to the calculations.
                                                    8

holding may not proxy for financial constraint but rather access to debt markets.3 On the other hand,

a person with substantial accumulated unsecured debt may not be in a very good position to finance

his unemployment spell, so it is also of interest to examine net financial assets. Total net worth has

the advantage that it ignores the decision to divide one's wealth into financial and non-financial

instruments, thereby summarizing the total resources available to a family.               But it has the

disadvantage that illiquid assets such as housing wealth (the dominant form of wealth for most sample

households) may be difficult to access in times of transitory income fluctuation such as an

unemployment spell.

        A further consideration is data quality. For the 1984-1986 panels, the SIPP collected a full

inventory of family level asset holdings at two points in time.4 From the 1987 panel onwards,

however, the full inventory was collected at only one interview (generally the first of the two); in the

other interview, data on gross financial assets was collected, but not data on unsecured debt or home

equity. As a result, there is much more complete information on gross financial assets, particularly

for analyzing the change in the family's wealth position. Moreover, studies of the quality of the SIPP

data conclude that the information on financial assets is reliable, but that information on non-financial

assets (in particularly business equity) may not be (Curtin et al., 1989). This mitigates further

towards a focus on financial assets.

        A final important consideration is imputed data. Roughly one-quarter of the households in

our data set have imputed information on gross financial assets, and the fraction rises to close to one-



   3
    That is, an individual with slightly negative net assets may actually have more precautionary savings
than a person with slightly positive net assets, if they have better access to unsecured borrowing.
   4
   In the 1985 panel, the first wealth inventory is collected in the third wave rather than the fourth.
                                                     9

half for total net worth. The SIPP imputation methodology has been criticized by a number of

commentators (Curtin et al., 1989; Hoynes et al., 1995). On the other hand, the probability of

imputation is not random; for example, it rises with income (and therefore with wealth). As a result,

if I exclude imputed values it will bias the estimates towards understating the resources of the

unemployed; including imputations will add noise to the estimates, but no obvious direction to the

bias. I therefore include imputed values.5

          The sample consists of individuals who separate from their job and who either search for a

new job or are on layoff for at least part of their resulting jobless spell. I consider all such spells

regardless of duration. It is important to note, however, that there are no data in the SIPP on the

reason for the separation; in particular, I do not know if current spells of job search arise from a

voluntary or involuntary separation. If individuals build up assets in anticipation of a voluntary

separation, then these results may overstate the wealth holdings of those involuntarily unemployed.6

          I also consider two other samples to provide a basis for comparison. The first is those who

separate from their job, but who are not on layoff and not searching for a new job (labor force

leavers). The second is a random sample of persons who do not separate from their jobs during the

SIPP panel. For the unemployed and labor force leavers, I use separations that occur after the first

wealth interview, but before the second, in order to consider wealth holdings before the separation



  5
   Results without imputed values are available from the author. These results consistently show wealth
adequacy which is about 50% lower than that shown below, reflecting the fact that those with imputed
values have higher wealth. But there is no systematic effect on any of the cross-sectional patterns or
regression results presented below.
      6
     The fact, documented below, that labor force leavers have much higher asset levels than do the
unemployed supports the notion that those leaving their job voluntarily will have higher assets that do those
leaving involuntarily.
                                                       10

and the change in wealth holdings during the spell.7

        The sample is drawn based on the unemployment spell, in order to capture the features of the

representative spell. As a result, about 85% of the observations in each sample are either from

persons with only one spell or from the first spell for a person with multiple spells; the remainder are

multiple spells.



Empirical Strategy

        The first step of the analysis is to tabulate the ex-ante wealth holdings of those becoming

unemployed. As a numerator, I use the three wealth measures described. To normalize wealth, I use

two types of denominators. The first is weekly earnings, net of income and payroll taxes paid, in the

quarter before separation. This provides a sense of how many weeks of unemployment the typical

individual could finance from their savings. Income taxes paid are computed by applying the federal

income tax schedule to the sum of previous own and spousal earnings; I exclude capital income since

that is a direct function of the variable of interest, wealth holdings. In addition, I account for Social

Security and Medicare payroll tax payments by applying the year specific tax rates for those

programs, up to the taxable maximum of earnings.

        The other denominator measure in different ways the income loss during the unemployment




   7
    This sampling rule results in an undersampling of very long spells, since they would be ongoing at the
point of the first wealth interview. But it is important to have an ex-ante measure of wealth holdings to
compare to the ex-post income loss from unemployment. I also select the sample based on having been
in the SIPP for at least 9 months, in order to have a sufficient window of past earnings for computing UI
eligibility and potential UI benefits. This is generally not a binding constraint for this sample (since the first
wealth interview is done after individuals have been in the survey for 16 months), but some persons join
the SIPP in progress.
                                                    11

spell.8 The first is simply the expected loss in net wages: net wages times the duration of the spell.

The problem with this measure is that it fails to account for the fact that the job leaver potentially has

access to the unemployment insurance system to provide income during the jobless spell, thereby

overstating the loss of income during the jobless spell and understating the ratio of wealth to net

income loss.9 This is especially important since, as Engen and Gruber (forthcoming) show, wealth

holdings are a function of the generosity of the UI system. As a result, it is after-UI expected loss

which is the relevant determinant of wealth adequacy.

        I therefore correct the expected income loss for the presence of UI in two ways. The first is

to use potential UI benefits eligibility. That is, for each person becoming unemployed, I measure their

eligibility for UI and their potential benefits entitlement. If they are eligible, I reduce the income loss

by the UI to which they are entitled, accounting for the taxation of those UI benefits. Their net

income loss from unemployment is therefore:

(1)     W*D*(1-ô1) - UI*max(D,26)*(1-ô2)

where W is pre-unemployment weekly wage
      D is duration of unemployment spell
      UI is potential UI weekly benefits
      ô1 is average tax rate for previous year
      ô2 is average tax rate during year of unemployment

        The first term in (1) is the first measure of expected loss, which ignores unemployment

insurance. The second term is the potential UI income during the spell: the weekly benefit for the


   8
   Note that I measure the spell as consisting of all weeks of separation from work. For those who have
some weeks of unemployment (either search or layoff), 80-85% of their spells are weeks of unemployment,
and the remainder of the spell is weeks out of the labor force.
   9
    In fact, there are many other resources that might be drawn upon during the jobless spell, such as the
labor supply of spouses, which might cause a further understatement of the wealth/loss ratio. I do not
consider these here since the magnitude of response is unclear ex ante.
                                                      12

duration of the spell, up to a maximum entitlement of 26 weeks.10 I also adjust for the fact that the

tax rate that the person faces while unemployed is lower than while employed, since his income is

lower. I do this by recalculating income for the year including the unemployment spell, which is a

weighted average of this potential income from UI while unemployed and earnings from the previous

job for the remaining (52-D) weeks.11

          I calculate potential UI benefits and eligibility using a simulation program which models each

state's UI rules over this time period.12 Eligibility and benefits are determined based on earnings levels

and distributions over the first four of the previous five quarters. For some individuals, I do not have

sufficient earnings histories to calculate these constructs; I therefore expand the available earnings

information to simulate the full required period. If individuals are assigned to be ineligible for UI, I

sent UI = 0 in expression (1); for the regression analysis of Part IV, ineligibles are excluded from the

sample.



   10
     In fact, many individuals are entitled to less than the full 26 weeks, but calculating potential duration
of UI benefits is beyond the scope of this exercise. Moreover, in some states and years, individuals are
entitled to more than 26 weeks if the state unemployment rate exceeds some "trigger" level, or if a Federal
extended benefits program is in place. But in my SIPP sample fewer than 3% of observations receive UI
benefits for more than 26 weeks.
    11
      This tax calculation is simplified along a number of dimensions. I do not account for the precise
calendar timing of the spell; I simply restart the year at the point that the spell begins. And I assume that
the earnings on the post-spell job is equal to the earnings on the pre-spell job. Variations in these
assumptions have little effect on the measure of expected loss in practice, since (particularly from 1987
onwards) the income tax system is relatively flat so that even moderate change in income don't much affect
average taxes. Also, for some individuals with very low earnings it is possible that (1) could be negative;
that is, UI replaces more than 100% of their earnings so that expected income is higher while jobless. I
deal with these cases by setting the expected loss in income to be at least 5% of the expected non-UI
income loss (the first term in (1)). Finally, I account for the partial taxation of UI benefits before 1987, and
their full taxation afterwards.
    12
     See Gruber (1997) and Cullen and Gruber (forthcoming) for a more detailed description of this
simulation program.
                                                     13

        The problem with this approach, however, is that it overstates the income smoothing role of

UI, since, even among those eligible, takeup of UI is much less than full. For example, Blank and

Card (1991) estimate takeup rates of roughly 2/3 among eligibles. An alternative which addresses

this issues is to use actual UI received during the spell in place of potential benefits. I do so by

replacing UI*max(D,26) in equation (1) with UI received during the spell. This measure is not ideal

either, however, since receipt of public assistance has generally been found to be understated in

survey data sets. Moreover, takeup of UI may itself be endogenous to wealth holdings.13

        Thus, I present most results below for all three measures of income loss during the

unemployment spell, in order to bound the true "wealth replacement rate". Ignoring UI clearly

understates wealth adequacy, while using potential UI clearly overstates it; the expected loss using

actual UI receipt lies somewhere inbetween.



                                 Part III: Ex-Ante Wealth Holdings

The Distribution of Wealth Holdings

        Table 1 presents the distribution of wealth holdings of unemployed searchers. The first

column presents the distribution of real wealth holdings, in 1994 dollars. The second column presents

the distribution of wealth normalized by post-tax weekly earnings before the separation. Individuals

with zero weekly earnings are excluded from the tables.

        There are several noticeable features of the distribution of wealth holdings. First, financial

wealth holdings are quite low on average: as noted earlier, roughly 17% of the sample has zero gross



   13
   This will be true, for example, if there is some fixed cost (ie. stigma) to UI takeup, so that individuals
who have other sources of consumption smoothing that are sufficient do not take up.
                                                  14

financial wealth, and the median person has only $1171. Moreover, if unsecured debt is excluded,

the median person in this sample of searchers has zero financial wealth. Second, there is a very wide

distribution; 25% of the sample has gross financial wealth of more than $7052, and net financial

wealth of more than $4352. Third, when illiquid assets are included the sample appears much

wealthier: only 12.3% of the sample has zero or negative net worth, and the median person has

almost $22,000. Thus, for thinking about UI adequacy, it is critical to consider how able the

unemployed are to tap into these other forms of assets during their jobless spells.

       The next set of rows normalizes these wealth holdings by earnings; negative values of net

assets are set to zero. Once again, there is a wide distribution of wealth adequacy here, and the

findings differ dramatically according to the type of wealth measure employed. For gross financial

assets, the median person has assets that are sufficient to cover 5.4 weeks of unemployment; in this

sample, the median spell of unemployment is 11 weeks, so this is much less than would be required

to cover an entire spell. This is even more true for net financial assets, although total net worth is

certainly sufficient at the median to cover even much longer spells. Once again, for a large share of

the sample, both gross and net financial wealth are sufficient to cover a typical spell.

       One interesting question that is raised by this analysis is: do these unemployed searchers have

disproportionately low wealth holdings? This is addressed in Table 2, which performs comparable

calculations for separators who do not become unemployed, and for those who remain employed.

For each of the three wealth definitions, the first column shows absolute wealth in $1994 dollars; the

second shows wealth relative to net weekly earnings.

       In both absolute value and as a share of weekly earnings, the wealth holdings of these two

groups are substantially higher than are those of the unemployed searchers. For both groups, median
                                                  15

gross financial assets are sufficient to weather the loss of 10 or more weeks of earnings. Even for

these groups, however, net financial assets are quite low at the median. Interestingly, while the

wealth holdings of the employed are higher in absolute value, those of labor force leavers are actually

higher as a share of earnings, reflecting the much lower earnings of this group. Thus, the wealth

holdings of the unemployed do seem lower than for other groups, but even for others net financial

wealth at the median is quite low.



Wealth Holdings Relative to Expected Income Loss

       Table 3 extends this analysis by normalizing wealth holdings by the three measures of the

expected income loss during the unemployment spell. In each case, I show the median ratio of wealth

to expected income loss, using both last quarter and high quarter earnings. I then display the

distribution of the sample across adequacy categories: wealth holdings that are less than 10% of the

expected loss, 25% of the expected loss, 50% of the expected loss, and 100% of the expected loss.

These categories are defined cumulatively, so that 1 minus the final row gives the share of the sample

that has wealth that is higher than the expected loss.

       Note that one disadvantage with using realized ex post durations to normalize ex ante wealth

holdings is that the duration of unemployment is itself likely to be a function of wealth. I attempted

to correct for this by predicting unemployment durations and using this to normalize wealth, but I was

unable to fit the distribution of durations with any accuracy, so that any calculations based on

predicted duration were quite misleading. It is therefore important to note that, if spell duration is

a function of wealth, then these calculations will overstate ex-ante adequacy to some extent. I

address this point more explicitly below by cutting the sample by ex-post durations.
                                                   16

        The first two cells of the table repeat the lesson of Table 1: the wealth holdings of the typical

unemployed person are sufficient to replace roughly one-half of lost after-tax earnings during the

unemployment spell. One third of the sample can replace less than 10% of the loss, and about 40%

of the sample can replace the entire loss.

        The next two columns show how this answer changes when we account in two different ways

for the role of UI. Using UI eligibility, wealth holdings appear much more adequate; wealth exceeds

the expected loss for the median person in the sample. Using UI receipt, the results are between the

first two columns, with gross assets sufficient to replace roughly three-quarters of lost income. But

the distribution across adequacy categories is fairly similar regardless of the denominator used, with

between one-half and 60% of the sample having wealth lower than their expected income loss from

unemployment.

        Subtracting off unsecured debt makes wealth holdings appear much less adequate, as in Table

1. According to the second panel, 60% of the sample has net financial assets that are lower than 10%

of the expected income loss from unemployment. Only 25-30% of the sample has net financial assets

which exceed the expected income loss. And net worth is once again quite large relative to the

expected income loss, with only 25% of the sample have net worth that is less than their expected loss

from the unemployment spell.

        To summarize, the data present a mixed picture of wealth adequacy. The typical worker has

gross financial assets that can replace 73% of their realized income loss from unemployment. But

almost one-third of workers can’t even replace 10% of their income loss, and if debt is subtracted off

from financial assets this figure rises to three-fifths of workers unable to replace 10% of their income

loss. On the other hand, if all assets, and not just financial assets, are included, three-quarters of
                                                    17

workers can replace all of their income loss from unemployment.



Heterogeneity by Demographics and Spell Type

        The results thus far have not distinguished at all the different types of persons becoming

unemployed. But there are a number of dimensions along which adequacy might vary. Several of

these are explored in Table 4. Each row in this table presents the analysis for a separate group.

There are columns for: the median wealth holdings in dollars; the median ratio of wealth to expected

income loss, where expected loss is defined using the UI receipt concept; and the distribution of

wealth/expected loss.

        The first four rows distinguish the sample by sex and then by marital status. On average, the

wealth holdings of men who become unemployed are slightly higher than are those of women, but

relative to earnings they are somewhat lower for men. Wealth holdings are even lower for married

men. This is consistent with the notion that married men have another form of insurance on which

they can rely if they lose their jobs: their wife's labor supply (Cullen and Gruber, forthcoming). This

pattern is not apparent for women, which likely reflects that roughly 90% of their husbands are

working in any case so that there is little scope for a reverse "added worker effect". Nevertheless,

across all of the first four rows there is little difference in terms of the distribution of wealth holdings

relative to expected loss.

        Splitting the sample of men by age, there is much more adequate savings for older men. This

likely reflects life cycle savings which also provides more of a buffer for older workers losing their

jobs. The most dramatic difference arises when the sample is split by race. Non-whites have very

inadequate savings relative to whites; almost half of non-whites have gross financial assets that are
                                                  18

less than 10% of the expected income loss, and only 28% have gross assets that are more than the

expected loss. This finding suggests important racial heterogeneity in adequacy.

       The final row redoes the analysis dividing the sample into those who are on temporary layoff

and those who are without a job. The findings here are striking: savings is much more adequate for

those on temporary layoff. This is true both because absolute wealth holdings are higher for

temporary layoffs, and because spells are much shorter. This higher wealth adequacy for temporary

layoffs is consistent with the notion that temporary layoff is an expected event for which workers can

prepare by increasing savings, as reflected in the smaller consumption smoothing role of UI for

temporary layoffs (Gruber, 1997).



Heterogeneity by Spell Duration

       The last result in Table 4 suggests the value of exploring further the distribution of wealth

adequacy by spell duration. I do so in Table 5, for five groups: those with spells of one month or less;

those with spells of 2-3 months; those with spells of 4-6 months; those with spells of 7-12 months;

and those with spells of more than one year. I once again show the median dollars of gross financial

assets, the median relative to income loss, and the distribution of wealth/income loss. As a basis of

comparison, I also show in the final columns the median wealth and wealth/income loss for labor

force leavers. Income loss for this group is defined analogously to the unemployed.

       The results in Table 5 are striking. For the unemployed, ex-ante absolute wealth holdings

actually fall with realized unemployment duration, so that adequacy drops very rapidly with duration.

For the shortest duration group, wealth is much more than adequate to finance the spell at the

median, and 2/3 of the group has wealth that is larger than the expected income loss. But for the
                                                    19

longest duration group, wealth only finances 7% of the expected income loss at the median, and over

one-half of the group has wealth that is less than 10% of the expected loss.14 Thus, there is a clear

negative relationship here between duration and adequacy. Along with the results for temporary

layoffs, this has important implications for the design of UI benefit payout streams, which I discuss

further in the conclusion.

         This finding stands in contrast to the results for labor force leavers. For that group, wealth

is roughly constant across the distribution of durations. The ratio of wealth to income loss does fall

for this group as well, but not nearly as precipitously. 15



                      Part IV: Wealth Use During the Unemployment Spell

         The results thus far have explored the adequacy of savings relative to income risk from

unemployment. But the underlying presumption in this discussion is that individuals will use their

savings to finance consumption during unemployment. This pattern of disavings would be consistent

with any precautionary savings model. But there is much about individual savings behavior that is

not well understood by economists, particularly with reference to the lower parts of the income



    14
       Note that this also suggests that there is unlikely to be an important effect of ex ante wealth on
durations; while the negative correlation does not prove that there is no wealth effect, it certainly shows
that it is not very large relative to other factors determining durations.
   15
     One possible explanation for this finding is a correlation between unemployment durations and
the length of previous employment spells. Individuals who have longer unemployment spells may be
the ones with the weakest attachment to the labor force, and may have had another recent spell of
unemployment, so that they had drawn down their wealth before the most recent spell began. In fact,
however, there is not a strong relationship between previous employment duration and wealth
adequacy. If anything, adequacy is lower for those with longer previous employment durations;
despite the fact that wealth holdings are higher, previous wages are higher as well, so more wealth
is needed to replace lost earnings.
                                                     20

distribution. If savings is serving some purpose other than as a precautionary buffer, then individuals

may be reluctant to access it during their unemployment spells. In that case, it is inappropriate to

interpret the earlier results as suggesting that a large fraction of workers, particularly in some

subgroups such as those with short unemployment durations, can easily maintain their consumption

during unemployment spells.

        In order to investigate this issue, I turn to a different type of analysis: an estimation of the

impact of UI generosity on wealth utilization during spells. If individuals are saving for precautionary

purposes, then as UI generosity rises, there will be less drawdown of own wealth to finance

unemployment spells. On the other hand, if individuals are reluctant to use their existing wealth

stocks to finance consumption during unemployment, then there will be no relationship between UI

generosity and wealth changes.

        To assess this issue, I estimate regression models of the form:

(2) Älog(Wi) = á + â 1UIRRi + â 2Xi + â 3ä j + â 4ôt + åi

where Wi is individual i's wealth holdings
      UIRR is the potential UI replacement rate
      X is a vector of individual characteristics
      ä j is a full set of state dummies
      ôt is a full set of panel dummies

        In this model, the change in log wealth is regressed on the replacement rate and a set of

controls for individual characteristics, state dummies, and time (panel dummies). If more generous

UI causes individuals to use their wealth less during unemployment spells, then the coefficient â 1 will

be positive. That is, a higher replacement ratio leads to a smaller drawdown of wealth from

unemployment, so that relative to other unemployed workers there is a positive change in wealth for

the high replacement rate worker.
                                                      21

        I use the change in log wealth since the distribution of wealth is highly skewed. The

disadvantage of this approach is that there is a non-trivial share of the sample with zero wealth

holdings; roughly 17% of the sample in each period has zero gross financial wealth, and a total of

30% of the sample has zero wealth in one of the two periods. If there is a correlation between UI

and having zero wealth holdings in either period, this will lead to a sample selection bias to the

estimates. In order to address this problem, I estimate both the model above, and a "heckit" sample

selection correction model which uses the effect of UI on having zero wealth to correct for any

selection bias to the estimates.16 For this reason as well, I only estimate models for gross financial

wealth, since there are relatively few non-positive values; this selection is much more of a problem

for net financial wealth. Moreover, the sample of changes for both net financial and net total wealth

is much smaller, due to the fact that data is available in only 1984-1986.

        The most important regressors in X are a trilinear spline in base period wage, high quarter

wage, and 1/weekly wage. These three variables jointly determine eligibility and benefits entitlement

for UI, and they may be independently correlated with wealth accumulation decisions. Moreover,

they determine benefits in a joint fashion, for example because the replacement rate (which is a ratio

of a function of the high quarter wage to the weekly wage) only enters for those determined to be

eligible (which is a function of base period wage and the distribution of earnings inside and outside

the high quarter). To form the trilinear spline, I choose as knot points the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and

90th percentiles of the wage distribution of searchers. The trilinear spline then controls for each

segment of the spline for each of the three variables, as well as interactions of these segments across


   16
     Since I do not have any excluded instruments which affect having zero wealth holdings but not the
level of wealth holdings, this selection correction is identified solely from the assumption of joint normality
between the error terms in the selection and Älog wealth equations.
                                                   22

variables. The other controls in X include age and its square, sex, marital status, race, and education.

        The results of this regression analysis are presented in Table 6. The first panel shows the

results for the unemployed. The first column presents the regression for change in log wealth with

no correction for sample selection. In the final row of that column I show the coefficient on the

replacement rate from a probit regression of the sample selection dummy (which is one if there is zero

wealth in either period and 0 otherwise) on the right hand side variables in equation (2). In the

second column, I then include the sample selection correction; the coefficient on the included mills

ratio is shown at the bottom of the second column.

        The results in these first two columns are supportive of a role for UI in affecting the use of

wealth during unemployment spells. In both columns, the coefficient on the replacement rate is

positive and significant, indicating that individuals draw their wealth down less rapidly as UI benefits

are more generous. This is consistent with the evidence in Engen and Gruber (1996) that wealth is

accumulated by employed persons differentially in response to UI generosity.             The coefficient

in the first column indicates that for every 10 percentage point rise in the replacement rate, the change

in wealth holdings during an unemployment spell is 7.9% higher. That is, at the sample average

replacement rate of roughly 45 percentage points, wealth holdings rise by 36% during unemployment

spells relative to how much they would fall if there were no UI. In other words, UI is playing a

significant role in reducing the drawdown of wealth during unemployment spells.17

        The final row of the first column shows that, in fact, there is a significant relationship between

being in the sample (having non-zero wealth in both periods) and the potential UI replacement rate.



   17
     Note that I do not incorporate actual unemployment durations into the regression model. This is
because durations are endogenous to both wealth holdings and to UI.
                                                  23

This suggests the potential for sample selection bias. The second column tries to account for this bias

by incorporating a sample selection correction (the mills ratio). This raises somewhat the coefficient

on the replacement rate.

       The remaining columns of Table 6 assess the robustness of this conclusion by rerunning these

regressions for the control samples, labor force leavers and the employed. If there is a causal

relationship between UI and wealth changes, there should be no effect on these groups, who cannot

avail themselves of UI benefits. However, if the results are driven by some spurious correlation

between the construction of potential UI benefits and wealth changes, then I may find a similarly

positive relationship for these samples.

       In fact, there is no evidence of a sizeable positive effect of UI on wealth changes for either

sample, either with or without selection corrections. In fact, the results for labor force leavers are

negative, and the estimates for the employed are small and insignificant. Thus, the conclusions for

the unemployed do not appear to be driven by some omitted factor.



                              Part V: Conclusions and Implications

       The adequacy of UI benefits is a key consideration for reform of the UI system, and that

adequacy will be directly tied to the ability of the unemployed to insure their spells through drawing

down their own wealth. This paper has considered both the ex-ante adequacy of wealth holdings of

the unemployed, and how those wealth holdings are used during unemployment spells. I find that

there is substantial heterogeneity in the extent of ex-ante wealth holdings among the unemployed.

For the median worker becoming unemployed, ex ante gross financial asset holdings are sufficient to

replace 5.4 weeks of earnings, and roughly three-quarters of their realized income loss from
                                                 24

unemployment spells. But older and white workers have wealth holdings which are roughly equal

to their income loss during unemployment spells, and those on temporary layoff have ex-ante wealth

holdings which substantially exceed their ex-post income loss. And ex-ante wealth holdings decline

precipitously with realized unemployment durations, both absolutely and (especially) relative to ex-

post income loss.

       I also find strong evidence that individuals who are eligible for more generous UI draw down

their wealth more slowly during unemployment spells. This demonstrates that wealth is used as a

consumption smoothing device alongside UI to cope with the income loss from unemployment.

       These findings have at least two important implications for UI policy. First, benefits are much

more “adequate” than would be assumed simply by looking at replacement rates. Many unemployed

workers have enough assets to supplement their UI benefits in smoothing consumption over the

unemployment spell, and they appear to appropriately use their assets in combination with UI for

consumption smoothing purposes. This is consistent with the finding of Gruber (1997) that only a

minority of UI income is translated to additional consumption during unemployment spells.

       Second, there are important sources of diversity in ex-ante wealth adequacy which can be

useful in more appropriately targeting UI benefits. Most importantly, wealth is more than adequate

to replace lost income for those on short spells or temporary layoffs, and much less adequate for

those on long spells. Following the logic of Shavell and Weiss’ (1979) model of the optimal time

pattern of UI benefits, this provides an argument for either increasing UI benefits over time, or for

a non-trivial waiting period before UI benefits begin, with the savings to the UI system passed on to

those with longer spells. Alternatively, UI benefits could be limited for those on temporary layoff,

who have much more adequate savings than do those on permanent layoff (who have longer spells
                                                   25

on average).

        There is also much less adequate wealth holdings for important subgroups of the population

such as minorities. While it is difficult to conceive of a racial or age-targeted UI system, these results

do raise the larger issue of further means- or asset-testing UI benefits. Asset testing would most

directly address the issues raised in this paper, but could have detrimental impacts on asset

accumulation; as Powers (1996) and Gruber and Yelowitz (forthcoming) show, savings is very

responsive to asset testing through social insurance programs. The administrative issues associated

with asset testing are also somewhat daunting. Further income testing could indirectly address these

issues, as asset holdings are strongly correlated with income, and the UI system has precise measures

of ex-ante income.

        More radically, the basic structure of the UI system could be altered to be one that relies on

consumption loans, rather than benefit payments. In such a system, with a sufficiently high interest

rate for loan repayment, individuals would be encouraged to rely on their own savings to support

their consumption during unemployment spells, before turning to the public UI system. This would

allow the system to implicitly differentiate between those with and without access to assets to finance

their consumption. Of course, such an alternative raises additional difficult questions, such as where

to set the interest rate and how to deal with bankruptcies. Facts such as those presented above can

provide a useful input into further thinking about this broader set of policy issues.
                                               26

                                           References

Baily, Martin Neil (1978). “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Public
        Economics, 10, 379-402.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card (1991). "Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment:
       Is There an Explanation?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 1157-1190.

Browning, Martin, and Thomas Crossley (1996). "Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels and
      Consumption Changes". Mimeo, McMaster University.

Cullen, Julie Berry, and Jonathan Gruber (forthcoming). "Spousal Labor Supply as Insurance: Does
        Unemployment Insurance Crowd out the Added Worker Effect?,” Journal of Labor
        Economics, forthcoming.

Curtin, Richard T., F. Thomas Juster, and James N. Morgan, "Survey Estimates of Wealth: An
        Assessment of Quality," in Robert E. Lipsey and Helen S. Tice, eds., The Measurement of
        Saving, Investment, and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Engen, Eric, and Jonathan Gruber (forthcoming). "Unemployment Insurance and Precautionary
       Savings,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Gruber, Jonathan (1997). "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,"
       American Economic Review, 87, 192-205.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Aaron Yelowitz (forthcoming). "Public Health Insurance and Private
       Savings,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Daniel Slesnick (1996). "Unemployment Insurance and Household
     Welfare: Microeconomic Evidence 1980-1993," Advisory Council on Unemployment
     Compensation: Background Papers, Vol. III. Washington, D.C.: ACUC.

Hausman, Jerry (1984). "Tax Policy and Unemployment Effects on Labor Policy," in Removing
      Obstacles to Economic Growth, Michael and Susan Wachter, eds. Philadelphia: Unversity
      of Pennsylvania Press.

Hoynes, Hilary, Michael Hurd and Harish Chand, "Imputed Wealth, Subjective Survival Probabilities,
      and Social Security Wealth," Mimeo, NBER, May 1995.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, "Precautionary Saving and Social
      Insurance," Journal of Political Economy 103 (April 1995): 360-399.

O'Leary, Christopher (1996). "The Adequacy of Unemployment Insurance Benefits," Advisory
                                            27

       Council on Unemployment Compensation: Background Papers, Vol. III. Washington, D.C.:
       ACUC.

Powers, Elizabeth (1996). "Does Means-Testing Welfare Discourage Saving? Evidence from the
      National Longitudinal Survey of Women." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Shavell, Steven, and Weiss, Laurence. (1979) "The Optimal Payment of Unemployment Insurance
       Benefits Over Time". Journal of Political Economy, 87, 1347-1361.

Topel, Robert (1983). "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance", American Economic Review, 73,
       541-559.

Woodbury, Stephen, and and Robert Spiegelman (1987). "Bonuses to Workers and Employers to
     Reduce Unemployment: Randomized Trials in Illinois," American Economic Review, 77, 513-
     530.
                      Table 1: Ex-Ante Wealth Holdings of the Unemployed

                          Gross Financial            Net Financial                Net Total
                                                Levels of Wealth ($1994)
     10th pctile                  0                      -7086                       -413

     25th pctile                 66                      -2098                       2066

     50th pctile                1171                       0                        21865

     75th pctile                7052                     4352                       83,102

     90th pctile               28,235                   24,510                     175,526


                                                   Relative to Earnings
     10th pctile                0.00                     0.00                        0.00

     25th pctile                0.34                     0.00                        10.36

     50th pctile                5.35                     0.00                        96.18

     75th pctile               33.73                     18.56                      404.23

     90th pctile               159.58                   129.10                     1125.64

   Number of Obs               15070                     12679                      12679


Notes: Data tabulated from SIPP. The top panel presents the distribution of real (1994$) wealth
holdings, and the bottom half normalizes holdings by after-tax weekly earnings in high or last quarter.
                            Table 2: Wealth Holdings of Other Groups

                                       Labor Force Leavers
                           Gross Financial            Net Financial                 Net Total
                         Dollars     Relative      Dollars     Relative     Dollars       Relative
                         $1994       to Earn       $1994       to Earn      $1994         to Earn
     10th pctile            0            0         -7472          0             0               0

     25th pctile           404         1.98        -1868          0          6421          32.7

     50th pctile          2952        15.72         513          2.53       49,022         230.4

     75th pctile         15,012       92.82        11,745       64.69       132,009        838.4

     90th pctile          54,289      423.3        51,087       357.4       257,636         2533

   Number of Obs         21,660       21,660       17,964      17,964       17,964        17,964
                                               Employed
                           Gross Financial            Net Financial                 Net Total
                         Dollars     Relative      Dollars     Relative     Dollars       Relative
                         $1994       to Earn       $1994       to Earn      $1994         to Earn
     10th pctile           106          0.3        -6816           0          947           3.05

     25th pctile           859         2.39        -1392           0        12,128          32.5

     50th pctile          4173         10.24        1584         4.01       53,605         122.5

     75th pctile         17006         38.76       13,763       31.26       130,984        297.3

     90th pctile         53,342        118.6       49,859      108.12       247,585        612.3

   Number of Obs        22,112        15,315       19,711       12,432       19,711      19,711
Notes: First column of each pair is real wealth holdings; second is wealth relative to after-tax last
quarter wage. Top half of table is for labor force leavers; bottom half for the employed.
                                   Table 3: Wealth Holdings of Unemployed Relative to Income Loss

                             Gross Financial Assets                   Net Financial Assets                        Net Worth
                          Earn        UI           UI          Earn          UI            UI           Earn         UI           UI
                                      Elig       Receipt                     Elig        Receipt                     Elig       Receipt
      Median              0.56        1.19         0.73        0.00         0.00             0.00       8.73        18.22        11.65

    <10% of loss          0.33        0.28         0.30        0.57         0.58             0.57       0.17         0.16         0.16

    <25% of loss          0.41        0.34         0.38        0.61         0.62             0.60       0.19         0.18         0.18

    <50% of loss          0.49        0.41         0.45        0.65         0.66             0.64       0.22         0.21         0.21

   <100% of loss          0.59        0.48         0.54        0.70         0.71             0.68       0.26         0.25         0.25


Notes: First row shows median values for ratio of wealth to income loss; remaining rows present distribution of wealth/income loss. Income
loss is defined in three ways: ignoring UI income; accounting for UI benefits for which workers is eligible; and accounting for UI benefits
receipt.
                Table 4: Gross Financial Wealth Holdings Relative to Income Loss
                         By Subgroup - Income Loss includes UI Receipt

                        Median      Relative    <10% of      <25%        <50%         <100%
                        Dollars        to         loss       of loss     of loss      of loss
                                    Income
                                     Loss
        Men              1206        0.67         0.31        0.39        0.46         0.55

      Women              1128        0.82         0.29        0.37        0.44         0.52

    Married Men          1048        0.54         0.33        0.41        0.48         0.58

  Married Women          1195        0.82         0.28        0.36        0.43         0.52

     Men < 45             972        0.58         0.33        0.40        0.47         0.56

     Men >= 45           2868        1.15         0.24        0.32        0.39         0.48

       Whites            1470        0.94         0.27        0.34        0.42         0.50

    Non-Whites            269        0.10         0.49        0.57        0.64         0.72

  Job Separations        1088        0.58         0.32        0.40        0.48         0.56

   Temp Layoffs          1494        1.80         0.23        0.29        0.34         0.42


Notes: Data for gross financial wealth holdings of different subgroups. First column shows median
of absolute wealth; second shows median of wealth to income loss, including UI receipt; remaining
columns show distribution of wealth/loss.
                        Table 5: Gross Financial Wealth Holdings Relative to Income Loss By Duration of Spell

                                                              Unemployed                                             Labor Force
                                                                                                                       Leavers
                              Median      Relative to    <10% of        <25%          <50%         <100%        Median       Median
                              Dollars      Income          loss         of loss       of loss      of loss      Dollars       rel to
                                            Loss                                                                             last qtr
        <=1 month               1320          3.74          0.19          0.23         0.26          0.33        2505          7.81

        2-3 months              1283          0.92          0.27          0.34         0.41          0.51        3281          2.09

        4-6 months              1173          0.39          0.34          0.44         0.53          0.63        3208          1.07

       7-12 months               963          0.18          0.43          0.54         0.63          0.72        3665          0.62

       > 12 months               676          0.07          0.54         0.65          0.73          0.80        2665          0.30


Notes: Data for gross financial wealth holdings across the distribution of unemployment durations. The first six columns present data for
the unemployed: first column shows median of absolute wealth; second shows median of wealth to income loss, including UI receipt; and
the next four columns show distribution of wealth/loss. The final two colunns repeat the first two columns for the sample of labor force
leavers.
                                   Table 6: Regression Results

                            Unemployed             Labor Force Leavers            Employed
 Replacement Rate        0.785         1.284       -0.519        -0.517       0.183       0.109
                        (0.330)       (0.474)      (0.231)       (0.258)     (0.201)     (0.224)
        Age              0.042         0.094        0.003         0.004       0.008      -0.003
                        (0.013)       (0.038)      (0.009)       (0.022)     (0.008)     (0.018)
 Age Squared/100        -0.052        -0.122       -0.001        -0.003      -0.007       0.006
                        (0.017)       (0.051)      (0.011)       (0.032)     (0.010)     (0.021)
      Married            0.093        -0.039        0.050         0.046       0.084       0.172
                        (0.051)       (0.103)      (0.039)       (0.105)     (0.028)     (0.131)
       White             0.034        -0.351       -0.018        -0.031       0.107       0.187
                        (0.070)       (0.271)      (0.052)       (0.273)     (0.037)     (0.264)
        Sex             -0.086        -0.226        0.066         0.063      -0.008       0.081
                        (0.046)       (0.106)      (0.035)       (0.073)     (0.025)     (0.134)
   Less than HS          0.038         0.767       -0.029        -0.003       0.061      -0.209
    Education           (0.078)       (0.502)      (0.056)       (0.525)     (0.047)     (0.396)
   HS Graduate           0.004         0.450       -0.061        -0.045       0.021      -0.121
      Only              (0.065)       (0.311)      (0.044)       (0.331)     (0.030)     (0.208)
   Some College          0.164         0.315       -0.061        -0.055       0.011      -0.040
                        (0.067)       (0.122)      (0.044)       (0.146)     (0.030)     (0.078)
    Mills Ratio                        1.055                      0.031                  -0.388
                                      (0.718)                    (0.628)                 (0.564)
  Number of Obs          9048          9048         14244        14244       20641        20641

  Selection Probit       0.614                      0.235                     0.201
    Coefficient         (0.209)                    (0.182)                   (0.218)
  Number of Obs          12411                      17859                    22884

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is change in log real wealth. First set of
columns shows results for unemployed; second set for labor force leavers; and third set for the
employed. First column in each set presents OLS regression results; at bottom of these columns are
coefficients on replacement rate from a selection probit for having zero wealth in either period.
Second column in each set presents selection-corrected regressions.
