                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     CAUSES OF THE LONG
                                STAGNATION OF JAPAN DURING
                                THE 1990S: FINANCIAL OR REAL?

                                            Taizo Motonishi
                                           Hiroshi Yoshikawa

                                          Working Paper 7351
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7351


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1999




This paper was presented at the NBER Tokyo Conference on Japan in October, 1998. The authors benefited
from many comments made by participants of the Conference, in particular, Professors Paul Beaudry, Fumio
Hayashi and Anil Kashyap. We also thank Professor Takeo Hoshi for his helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Taizo Motonishi and Hiroshi Yoshikawa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan
during the 1990’s: Financial or Real?
Taizo Motonishi and Hiroshi Yoshikawa
NBER Working Paper No. 7351
September 1999
JEL No: E22, E30, G21, N15
                                           ABSTRACT

       Corporate investment is the most important factor to explain the long stagnation of Japan
during the 1990’s. Using the Bank of Japan diffusion indices of ‘real profitability’ and ‘banks’
willingness to lend’, we estimate investment functions for four groups of firms: large/small and
manufacturing/non-manufacturing. Our results suggest that for large firms, financing constraints are
not significant whereas the converse is true for small firms. A fall of investment during 1992-94 is
largely explained by real factors. However, the credit crunch occurred beginning 1997 and it lowered
the growth rate of GDP by 1.6%.


Taizo Motonishi                                             Hiroshi Yoshikawa
Faculty of Economics                                 Faculty of Economics
Nagasaki University                                         University of Tokyo
4-2-1 Katafuchi                                             7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Nagasaki, 850-8506 Japan                                    Tokyo, 113-0033 Japan
moto@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp                                   yoshikawa@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
February 1991.         At first, the recession appeared as a normal
adjustment after a long boom, but as it turned out, it was the beginning
of the stagnated decade. The average growth rate during 1992-98 is
merely 1%. During the same period, the U.S. enjoyed the steady 3%
growth. The reversal of growth rate between Japan and the U.S. for
such a long period is a new phenomenon.
        What are the causes of the long stagnation of Japan during the
1990’s? Since the bubbles burst, economists have focused on the
financial problems. A fall in asset prices allegedly had the negative
wealth effect on household consumption. Through deterioration of
collateral, it also hurt investment of small firms. And banks suffering
from bad loans became reluctant to make new loans (kashi-shiburi), and
further depressed investment. The views have been expressed many
times, but not necessarily with substantial evidences. This paper
attempts to quantitatively assess the effects of credit crunches or bank’s
kashi-shiburi on investment.
        We begin by providing an overview of the Japanese economy in
the next section.         We can easily find that an extremely poor
performance of corporate investment is the most important factor to
explain the long stagnation of the Japanese economy during the 90’s.
An obvious question is then why investment so stagnated. A popular
answer is, of course, a credit crunch caused by bad loans banks hold.
There is a good consensus that the effect of credit crunch is much more
serious on investment of small firms than that of large firms because
large firms have better access to capital markets.             Given this
observation, we estimate investment functions for large and small firms
in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors.                   The
explanatory variables are the Bank of Japan Diffusion Indices (DI’s) of
‘real profitability’ and ‘banks’ willingness to lend.’ Taking the latter as
an indicator of possible financing constraints, we find that the financing
constraints do significantly affect investment of small firms, but not
that of large firms. This finding is consistent with the results other
researchers have obtained.
        On the whole, the effects of the real factor on investment are
much more significant than those of the financial factor. In particular,
a fall of investment during 1992-94 was basically caused by worsening
real profitability; during the same period, financial factor was
supportive. However, beginning 1997 amid recession, the credit crunch
finally occurred. Based on our investment equations, we make an
estimate of the effects of the credit crunch on investment as a whole,
and also on GDP. The final section provides some concluding remarks.

2. The Japanese Economy during the 1990’s: An Overview
        A sensible way to get an overview of the Japanese economy
during the 1990’s is to look at the demand-decomposition of the growth
rate of real GDP. Table 1 presents contribution of demand component


                                    1
such as consumption, investment, and exports to growth rate of GDP.
                                      ∆X   X 
Here, the contribution of X means         with Y as real GDP.
                                      X  Y 
        The table shows that investment is the major factor to account
for the 1991-94 recession, the 1995-96 recovery, and also the most
recent recession beginning mid 1997. When the growth rate fell from
3.8% to 0.3% during 1991-93, the contribution of investment fell from
1.2% to –1.9% accounting for nearly 90% of a fall in the growth rate.
Similarly, when growth accelerated from 0.3% to 5.1% during 1993-96,
the contribution of investment rose from –1.9% to 1.8%, again
accounting for 80% of the recovery. To the negative growth in 1998,
declines in consumption, investment, public expenditures, and exports
all contributed. However, Table 1 clearly shows that investment is by
far the most significant factor to cause the most recent recession.
        Before we turn to investment, we inquire into the following
questions; By historical standard, how anomalous a decline or fall in
each demand component had been during the 1990’s. To study this
problem, we first calculate the average, µand the standard deviation, σ
of the growth contribution of each demand component for 1971-90
(quarterly), and then how many σ ’s the growth rate deviates from µ for
1992. I–98. II. The results are shown in Table 2. By the usual
standard, the figures close to two in absolute value would indicate
anomaly. The table shows that a fall in investment during the 1992-94
recession was indeed anomalous. So is a decline in investment in 1998.
        We notice that a fall in consumption beginning the second
quarter of 97 to the present is also anomalous by historical standard.
But perhaps more important, we must note persistence in the minus
sign for consumption throughout the 1990’s. Not the theme of the
present paper, but the long stagnation of consumption is a significant
factor to have depressed the Japanese economy during the 1990’s.
Many economists believe that the stagnation of consumption has been
in turn caused by job insecurity and uncertain future of the public
pension system: See Nakayama (1999).
        By and large, corporate investment is the key factor to
understand the long stagnation of the Japanese economy during the
1990’s although consumption, and a major mistake in fiscal policy also
made significant contribution. The most popular explanation of weak
investment is credit crunch; Bad loan makes banks unwilling to lend,
and it hurts investment. In what follows, we focus on investment, and
attempt to estimate the effects of financial distress on investment.

3. Financing Constraints and Investment
       Given the popularity of credit crunch as a possible explanation
of weak investment, it is natural to turn to financing constraints. Many
economists take high correlation between sales/profits/cash flows and



                                   2
investment as an evidence for the significance of financing constraints
facing firms. Models of asymmetric information and incentive problems
in capital markets imply that the internal resources of a firm influence
the shadow cost of external funds and, therefore, that an increase in
sales or profits raises investment, holding constant underlying real
investment opportunities. In this ‘financing constraints’ view, cash
flows and profits are taken as proxies for changes in net worth or
internal funds rather than future profit opportunities. We would expect
that financing constraints should be most important for firms likely to
face information related capital market imperfections, say small firms
as against large firms.
        Most empirical works separate the samples of firms likely to face
financing constraints from these of firms unlikely to face such
constraints in advance. Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), for
example, group firms according to whether they pay substantial
dividends or not; High-payout firms are taken as unlikely to face
financing constraints. Assuming that (1) real profitable investment
opportunities can be measured by q, and that (2) cash flow is a
reasonable, if imperfect, proxy for the change in net worth, they
estimate investment function for each group of firms. Absent financing
constraints, the estimated coefficient for cash flow should be zero. They
find significantly larger estimated cash flow coefficients for the low-
dividend-payout firms than for the high dividend payout firms.
        Along similar lines, Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1991)
study financing constraints for Japanese firms. Instead of dividend
pay-out, they use membership in a large industrial group, or keiretsu as
a sorting device. Keiretsu firms are supposed to have access to external
financing through the group’s ‘main bank’. As a consequence, cash
flow should have a smaller effect on investment for keiretsu firms than
or non-keiretsu firms. They obtain the expected results.
        Oliner and Rudebusch (1996) similarly estimate investment
equations for small and large firms. Using the panel data taken from
the Financial Report for Manufacturing, Mining and Trade Corporations,
they find that a credit channel based on financing constraints does exist
for the transmission of monetary policy and that it operates through
small firms. For large firms, they find that there is no significant
linkage between cash flows and investment.
        The existence of financing constraints, however, is actually not
self-evident even for small firms. Figure 2, for example, shows the
reasons for cutting investment expenditures which small firms regard
as important. It shows that ‘real’ factors such as a decline in sales or
poor profit opportunities are       much more important than such
‘financial’ factors as ‘financing constraints’ or ‘a rise in the cost of
capital.’ The result shown in Figure 2 is only for 1995, but is typical.
        Similarly, the stability of the share of internal funds in the
finance of investment of small firms, as shown in Figure 3, is also a bit


                                   3
puzzling from the standpoint of the standard financing constraints
story. For example, the simple framework used by Hubbard (1998) to
explain financing constraints consists of demand and supply functions
of the external funds:

                      S = a + br + W ,                            (1)
                      D = c − dr + Π.                             (2)

Financing constraints mean that the supply of funds facing firm S
depends not only on the interest rate r but also on firm’s net worth W
which is often proxied by cash flows. The demand for funds D, on the
other hand, depends on r and investment opportunities Π .          The
equality of D and S determines the level of investment I, and the
amount of borrowed funds B is equal to the difference between I and
cash flows W. From (1) and (2), we obtain

              B      b( c − a )   1   b   Π 
               = a +                +       − 1 .          (3)
              W       b + d   W   b + d   W 

There is no good reason why B/W is so stable as shown in Figure 3. In
particular, when b is small (note that large b means no effective
financing constraints in the first place), B/W is roughly a/W, and,
therefore, we would expect that the share of internal funds rises when
cash flows increase, and vice versa . Figure 3, however, shows that the
share is actually very stable over business cycles. Note that the figure
embraces years in both expansion and recession.
        What about the case where there are no financing constraints,
and cash flows basically transmit prospects for future profits to firms?
In this case, the share of internal funds would become stable if the
elasticity of the desired investment with respect to cash flows, which are
highly correlated with profits, is close to one. And we would expect that
this elasticity is indeed close to one under the Cobb/Douglas
production function.
        Despite some criticisms such as Kaplan and Zingales (1997),
and some suggestive evidences we discussed above, the recent
researches in this area, by and large, point to the existence of financing
constraints for the investment decisions of some firms. However, to
show the importance of financing constraints for some firms is not
enough for our purpose to understand the credit crunch explanation of
weak investment in Japan during the 1990’s. We obviously need to
know the impact of credit crunch on aggregate investment fluctuations,
or for that matter, for aggregate (GDP) fluctuations.           Given the
popularity of the credit crunch view of the Japanese economy during
the 1990’s, it is extremely important to estimate the effects of financing
constraints on aggregate investment.
        Investment can decline either when economic conditions facing


                                         4
borrowing firm changed or bank’s lending attitude changed. The
standard investment equation with cash flows does not help when the
credit crunch is caused by a change in bank’s lending attitude
independent of the position of cash flows on the part of borrowing firm.
        The existing literature studies financing constraints mainly in
relation to monetary policy. Therefore, the action of the central bank is
often taken into account. For example, Oliner and Rudebusch (1996)
put a dummy variable that equals unity in the four quarters after a
monetary tightening and equals to zero otherwise in their investment
equation, and then find that investment of small firms is more closely
tied to cash flows during periods of monetary stringency. However, the
major problem surrounding the Japanese economy is, of course, not
tight monetary policy but rather a possible credit crunch caused by
banks. We are interested in the magnitude of credit crunch. As noted
above, a standard approach which uses cash flows as a regressor in
investment equation may show the existence of financing constraints,
but does not show us the magnitude of possible credit crunch. For this
reason, we use the Bank of Japan Diffusion Index of ‘banks’ lending
attitude’ as seen by borrowing firms rather than cash flows in our
investment function. We begin by describing our data.

4. Data Description
         Our data on investment and capital stock are from Hojin Kigyo
Tokei (Statistical Survey of Corporations) compiled by the Ministry of
Finance. Hojin Kigyo Tokei has quarterly data on gross investment and
capital stock for four classes of firms grouped by size of capital for both
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors.           This data covers,
however, only firms whose capital is greater than ten million yen. We
aggregate the bottom three size classes covering firms with capital up to
one billion yen to define the ‘small firm’ group. For the purpose of this
study, firms with capital greater than one billion yen are said to belong
to the ‘large firm’ group. We then divide the large and small firm groups
into manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, respectively. In
this way, we obtain four classes of the Japanese firms: small/large and
manufacturing/non-manufacturing.
         The explanatory variables used in our investment equations are
taken from the Bank of Japan Tankan. The BOJ Tankan (Short-term
Economic Survey of Corporations) is based on the quarterly survey
conducted by the Bank of Japan about the present and future business
conditions facing the Japanese firms. The survey started in 1957 and is
considered to be one of the most important information for the Bank of
Japan to conduct monetary policy.
         The “Judgement Survey” section of the Tankan which consists of
diffusion indices (DIs), contains the views of firms on the present and
future business conditions. In this survey, high rank executives of each
firm are asked to select one of the three answers, for example, “good”,


                                    5
“not so good”, or “bad”. They are asked to explicitly take into account
seasonality. The Tankan DI’s are, therefore, conceptually seasonally
adjusted. DI represents the percentage of “good” minus the percentage
of “bad” in total responses.
        As variables to capture the real and financial conditions facing
firms, we use the “Forecast on the Next Quarter’s Business Conditions”
DI and the “Lending Attitude of Financial Institutions” DI, respectively.
The former represents the “favorable” minus the “unfavorable”
percentage points of entrepreneurs’ forecasts of the next quarter’s
business conditions facing firms with particular emphasis on profits,
while the latter represents the “accommodative” minus the “severe”
percentage points about the present lending attitude of financial
institutions. For the sake of brevity, we call the former the “Real DI”
and the latter the “Financial DI”.
        The BOJ Tankan actually has the “Forecast on Capacity in the
Next Quarter” DI.       The firms are to answer either ‘excessive ’ of
‘insufficient.’ This DI is plainly more directly related to the desired
capital stock or investment than the “Forecast on the Next Quarter’s
Business Conditions DI.”           However, it is available only for
manufacturing firms. For this reason, we will use the “Forecast on the
Next Quarter’s Business Conditions” DI in what follows. The two DI’s
for large manufacturing firms have a significantly negative correlation,
namely –0.80, as we would expect.
        The BOJ Tankan has two parts, one the survey of ‘principal’
corporations and the other that of ‘all’ the firms. The former covers 385
manufacturing and 320 non-manufacturing major companies2. They
are basically non-financial corporations with capital greater than one
billion yen, and listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The latter survey
covers about 4000 manufacturing firms with more than fifty employees
and about 5000 non-manufacturing firms with more than twenty
employees. They are classified into three categories by the number of
employees. For the purpose of this paper we define the ‘principal’
enterprises of the BOJ Tankan as large firms, and ‘small’ enterprises as
small firms. 3 We then have the ‘Real’ and ‘Financial’ DI’s for four
groups of firms, namely large/small and manufacturing/non-
manufacturing firms.       They are the variable to be used in our
investment equation.
        Since the ‘Real DI’ and the ‘Financial DI’ are our principal
explanatory variables, it is important to check the properties of these
two DI’s in advance of the estimation of investment functions. In
particular, one might wonder if they might have considerable overlap.


2 1998. II survey.
3 ‘Small enterprises’ in the BOJ Tankan are manufacturing firms with
50-299 employees, wholesale firms with 20-99 employees, and retail
firms with 20-49 employees.


                                   6
Theoretically, they should be related to each other with possible lags in
the economy as a whole. For example, if investment of a firm was cut
due to the credit crunch, it would surely adversely affect demand for
products and thereby profitability of some firms in the economy. The
financial DI, therefore, is meant to capture the impact of specific
financial factor, namely banks’ lending attitude on borrowing firms.
Real profitability perceived by firms may be affected not only real factors
but also indirectly by financial factors in the economy. Still, the two
DI’s are conceptually different.
        We pointed out above that in the economy as a whole the ‘Real
DI’ and the ‘Financial DI’ were quite likely related to each other with
possible lags. We have four different groups of firms, however. For
each group, the relationship between the two DI’s is not so obvious. For
example, if investment of small firms in the non-manufacturing sector
was cut due to the credit crunch, it is unlikely that demand for
products in the same sector declines accordingly. The relationship
between the two DI’s would be much more indirect for each group of
firms than for the economy as a whole.
        Given the above consideration, we empirically explore the
relation between the Tankan Real DI and the Financial DI for four
groups of firms: large/small and manufacturing/non-manufacturing.
First is the Granger causality test. We regressed one of the two DI’s on
four lags of the other DI. Table 3 shows the p values under H0 that the
FDI does not Granger cause RDI and H0 the RDI does not Granger
cause FDI, respectively. The table shows that we cannot reject H0
under conventional significance levels, 5% or 10%. Second is the
variance decomposition based on trivariate VAR(4) (Table 4).            We
observe that fluctuations in each of the two DI’s are mostly explained by
its own innovations.
        Although we will use the “Forecast on the Next Quarter’s
Business Conditions” DI as an explanatory variable in our investment
function, some argue that the “Present Business Conditions” DI might
be a more appropriate variable to use in VAR. We ran VAR with the
“Present Business Conditions” DI rather than RDI, and obtained
basically the same results. On the whole, these results show that the
two DI’s contain reasonably independent information.
        Since diffusion indices are indirect measures, we also explore
the relation between RDI/FDI and more conventional variables.
Specifically we regressed RDI and FDI on changes in sales deflated by
capital stock in the previous period and cash flows, similarly deflated,
for four groups of firms. The results are shown in Table 5. On the
whole, RDI is more significantly related to changes in sales than cash
flows whereas the converse is true for cash flows. In sum, our
preliminary investigation suggests that RDI and FDI reasonably capture
the constraints as we presume.
        The Monthly Report of the Bank of Japan always carries tables


                                    7
and figures of Tankan DI’s, and refers to them in its analysis of the
Japanese economy. Analysts also regard the BOJ DI as one of the most
important indicators. However, there are actually few formal analyses
which use the Bank of Japan Tankan diffusion indices. Kanoh et. al.
(1991) is a notable exception. They assume different investment
behavior for firms which consider their capital stock (1) insufficient, (2)
appropriate, and (3) excessive, and using the Tankan “Forecast on
Capacity in the Next Quarter” DI, estimate aggregate investment
function. They make an interesting point that the standard assumption
of representative firm could be deceptive, and that heterogeneity of
firms is essential to understand aggregate investment.


5. Regression Results
5.1. The Basic Results
        In this section, we report the regression results.          Before
proceeding to our own investment equation, we experimented on
investment functions with standard variables. In the literature, Tobin’s
q, sales and profits are the popular variables to control underlying real
investment opportunities, and cash flows are assumed to capture
possible financing constraints in investment equation.
        It is well known that despite its popularity, q investment
function performs poorly: For a recent experiment on the Japanese
data, see Kiyotaki and West (1996). We note that q is actually not a
sufficient statistic for investment when (1) there is a gestation lag, and
(2) real profit opportunities and discount factors obey different
stochastic processes (see Ueda and Yoshikawa 1986). It is, therefore,
not surprising at all to find that q investment function performs poorly.
The standard procedure to control real investment opportunities by q is
also not so tenable as is commonly thought. For our four groups of
firms, stock price is not available any way.
        As a preliminary exercise, we estimated following investment
equations for each of the four groups of firms (1983.II-1998.II).

                         4                      4
               IK t =   ∑      α i IK t −i +   ∑ β ∆YKi   t− i   + γCFK t + δ Dt + u t   (4)
                        i =1                   i =1



and

                         4
               IK t = ∑ αi IK t − i + βRDI t + γCFK t + δDt + ut .                       (5)
                        i =1



Here IK t denotes gross investment in period t deflated by capital stock
at the end of period t-1. ∆YK and CFK are changes in sales and cash
flows similarly deflated. Dt are seasonal dummies. In (5), changes in


                                                          8
sales ∆YK is replaced by the Tankan ‘real’ diffusion index, RDI. Table 6
shows the results. In both (4) and (5), cash flows turn out to be very
significant for all four groups of firms.
        As we pointed it out in section 3, the significance of cash flows
might suggest the existence of financing constraints but does not
provide any information on credit crunch which is caused by a change
in bank’s lending attitude independent of the position of cash flows on
the part of borrowing firm. Therefore, we estimate investment function
using RDI and FDI, namely

                       4
               IK t = ∑ αi IK t − i + βRDI t + γFDI t + δDt + ut .            (6)
                      i =1



RDI is the “Forecast of Next Quarter’s Business Conditions DI” and FDI
is the “Lending Attitude of Financial Conditions DI”.
        As explained in the previous section, the BOJ Tankan DI’s are
defined as the difference between the percentage of firms in the
“favourable conditions” and that of firms in the “unfavourable
conditions.” Suppose that x is a variable which affects the firm’s
investment decisions such as investment opportunities and available
funds, and that x is distributed over firms with density function f ( x ) .
Normalize the critical value of x which divides the “favourable” and
“unfavourable” conditions as seen by firms to be zero. Then the Tankan
DI is
                      ∞               0                        ∞
               DI = ∫ f ( x) dx − ∫        f ( x ) dx = 2 ∫ f ( x ) dx − 1.   (7)
                      0               −∞                   0


       The i-th firm’s investment function is

                                     Ii
                                        = α + βxi .
                                     ki

α and β are assumed to be common for all the firms. The aggregate
investment equation is then

                                                 Ki  Ii 
                                           ∑  K   K 
                                     I
                                       =
                                     K       i             i

                                          K 
                                      = ∑  i  (α + βx i ).
                                        i  K 



And, therefore, the expected value of I/K is

                               I
                             E   = α + βx ,                                 (8)
                                K


                                                 9
where x is the expected value of x i . Expectation is taken with respect
to f ( x ) . In general, there is no simple relation between x and DI
defined by (7). If f ( x ) is an uniform distribution, we have a simple
correspondence.     Namely       if   f ( x ) = 1 / 2a• @
                                                        (a > 0 ) ,   then   DI = x / a .
Therefore, (8) becomes

                         I
                       E   = α + aβ DI .                                    (9)
                          K

On the premise that this approximation is all right, we estimate (6)
using RDI and FDI.
           Table 7 provides the OLS and IV estimates of the above
investment equation for each of our four groups of firms over the
sample period from 1983.II to 1998.II. Some economists believe that
financing constraints more significantly affect firm’s investment in
recessions than in booms. Given this observation, we also estimated our
investment equation for 1983.II-90.IV and 1991.I-98.II, separately. The
FDI turn out to be insignificant for three groups of firms, and have a
wrong sign for one group. This result is the same for two subsample
periods.
           An estimated coefficients on DIs indicates a percentage change
in I/K corresponding to one percent changes in DIs. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Since the lagged
dependent variables are on the right-hand side, the absence of serial
correlation is essential to obtain the consistent OLS estimates. To test
the absence of serial correlation, we regressed the residual et on et-1, et-2 ,
et-3 , et-4, and other regressors. We report the p values under H0 that the
coefficients on the lagged e t’s are zero, namely that there is no serial
correlation in (6).
           The error term in investment equation (6) is possibly correlated
with RDI and as a result the coefficient for RDI may be overestimated.
We also take into account a possibility that both DI’s may suffer from
measurement errors, and estimate (6) using lagged RDI’s as FDI’s
instruments. Table 7 also provides IV estimates. It turns out that the
OLS estimates and the IV estimates are reasonably similar to each
other.        For simplicity, we use the OLS estimates in subsequent
discussions. We call (1) the large manufacturing firms, (2) large non-
manufacturing firms, (3) small manufacturing firms, and (4) small non-
manufacturing firms as type I firms, type II firms, type III firms, and
type IV firms, respectively.
           For type I firms, RDI has the significantly positive effects on I/K,
while the coefficient of FDI is insignificant and also has wrong sign. The
result is basically the same for type II firms, but the coefficient of RDI is
smaller for type II firms than for type I firms. For type III firms, the
estimated coefficient for both RDI an FDI are significant and of correct


                                      10
sign. The estimated coefficient for RDI is larger than the corresponding
estimates for type I and type II firms. Also, for type III firms, the impact
of RDI is twice as large as that of FDI.
        Both RDI and FDI have significant effects on I/K for type IV
firms. The coefficient for RDI is smaller for type IV firms than that for
type III firms, however. In contrast, the coefficient of FDI is larger for
type IV firms than for type III firms. In other words, small non-
manufacturing firms are more strongly affected by financial factors than
by real factors whereas the other way round is true for small
manufacturing firms.
        To sum, the estimated coefficients of RDI are all positive and
highly significant. The coefficients are larger for small firms than for
large firms, and also they are larger for manufacturing firms than for
non-manufacturing firms. On the other hand, the coefficients of FDI are
insignificant and of wrong sign for large firms. However, they are
significant and of correct sign for small firms. These results are broadly
consistent with those of Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) and
Oliner and Rudebusch (1996). They use cash flows as the proxy for
financing constraints, however.
        We also obtain VAR(4) estimates for the three variables, FDI,
RDI, and I/K for each of our four groups of firms. Table 8 reports the
variance decompositions of I/K. For type I firms, FDI explains only 8%
of the fluctuations in I/K, while RDI explains about 79%. For type II
firms, the contributions of RDI and FDI are 40% and 19%, respectively.
Similarly, the corresponding figures are 38% and 43%, respectively for
type III firms. Finally, for type IV firms, RDI accounts for about 34% of
the variance of I/K, whereas the contribution of FDI is merely 51%. On
the whole, the relative contribution of financial factor is larger for small
firms than for large firms. It is the largest for small non-manufacturing
firms. These results are broadly consistent with our OLS estimates; The
Real DI is a more important determinant of investment for large firms
whereas the converse is true for small firms.

5.2 Machinery and Construction
        We have seen investment for four groups of firms thus far. It is
often pointed out that the pattern of fluctuations differs for machinery
and construction.      Specifically, during the 1990’s, construction
investment dropped more severely than machinery investment. In the
light of this argument, in what follows, we disaggregate investment into
machinery and investment, and study the differences in their
determinants.
        The Hojin Kigyo Tokei has data on ‘construction in process’,
which is approximately equal to construction investment. Using this
data, we can disaggregate investment into machinery investment and
construction investment. Construction shares about two-third of the
investment of large firms whereas it shares only about one-third of the


                                    11
investment of small firms.        Until the beginning of the 1990’s,
investment of large firms had lagged behind that of small firms over
business cycles in a quite regular manner. This ‘stylized fact’ may have
reflected the difference in the shares of machinery and construction of
investment in small and large firms.
        We estimate the machinery and construction equations for each
of our four groups of firms for the same sample period as in our basic
regressions, i.e., 1983.II to 1998.II. Table 9 shows the estimated
coefficients for machinery investment and for construction investment.
On the whole, the coefficients of the RDI and the FDI tend to be much
larger in the construction equations than in the corresponding
machinery equations.        The estimated coefficients of the FDI in
construction equations for small firms are more than 10 times as large
as the corresponding coefficients in machinery equations.            The
coefficients of the RDI in the construction equation is about 3 times as
large as those in machinery equations, with the exception of small non-
manufacturing firms. Construction investment is more sensitive to
changes in both real and financial factors than machinery investment.
        In both machinery and construction equations, FDI is significant
for small firms, but not for large firms. On the other hand, RDI is
significant and has correct sign, except for construction investment of
small firms.

6. Effects of Credit Crunch on Aggregate Investment and GDP
        Our OLS estimates imply that the effects of real and financial
factors on investment differ for our four groups of firms. In what
follows, by aggregating four investment equations, we estimate the
effects of real and financial factors on aggregate investment.
        First, given the estimated equation, we set the values of one of
the two DIs to be zero, and simulate the hypothetical movements of I/K
for each one of the four groups of firms to see the relative importance of
the ‘Real’ and ‘Financial’ DIs. In this way, we have the contribution of
RDI and FDI on I/K for each of the four groups of firms.
        Then we convert the time-series of I/K into the rate of change in
investment for each group of firm. Specifically, we use the following
relationship for this conversion.

               I t − I t −1 ( I / K ) t − ( I / K ) t −1  I − DP 
                           ≈                            +         + δ,   (10)
                   I t −1          ( I / K ) t −1         K  t− 1


where DP denotes depreciation. Under the assumption that δ is
constant, we can transform the time series of I/K into the time series of
the growth rate of investment for each of our four groups of firms. The
results are shown in Figures 4(a) – 4(d).
        Figure 4(a) shows the effects of real and financial factors on the


                                          12
growth of investment for large manufacturing (type I) firms. The effects
of financial factor are very small relative to that of real factors. The
effects of real factor range from –25% to 30%, while those of financial
factor are from –2% to 2%. The quantitatively same result is obtained
for large non-manufacturing (type II) firm, as shown in Figure 4(b).
However, the effects of real factor is much smaller (less than a half in
magnitude) for large non-manufacturing firms than for large
manufacturing firms. This is not surprising because the estimated
coefficient for RDI is almost twice as large for large manufacturing firms
as for large non-manufacturing firms (0.0169 versus 0.0095 in Table 7).
        The effects of real and financial factors for small firms are
presented in Figures 4(c) and 4(d). They are entirely different from
those for large firms shown in Figures 4(a) and 4(b). The financial
factor plays a much larger role for small firms than for large firms. In
particular, for small non-manufacturing firms (Type IV firms), the
effects of FDI often become larger in magnitude than those of RDI.
Again, this should not be surprising given the estimated coefficients for
RDI and FDI shown in Table 7.
         The financial factor sustains growth of investment of small firms
for most of our sample period except for 1997-98. For 1998, investment
of type IV firms is lowered by nearly 7% only by financial factors.
        Next, to see the effects on the macroeconomy as a whole, by way
of aggregation based on four equations, we estimate the effects of real
and financial factors on growth of the aggregate investment. The
shares of investment of type I-IV firms in 1990.I are 16%, 10%, 22%,
and 23%, respectively. We assume that firms that our data does not
cover are all “Small Non-manufacturing firms,” namely type IV. Many of
the firms that our data does not cover are, in fact, small retail stores;
The assumption we make is, therefore, reasonable.
        The result is shown in Figure 5. This figure clearly shows that
on the whole the effects of real factor dominate those of financial
factors. We observed in Table 2 unusually large declines in investment
during 1992-94 and 1998. Figure 5 shows that a significant fall of
investment during 1992-94 was basically caused by worsening real
factors rather than financial distress; The financial factor during this
period was basically supportive. This result is consistent with the
results obtained by Gibson (1995). He finds that although a firm’s
investment is sensitive to the financial health of its main bank, the
effect of the problems in the banking sector on aggregate investment
during 1991-92 is small.
        However, beginning 1997 the financial factor abruptly turned
from supportive to distressing factor. Since there was absolutely no
intention to tighten money on the part of the Bank of Japan during the
period, we must interpret this negative effect of the abrupt change in
the FDI as the credit crunch caused by actions taken by banks. We
note that historically the FDI basically reflects the stance of monetary


                                   13
policy, and that deterioration of the FDI amid easy money is
unprecedented. For 1998, the negative impacts of financial distress on
the aggregate investment growth are estimated to be at most 3.8%,
while those of real factors are 15.5%.
        To evaluate the effects of the credit crunch during 1997-98, we
simulate growth of investment under alternative financial conditions.
For this purpose, we take up the period of 1995.III-96.II as the
benchmark period; This is the period of recovery leading up to the 5%
growth for 1996. We calculate the average FDI for this benchmark
period, and then simulate growth of the aggregate investment for
1996.II-98.II under the hypothesis that the FDI had kept unchanged at
this 1995.III-96.II average level. Figure 6 shows the difference between
the estimated growth of aggregate investment based on actual RDI and
FDI, and the simulated growth based on the hypothetical values of FDI
as explained above.
        The figure shows that the annual growth rate of investment
would have risen by nearly 10% for 1998 if the credit crunch had not
occurred and FDI had kept unchanged at the 1995.III-96.II average
level. Given the fact that investment shares one sixth of real GDP, this
implies that the absence of credit crunch would have raised the growth
rate of GDP by 1.6%.

7. Concluding Remarks
        The most important factor to explain the long stagnation of the
Japanese economy during the 1990’s is extremely weak investment.
Many economists argue that weak investment is, in turn, explained by
credit crunch.
        To test this popular argument, we estimated investment
equations using the BOJ Diffusion Indices for ‘real’ and ‘financial
factors.’   Taking the financial DI as a variable to indicate the
significance of possible financing constraints, and also to measure the
seriousness of credit crunch facing borrowing firms, we found that
financing constraints existed for small firms, but not for large firms.
This result is consistent with those obtained in the standard literature.
        However, on the whole, the real DI (RDI) is a much more
important determinant of investment than the ‘banks’ lending attitude’
DI (FDI). In particular, a fall of investment during 1992-94 was
basically caused by worsening profit opportunities. FDI had been
supportive throughout the period up to 97.
        Many economists refer to bubbles and burst of stock /land
prices and tend to interpret them as a causal factor to explain
investment (See, for example, Fisher 1996). However, asset prices are
not exogenous variables. Expectations about future profitability and
growth had driven the large fluctuations in both investment and asset
prices. Our finding that RDI is a dominant factor to explain investment
is, therefore, not inconsistent with the fact that asset prices and


                                   14
investment moved in tandem.
        Beginning 1997, the FDI abruptly turned from supportive to
distressing factor. As we argued above, we cannot help but interpret it
as a credit crunch. Based on our estimated investment equations, we
assessed the magnitude of this credit crunch. Our estimate is that the
credit crunch lowers the growth rate of real GDP by 1.6 % for 1998. In
conclusion, the credit crunch does not really explain the long
stagnation of investment throughout the 1990’s, but it had the major
negative effect on aggregate investment during 1997-98. It is an
important remaining issue to explain exactly what are the real causes to
depress investment so long.




                                  15
References

Fazzari, S., Hubbard, G., and Petersen, B., (1988). Financing
      constraints and corporate investment, Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity , 141-195.
Fisher, J., (1996). Comments on Kiyotaki and West, in NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 1996 (B. Bernanke and J. Rotenberg ed.),
      pp.323-339, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gibson, M. S., (1995). Can bank health affect investment? Evidence
      from Japan, Journal of Business 68, 281-308.
Hoshi, T., Kashyap A., and Sharfstein D., (1991). Corporate structure,
      liquidity, and investment: evidence from Japanese industrial
      groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 33-60.
Hubbard, G., (1998). Capital-market imperfections and investment,
      Journal of Economic Literature 36, 193-225.
Kanoh, S. et. al., (1991). A reconsideration of aggregate investment
      function: heterogeneity of firms, (in Japanese), Ministry of Finance
      Financial Review 21, 115-130.
Kaplan S. and Zingales L., (1997). Do investment-cash flow sensitivities
      provide useful measures of financing constraints, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Kiyotaki, N. and West K., (1996). Business fixed investment and the
      recent business cycle in Japan, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      1996 (B. Bernanke and J. Rotenberg ed.), 277-323, MIT Press,
      Cambridge, MA.
Nakayama, S., (1999). Why is the household saving rate so high during
      the 1990’s?, (in Japanese), the Bank of Japan Monthly Review,
      April.
Oliner, S. and Rudebusch G., (1996). Is there a broad credit channel for
      monetary policy?, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
      Economic Review, 4-13.
Ueda, K. and Yoshikawa H., (1986). Financial volatility and the q theory
      of investment, Economica , 53,11-27.
Yoshikawa, H., (1993). Monetary policy and the real economy in Japan,
      in Japanese Monetary Policy (K. Singleton ed.), 121-159,
      University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Yoshikawa, H., (1995). “Macroeconomics and the Japanese economy”,
      Oxford University Press, Oxford.
</ref_section>




                                   16
</ref_section>
