NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE DYNAMICS UNDER TERM LIMITS
Jeff Grogger
Charles Michalopoulos
Working Paper 7353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7353

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999

The authors thank Dan Bloom, Janet Currie, V. Joseph Hotz, David Levine, Robert Moffitt, Seth Sanders,
and seminar participants at MDRC and UC Davis for helpful comments and discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, MDRC or the State of Florida.
© 1999 by Jeff Grogger and Charles Michalopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed

two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits
Jeff Grogger and Charles Michalopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 7353
September 1999
JEL No. I30, I38
ABSTRACT
Among the most important changes brought about by the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) is the imposition of time limits. In this paper, we
analyze a simple model in which a potential welfare recipient chooses how to allocate her time-limited
endowment of benefits so as to maximize her expected lifetime utility. Not surprisingly, the model reveals
that time limits provide an incentive for the consumer to conserve, or bank, her benefits. More interesting
is the prediction that these incentives to conserve one's benefits vary inversely with the age of the youngest
child in one's family. This implies that the reduction in welfare payments that results from PRWORA will
fall disproportionately on families with young children.
We estimate age group-specific effects of time limits and test the prediction of the model using data
from a welfare reform demonstration in Florida. Subject to some assumptions that are necessary to
distinguish the effects of time limits from the effects of other provisions of the demonstration, we find that
time limits indeed reduce welfare use by the greatest amount among the families with the youngest children.
Moreover, time limits have substantial effects on welfare utilization, reducing monthly utilization probabilities
by 19 percent. Time limits lead families to exit the welfare rolls well before they exhaust their benefits,
suggesting that welfare mothers are rational in the sense of being forward-looking.

Jeff Grogger
Charles Michalopoulos
School of Public Policy
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation
University of California, Los Angeles
16 East 34 Street
3250 Public Policy Building
New York, NY 10016
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656 charles_michalopoulos@mdrc.org
and NBER
jgrogger@ucla.edu

I.

Introduction
The U.S. welfare system has changed dramatically as a result of the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). Among
the most important of the changes brought about by the Act is the imposition of time
limits. Under the old AFDC program, welfare benefits were an entitlement: all poor,
single-parent families with at least one child under 18 years of age were eligible to
receive aid. 1 The duration of welfare receipt was limited only by the age of the youngest
child in the family. Under PRWORA's new TANF program, benefits remain payable
largely to poor, single-parent families with children under 18, but the duration of welfare
receipt is sharply limited. Federal law now allows families to receive benefits for no
more than five years. Many states set stricter limits. 2
One of the implications of time limits is that the familiar static model long used to
study welfare incentives no longer suffices to analyze consumer behavior. Whereas the
consumer’s problem was essentially static under the old entitlement regime, it is
inherently dynamic under time limits. One of the contributions of this paper is to provide
a theoretical model that embeds the leisure-consumption choice from the static model
within a dynamic framework under which current choices about welfare utilization may
affect future constraints.

1

Some poor, married-couple families were also eligible under the Unemployed Parent component
of AFDC, but this program never accounted for more than a small fraction of the AFDC caseload (Moffitt
1992).
2
States can exempt up to 20 percent of their caseload from the five-year time limit. In addition,
states can allow more individuals to continue receiving cash assistance for more than five years as long as
they do not use federal funds for payments past the five year limit. Several states have adopted plans that
use this option. Several other states, including California, eliminate only the adults’ portion of welfare
grants when the five-year limit is imposed, allowing the families to continue receiving the children’s
portion of the grants.

The model yields both a testable implication and a restriction that is helpful for
identifying the effects of time limits in our empirical work. The testable implication is
that time limits should affect families differently depending on the age of their youngest
child. Families with the youngest children face the longest horizon over which welfare
could be used to smooth consumption in the event of an adverse wage realization.
Therefore they have the greatest incentive to conserve, or bank, their welfare benefits.
This implies that families with the youngest children should be the first to leave the
welfare rolls when time limits are imposed. The model also yields an identifying
restriction, since it implies that families whose oldest children are above a threshold age-age 13 in the case of a five-year time limit--are unaffected by the imposition of the time
limit. For these families, the time limit amounts to a non-binding constraint.
For our empirical analysis we use data from Florida's Family Transition Program
(FTP). Subject to a number of identifying assumptions required to isolate the effect of
time limits from the effects of other provisions of the program, we find that families with
younger children indeed exit the welfare roles more rapidly once time limits are imposed.
Moreover, we find strong anticipatory responses to time limits. Our estimates indicate
that, in the absence of other provisions of FTP that tended to increase aid utilization, time
limits would have caused welfare use to fall by 19 percent before any of the families had
actually exhausted their benefits. Contrary to expectation, our estimates suggest that
even relatively disadvantaged aid recipients respond to the time limit.
By focusing primarily on time limits and using data from a randomized trial, our
analysis differs from a number of recent studies that have estimated the effects of welfare
reform more generally (Blank 1997; Council of Economic Advisors 1997; Wallace and

2

Blank 1999; Ziliak, et al., 1997). These studies focus on welfare caseloads, utilizing
aggregate state-level data measured either monthly or annually. With the exception of
Ziliak, et al. (1997), they generally find welfare reform to have at least a marginally
significant effect on caseloads, as does Moffitt (1999), who analyzes data from the
Current Population Survey (CPS). Their results regarding the effects of time limits are
mixed, and at any rate, they do not (and with aggregate data, can not) disaggregate the
effects of time limits by age. Moreover, one set of authors constrains time limits to have
the same effect as work requirements (a distinct type of welfare reform policy), thus
failing to isolate the effects of time limits even on aggregate caseloads (Ziliak, et al.
1997). Others have been criticized as incorrectly characterizing some states' welfare
reform plans, causing their models to be misspecified (Council of Economic Advisors
1997; Martini and Wiseman 1997).
To our knowledge, the only other paper to provide both a theoretical and
empirical analysis of the effects of time limits is Swann (1998). 3 Swann's model, like
ours, captures the important dynamic elements of the consumer's problem under time
limits. In most other respects, however, our papers differ substantially. Swann's model is
more general than ours in some dimensions, but ours is more general in others.
Moreover, our focus differs from Swann's. Whereas he uses numerical simulations to
study welfare utilization (and other outcomes) over time, we focus on deriving analytical
results. Perhaps the greatest difference between our studies concerns our empirical work.
Swann uses individual data collected under the old AFDC system to estimate a dynamic
model of welfare utilization, then uses the parameters from that model to simulate how

3

Bloom et al. (1997, 1998) have studied the FTP program using the data we analyze here, but they
did not attempt to isolate the effects of the time limit from the effects of the other program treatments.

3

utilization changes in response to time limits. In our empirical work, in contrast, we
compare the behavior of consumers who were actually subject to a time limit to that of
consumers for whom welfare remained an entitlement.
II. The Model
We begin with a simple model of welfare receipt under time limits, abstracting
from a number of important considerations such as job search, welfare stigma, and
human capital formation. Although incorporating these aspects of the consumer's
problem might add valuable realism to the model, it would also add substantial
complexity. Our goal in focusing on a parsimonious model is not to deny the importance
of other elements of the consumer's problem, but rather to focus on the effects of time
limits per se and derive predictions that can be studied using the experimental data at our
disposal.
A. The Consumer's Problem under Time Limits
As was noted in the introduction, aid is available under TANF (and was available
under AFDC) only to families with minor children in the home. This means that the
consumer's period of eligibility for aid, or equivalently, her eligibility horizon, is T
periods long, where T is the number of years until the consumer's youngest child turns 18.
We take T to be exogenous, but note the implications of endogenous fertility below.
At the beginning of her period of eligibility, the consumer is endowed with an
initial stock of benefits. This stock is denominated in periods of benefit receipt,
consistent with the language of PRWORA. The initial stock, which we denote as N, is
equal to the time limit.

4

If the consumer works in period t, she receives a gross wage of wt. Wages at time
t are stochastic, however, and unknown until period t begins. We assume that the
consumer gets a new i.i.d. wage draw each period from the known distribution function
F (w). The new wage draw each period captures the observation that employment in the
low-wage sector tends to be fairly unstable, particularly for welfare recipients (Edin and
Lein 1997; Loeb and Corcoran 1999). We assume that wt becomes known at the
beginning of period t, after which the consumer chooses how much to work and, if she
has not already exhausted her benefits, whether to utilize welfare. Of course, the amount
of time she spends working may depend on whether she utilizes welfare. We denote her
hours of work and hours of leisure at time t as ht ( I t ) and Lt ( I t ) , respectively, where It is
the welfare utilization indicator, equal to one if the consumer utilizes benefits at time t
and zero otherwise. Each period the consumer faces a time constraint given by
ht ( I t ) + Lt ( I t ) = L , where L denotes total time available.
We denote consumption at time t by Ct ( I t ) , the price of which is normalized to
one. We assume that there is no borrowing or saving, which is realistic for a low-income
population (Edin and Lein 1997). Letting τ denote the benefit reduction rate, that is, the
rate at which benefits are taxed as the consumer's earnings increase, the consumer’s
current-period budget constraint is given by Ct (1) = G + wt (1 − τ ) ht (1) if she elects to
receive welfare. We refer to this as the "welfare budget constraint." Her budget
constraint is given by Ct (0) = wt ht (0) if she foregoes welfare, which we refer to as the
"no-welfare budget constraint."
The consumer's current-period utility function is given by U(Lt , Ct ) and is
increasing and concave in both arguments. We assume that both consumption and leisure
5

are normal goods. 4 The consumer’s problem is to choose hours of work and welfare
utilization so as to maximize the expected present value of lifetime utility, subject to the
time limit and her time and budget constraints. A formal statement of the consumer’s
problem is:
T

max

∑ ρt − 1 E U ( L t , C t )

s.t.

Lt ( I t ) + ht ( I t ) = L
Ct ( I t ) = (1 − I t ) wt ht ( 0) + I t [G + wt (1 − τ )ht (1)]

I1 ,..., IT
h1 ,..., hT

t =1

S1 = N
S t = S t −1 − I t −1

t = 2,..., T

ST +1 ≥ 0
wt ~ F ( wt ) i.i.d .
where ρ ε ( 0,1) is the discount factor. The variable St is the state variable, giving the
stock of benefits remaining at the beginning of period t. At time t =1 it is equal to the
time limit, and it must be non-negative at the beginning of period T+1, which is the end
of the consumer's eligibility horizon. In between, utilizing benefits at time t depletes the
remaining stock of benefits by one unit. Thus S t = S t −1 − 1 if benefits are utilized in
period t-1 and St = St-1 if not. This simple stock depletion rule has important implications
for the solution of the model.
B. The Solution of the Model
To characterize the solution, let Vt(St ) denote the optimal value of the consumer's
problem starting from time t with remaining benefits St . Vt satisfies the usual recursion
relationship

4

We further assume that U C

→ −∞ as C → 0 , where U C denotes the derivative of the utility

function with respect to C. This final "Inada condition" is not strictly necessary for our results, but it does
help simplify some of the diagrams below.

6

Vt ( S t ) = max [U ( Lt , Ct ) + ρEVt +1 ( S t +1 )].
ht , I t

Because St depends on It but not ht, the consumer's problem simplifies considerably. In
each period, the consumer solves a two-part problem. First, she chooses optimal currentperiod labor supply along each of the welfare and no-welfare budget constraints. Second,
she chooses whether to utilize welfare so as to maximize expected utility over her
remaining eligibility horizon. In other words, she first solves her current-period
maximization problem subject to each of her possible current-period budget constraints,
then chooses the budget constraint (i.e., decides whether to utilize welfare) so as to
achieve the global maximum. 5
The solutions to the first-part problem satisfy the usual tangency conditions.
Define the consumer's current-period marginal rate of substitution as a function of her
labor supply and consumption:
m( ht ( I t ), C t ( I t )) ≡ U L ( L − ht ( I t ), Ct ( I t )) / U C ( L − ht ( I t ), C t ( I t )) . Then the consumer's
optimum along the welfare budget constraint satisfies m( ht* ( 0), Ct* ( 0)) ≥ (1 − τ ) wt , where
the inequality holds strictly if (1 −τ ) wt < m(0, G) , that is, if her net wage draw is less
than her shadow price of leisure. The consumer's optimum along the no-welfare budget
constraint satisfies m( ht* (1), Ct* (1)) = wt .
The second part of the consumer's two-part problem is to choose whether to
utilize welfare so as to solve:
max {U ( L − ht* (0), Ct* (0)) + ρEVt +1 ( S t ), U ( L − ht* (1), Ct* (1)) + ρEVt +1 ( S t − 1)} .
It

5

The mechanics of the problem thus are similar to those in Moffitt's (1983) static model.

7

It proves useful to write the consumer's second-part problem in terms of her currentperiod wage realization. To do this, define the consumer's maximized, or indirect, utility
function along a budget constraint defined by non-labor income At and a net wage of Wt
as
v (Wt , At ) = U ( L , At )

if m( 0, At ) > Wt

= max [U ( Lt , C t ) | Ct = Wt ht + At ; L = Lt + ht ] if m(0, At ) ≤ Wt .
h

Then the second part of the consumer's problem can be written as:
max {v ( wt ,0) + ρ EVt +1 ( S t ), v ( wt (1 − τ ), G) + ρ EVt +1 ( S t − 1)} .
It

For low wage realizations, utilizing benefits raises current-period utility.
Utilizing benefits today, however, reduces the stock of benefits remaining for the future.
In the case where S t < T − t + 1 , so the remaining stock of benefits is less than the
remaining number of periods in the eligibility horizon, utilizing benefits today reduces
the expectation of maximized utility beginning in period t +1. In the dynamic model, the
consumer will utilize benefits today only if the current-period utility gain is great enough
to offset the discounted loss in expected future utility, that, only if
v ( wt (1 − τ), G) − v ( wt ,0) > ρ[ EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( S t − 1)] .

(1)

Panel A of Figure 1 depicts the consumer's welfare utilization decision. It plots
two functions against the current-period wage realization. The first is the current-period
utility gain that results from current-period welfare utilization, denoted by
δ ( wt ) ≡ v ( wt (1 − τ), G) − v( wt ,0) . The second is the discounted gain in expected future
utility that results from foregoing current-period welfare utilization, denoted by
∆ t +1 ( S t ) ≡ ρ[ EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( S t − 1)] . The current-period utility gain δ ( wt ) is large

8

for low values of wt , since for a low wage draw, utilizing welfare can raise consumption
substantially. The current-period utility gain from utilizing aid falls as the wage
realization improves. 6 In contrast, the expected future utility gain from foregoing
current-period welfare, ∆ t +1 ( S t ) , is not a function of the current-period wage realization,
and hence graphs as a horizontal line.
At the wage corresponding to the intersection of these two curves, the consumer is
just indifferent about utilizing welfare in the current period. We term this wage the
~ (S ) .
consumer's reservation wage for welfare utilization, and denote it by w
t
t
Algebraically, the consumer's reservation wages satisfies:
~ ( S )(1 − τ ), G ) + ρEV ( S − 1) = v( w
~ ( S ),0) + ρEV ( S ) .
v (w
t
t
t +1
t
t
t
t +1
t

(2)

Figure 1 shows that the consumer's welfare utilization problem satisfies the reservation
~ ( S ) , the consumer utilizes
wage property: for wage realizations less than or equal to w
t
t
~ ( S ) , she foregoes currentwelfare in the current period; for realizations greater than w
t
t
period welfare utilization.
C. Implications
A number of implications follow from the reservation wage property of the
model. First, the reservation wage is highest in the final period of the eligibility horizon.
At period T, the value of preserving benefits for the next period is zero. Put differently,
at period T the consumer's problem is effectively static, since today's choice does not
~≡w
~ ( S ) for ST > 0.
affect future utility. Denote the final-period reservation wage by w
T
T

6

There is a kink in

values of

δ ( wt ) at wt = m(0, G ) because the consumer will choose not to work for

wt ≤ m( 0, G) . Thus v ( w(1 − τ ), G) is constant (and equal to U ( L , G) ) for

9

This notion generalizes. If at any time period t' the remaining benefit stock S t '
(weakly) exceeds the remaining number of periods in the eligibility horizon, then the
consumer's problem is again essentially static, because the period of eligibility will end
(weakly) before the remaining benefit stock can be exhausted. Because this result
provides an important restriction for our empirical identification analysis in Section IV,
we state it as a lemma:
~ (S ) = w
~ for t ' ≤ t ≤ T .
Lemma: Let S t ' ≥ T − t '+1 . Then w
t
t
It follows that an entitlement is formally a special case of time limits, since for N = T, we
have S t ≥ T − t + 1 for t = 1,..., T.
To establish our principal result, we note that the reservation wage in period t
satisfies equation (2),whereas if I t* = 0 , then the reservation wage in period t+1 will
satisfy
~ ( S )(1 − τ ), G) + ρ EV ( S − 1) = v ( w
~ ( S ), 0) + ρEV ( S ).
v (w
t +1
t
t +2
t
t +1
t
t +2
t

(3)

Comparing equations (2) and (3), we see that if benefits are not utilized in period t, then
the reservation wage at period t+1 will exceed the reservation wage at period t, provided
that EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( St − 1) > EVt + 2 ( S t ) − EVt + 2 ( S t − 1) , that is, provided that the value
(in expected utility terms) of the marginal unit of benefits falls, the closer is the end of the
eligibility period. But the value of the marginal unit of benefits falls as t rises for a
simple reason: the closer one is to the end of one's eligibility horizon, the greater the
likelihood that the remaining benefit stock eventually will exceed the remaining
eligibility horizon, in which case the consumer's problem becomes static and the marginal

wt ≤ m( 0, G) , but increasing and concave for wt > m(0, G ) , giving rise to a kink.
10

unit of benefits has a zero shadow price. We state this result in the form of a proposition,
the proof of which is provided in the Appendix:

Proposition (Rising reservation wages): Let S t < T − t + 1. Then provided that I t* = 0 ,
~ (S ) > w
~ ( S ) . In other words, all else equal, the consumer becomes less reluctant to
w
t +1
t
t
t
utilize welfare as time passes (i.e., as t rises).

This result is depicted graphically in Panel B of Figure 1. Since neither ∆ t +1 ( S t )
nor ∆ t + 2 ( S t ) is a function of the current-period wage realization, both graph as horizontal
lines. Since the value of the marginal unit of benefits is lower, the closer the consumer is
to the end of her period of eligibility, ∆ t + 2 ( S t ) < ∆ t +1 ( S t ) . Thus ∆ t + 2 ( S t ) intersects
δ (w) farther to the right than does ∆ t +1 ( S t ) .
This result is fairly intuitive. Welfare allows the consumer to smooth
consumption in the face of adverse wage shocks. Because of time limits, however, there
are limits to how much smoothing she can do. Early in the eligibility period, the odds of
realizing an adverse wage draw at some point in the future are high. The consumer reacts
by waiting to draw down her benefits. As time passes, however, the odds of adverse
future wage draws fall, so the consumer becomes more willing to utilize her benefits.
Put somewhat differently, the value of preserving one’s option to draw benefits in
the future is high when the eligibility horizon comprises many periods. As the end of the
eligibility horizon approaches, however, the value of preserving one’s benefits falls. The
consumer can afford to exhibit less reluctance in utilizing welfare.

11

This result has two empirical implications that can be tested with data on welfareeligible families observed at the time that time limits are imposed. We term these
implications the Exit Hypothesis and the Entry Hypothesis:
Exit Hypothesis: Upon the imposition of time limits, families with younger (youngest)
children will leave the welfare rolls more quickly than families with older (youngest)
children.
Entry Hypothesis: Upon the imposition of time limits, families with younger (youngest)
children will be less likely to enter the welfare rolls than families with older (youngest)
children.
When time limits are imposed initially, families utilizing welfare receive the same
initial endowment of benefits, but face substantially different eligibility horizons.
Families whose youngest children are very young have long eligibility horizons and thus
have low reservation wages. Families whose youngest children are close to age 18 have
short eligibility horizons and high reservation wages. For families receiving welfare
when time limits are imposed, this means that families with younger (youngest) children
are less likely to continue utilizing benefits than families with older (youngest) children.
For families not receiving benefits, this means that families with younger (youngest)
children are less likely to sign up for welfare than families with older (youngest) children.
Although the entry and exit hypotheses, as stated, pertain to families involved in
the transition from AFDC to TANF, the implications of the general result appear to be
broader and yield predictions regarding the steady-state age distribution of children
receiving welfare under TANF as compared to AFDC. Under AFDC, entering cohorts of
welfare-eligible families (predominantly families becoming eligible due to an unwed

12

birth or divorce) had no incentive to hoard their benefits. Under TANF, entering cohorts
will have different incentives to hoard their benefits depending on the age of the youngest
child in the family. On average, families with older (youngest) children will be more
likely to use their benefits, whereas families with younger (youngest) children will be less
likely to use theirs. As a result, in an otherwise stationary environment, the move from
AFDC to TANF should raise the average age of (youngest) children receiving aid.
The rising reservation wage result may have important substantive implications as
well. Taken together, the entry and exit hypotheses indicate that the reductions in welfare
expenditures that result from the imposition of time limits will fall disproportionately on
families with young children. In other words, any reductions in welfare receipt that a
child experiences due to time limits are more likely to occur earlier, rather than later,
during childhood.
If decreasing welfare payments cause poverty rates to rise, then this may affect
the child's ability and ultimate educational attainment. Guo (1998) studies ability and
achievement tests in the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth data.
She finds that poverty in childhood has a strong negative influence on the child's
measured ability, but that poverty in adolescence has little such effect. This is broadly
consistent with findings of Duncan et al. (1998), who study data on educational
attainment from the PSID. They divide childhood into three segments--birth to age 5, age
5 to age 10, and age 11 to age 15--and find that poverty during the earliest phase of
childhood has the greatest negative consequences for the child's ultimate educational
attainment. These results suggest that the incentives arising from time limits may have
adverse consequences for children, particularly in light of findings that welfare families

13

"neutralize" government policy to only a limited extent (Schoeni 1997; Rosenzweig and
Wolpin 1994; Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales 1997).
Of course, other analysts have argued that welfare receipt is damaging for
children because it encourages them to bear their own children at early ages and rely on
welfare themselves when they grow up (Murray 1984). Indeed, since welfare spells that
begin when children are young last longer, on average (O'Neill et al., 1987), preventing
such spells might be the most effective way to reduce welfare utilization overall. This
line of reasoning would lead one to conclude that time limits may have favorable
consequences for children.
Our objective in pursuing this discussion is not to take a stand on how time limits
will affect child welfare. Rather, it is to point out that, although the conclusions of these
arguments differ widely, they both suggest that the rising reservation wage result may
have important substantive implications for the well-being of children. Therefore it is
important to test the theory and determine whether it adequately describes the data.
Before turning to a discussion of our data, however, it is useful to mention how
potentially endogenous fertility might affect our results. Additional births increase the
consumer's period of eligibility by increasing the number of years before the youngest
child in the family turns 18. They have no effect on the family's time limit, however.
Thus additional births increase the family's reluctance to use welfare, all else equal.
III. Florida's Family Transition Program: Background, Data, and Program
Treatments
Our empirical work focuses on the exit hypothesis, which predicts that families
with younger (youngest) children will spend less time on aid than families with older
(youngest) children when time limits are initially imposed. Our data come from Florida's

14

Family Transition Program (FTP). Although these data have some limitations, they have
two advantages which may help to offset their shortcomings. First, they provide some of
the first individual-level data that permit one to study the effects of time limits. Although
other analysts have studied time limits that were imposed under the states' pre-PRWORA
waivers, most of them use state-level aggregate data. 7 Moffitt (1999) uses data from the
CPS, but he does not analyze the effects of time limits separately from the effects of other
pre-PRWORA welfare reform provisions. The second advantageous feature of FTP is
that it involved random assignment to treatment, which aids in identifying the effect of
time limits.
A. Background
Florida's experimental FTP program was implemented in Escambia County
(Pensacola) starting in May 1994. New applicants for cash welfare were randomized into
one of two groups: the experimental FTP group, which was subject to time limits, or the
control group, which was enrolled in the AFDC program. Persons already receiving
welfare were randomized into treatment or control groups at the time of their biannual
recertification interviews. Recruitment into the experiment continued until October 1996.
Bloom et al. (1997, 1998, 1999) provide evaluations of the early impacts of the program
and more detailed information about the data, program operations, and program rules.
B. Data
In this paper we analyze data on persons drawn into the experiment between May
1994 and February 1995. This yields a sample of 2,623 persons, 1,312 of whom
participated in the FTP program and 1,311 of whom received AFDC. Sample members
are observed for 24 months beginning with the month after random assignment. In this
7

This includes CEA (1997), Blank (1997), Ziliak, et al. (1997), and Wallace and Blank (1999).

15

study we include only single-parent cases, the vast majority of which are headed by
women.
The data analyzed here come primarily from two sources, Florida administrative
records and a short survey instrument known as the Background Information Form (BIF).
Florida administrative records provide data on monthly benefit receipt. The BIF was
administered to welfare applicants (and re-certificants) at the time they applied (or were
re-certified) for benefits, prior to random assignment. It contains baseline demographic
characteristics.
C. FTP Program Treatments and Conditions of AFDC Receipt
Although time limits were arguably the central component of the FTP program,
the program included a number of other treatments as well. Since these other treatments
may affect recipients' decisions about exiting welfare, they may hinder our ability to
isolate the effects of time limits. We describe the full set of FTP treatments in some
detail, as well as the corresponding conditions imposed on AFDC recipients under the
Florida welfare reform waiver. This discussion motivates our approach to estimating the
effect of time limits.
FTP participants were subject to five different categories of treatments: the time
limit, financial work incentives, enhanced support services, employment and training
mandates, and child care subsidies. Most FTP participants faced a 24-month time limit,
after which their benefits could be, and nearly always were, terminated. Particularly
disadvantaged participants, who make up roughly 40 percent of the sample, received a
36-month time limit. FTP participants also enjoyed relatively generous work incentives:
the first $200 of monthly earnings were disregarded from income in determining their

16

monthly benefits, and earnings in excess of $200 were subject to a benefit reduction rate
of 50 percent. Relative to AFDC recipients, FTP participants had enhanced social
support services, including enhanced employment and training services. The FTP group
was subject to a 30 hour/week employment and training mandate, with exemptions only
for women with children under six months old. Finally, the FTP program provided
subsidies for child care.
In some respects, conditions facing the AFDC group were the same as those
facing participants in a conventional AFDC program. Most importantly for our purposes,
AFDC recipients faced no time limits. The AFDC group also faced conventional AFDC
work incentives. During the first four months on aid, the AFDC group faced an income
disregard of $120 and a benefit reduction rate of 67 percent After the first four months,
the benefit reduction rate rose to 100 percent, and after the 12th month on aid, the
disregard fell to $90. Thus AFDC participants had lower income than FTP participants
for any given level of earnings.
In other respects, however, the AFDC group faced conditions quite unlike those
of a conventional AFDC program. As part of Florida's welfare reform waiver, AFDC
participants were subject to the same 30 hours/week employment and training mandate as
the FTP group. Unlike the FTP group, however, AFDC mothers were exempted from the
mandate if they had children younger than three. Furthermore, AFDC recipients were in
principle eligible for the same child care subsidies as FTP participants. Table 1
summarizes the various FTP treatments and the corresponding conditions facing AFDC
recipients.

17

IV. Identification
On the one hand, the presence of multiple program treatments complicates our
effort to estimate the effects of time limits. On the other hand, since some of these
treatments, such as greater financial work incentives, are components of many states'
TANF plans (Moffitt 1998), it may be useful to learn how those treatments affect
behavior as well.
Given the number of treatments, however, one might expect that the effects of
time limits could be identified only under a number of assumptions. Therefore we
approach the identification problem as an effort to establish conditions under which the
effects of the time limit are identified. We argue that some of these conditions are likely
to be satisfied either by the rules of the FTP program or as a result of the theory
developed above. Other conditions, however, are more specialized, and as we stress
below, the estimates we provide are valid only under those conditions.
In section V, we present estimates of the effects of time limits and some of the
other program treatments under the assumptions we develop here. We then attempt to
test some of these assumptions in section VI, acknowledging that the tests are fairly
indirect. Our goal with this approach is not to assert that we can identify the effects of
time limits under general conditions, but rather to use what are among the first available
data on time limits to learn what we can about this new and important feature of the U.S.
welfare system. A more robust analysis will have to await the collection of data more
specifically designed to isolate the effect of time limits.
The first step of our identification analysis is to determine what is identified by
random assignment to the FTP program. Since the program consists of several different

18

treatments, randomization by itself does not identify the effects of any specific treatment.
Rather, randomization identifies what we term the general program effect: the effect of
participating in FTP rather than AFDC. Because the effects of the specific treatments
may vary with the age of the youngest child in the family, the general program effect may
vary by age as well. Let γ a denote the general program effect for a mother whose
youngest child is a years old (or alternatively, is in age group a).
Assuming the general program effects to be the sum of the specific effects of time
limits (TL), financial work incentives (WI), enhanced support services (SS), employment
and training mandates (ET), and child care subsidies (CC), we have
γ a = τaTL + τaW I + τ aSS + τ aET + τaCC
where τaj denotes the effect of the jth specific treatment on the ath age group. In general,
there are five specific treatment effects to be identified from each general program effect.
Obviously, the effects of time limits can be isolated from the general program effects
only under a number of identifying restrictions.
One type of restriction that may aid in identification is age-invariance of a
particular treatment effect. If the effect of the jth treatment does not vary by the age of
the youngest child in the family, then τaj = τ j for all a. A special case of age-invariance
arises when a specific treatment does not vary between the experimental and control
groups. If the jth treatment does not vary between the AFDC and FTP groups, then
τaj = 0 for all a. Some restrictions of this type derive from program rules.
For example, all aid recipients from both the FTP and the AFDC groups, with the
exceptions of AFDC mothers with children under three and FTP mothers with infants
under six months old, were subject to the same employment and training mandates. Thus
19

τaET = 0 for a ≥ 3 (and for a ≤ 6 months). Similarly, both the AFDC mothers and the FTP
mothers had access to the same child care subsidies, at least in principle. Under this
condition, τaCC = 0 for all a.
Another important restriction derives from the theory developed in section II.
Our Lemma implies that, for a consumer whose benefit stock exceeds her eligibility
horizon, a time-limited program is equivalent to an entitlement program. Therefore, for
mothers whose youngest children are sufficiently close to their 18th birthdays, time limits
will have no effect on behavior. Put differently, both FTP mothers and AFDC mothers
whose children are above a threshold age will face the same effective time limit, which is
the categorical limit that arises from the requirement that there be a minor child in the
household. For those with a two-year time limit, the threshold age is 16; for those facing
a three-year time limit, the threshold age is 15. Denote this threshold age by a . Then
the Lemma from section II implies that τaTL = 0 for a ≥ a .
Table 2 helps to illustrate the consequences of these various restrictions.
Corresponding to our approach to the empirical analysis below, we consider the
relationship between the general program effects and the specific treatment effects for
families whose youngest children fall into one of four age categories. The youngest
category, age group 1, consists of mothers whose children are older than six months (0.5
year) and less than 3 years. This is the age range over which employment and training
mandates differ between the FTP and AFDC groups. The oldest category, age group 4,
consists of mothers whose youngest children are older than the threshold age a .
Categories 2 and 3 are intermediate age categories, of which at least two are needed to
estimate whether time limits lead mothers with younger children to exit the welfare roles

20

sooner than mothers with older children. Age group 2 includes families whose youngest
child is 3 to 11 years old; age group 3 includes families whose youngest child is between
12 and 14 or 15, where the upper limit depends on the length of the family's time limit.
Column (3) of Table 2 simply defines the general program effects as the sum of
the unrestricted specific treatment effects, reiterating that the specific treatment effects
are unidentified without further restrictions. Column (4) imposes the age-invariance
restrictions that τaET = 0 for a > 1 and τaCC = 0 for all a. Column (5) imposes the
restriction from the Lemma that τ4TL = 0 .
Column (5) reveals that an additional set of conditions sufficient to isolate the
effects of time limits, at least on the two intermediate age groups, is that the effects of the
financial work incentives and the enhanced social support services, τWa I and τaSS , be ageinvariant. These assumptions follow neither from the program rules nor, in general, from
the theory developed in section II. We do not attempt to argue that these conditions hold
generally, but instead provide a set of assumptions under which they hold. In section VI
we provide some evidence on the validity of these assumptions.
To analyze the effects of the work incentives we draw on the familiar leisureconsumption diagram long used to study welfare incentives under AFDC. One lesson
that follows from the theory developed in section II is that program features that affect
the current-period budget constraint may affect current-period utilization decisions by
affecting the choice of hours conditional on utilization. This suggests that the currentperiod budget diagram may help us to understand how program features such as the
benefit reduction rate influence welfare utilization decisions.

21

Figure 2 shows how the lower benefit reduction rate facing the FTP group affects
current-period utilization incentives. Under each program, there is a level of labor supply
at which income is the same, whether or not the consumer utilizes welfare. This is
known as the "breakeven" level of labor supply. By increasing breakeven hours from
h BAFDC to h BFTP , and by raising the welfare payment to consumers working less than the
breakeven number of hours, the lower benefit reduction rate under FTP should increase
welfare utilization by providing a greater incentive to combine work and welfare. The
higher earned income disregard under FTP (not illustrated) reinforces this effect.
The real question for us, however, is whether these utilization incentives vary by
the age of the youngest child in the family. Presumably, utilization incentives would vary
by the age of the youngest child due to interactions between the financial work incentives
and child care costs. Child care costs vary inversely with the age of the youngest child.
Therefore a mother who had the same wage as that depicted in Figure 2, but who had
higher child care costs, would face a lower budget constraint. Thus FTP's financial work
incentives might affect her differently than they would affect an otherwise identical
mother with lower child care costs. If the child care subsides that were available under
FTP were sufficient to equalize child care costs, however, then the two mothers would
face the same budget constraint, and be affected similarly by the financial work
incentives. Thus an assumption sufficient to justify age-invariance of the effects of the
financial work incentives is that the child care subsidies equalized child care costs among
mothers with youngest children of different ages.
Ideally, we would test this assumption directly using survey data on net child care
expenditures. Unfortunately, no such data exist. Instead, we propose in section VI an

22

indirect test that relies on a simple observation: in order for FTP's financial work
incentives to affect the consumer's income, the consumer must combine work and
welfare. Thus we test for age-invariant financial work incentives by asking whether FTP
affects the consumer's probability of combining work and welfare differently according
to the age of her youngest child.
Beyond age-invariance of the effects of the financial work incentives, another
condition required to identify the effects of time limits is age-invariance in the effects of
the enhanced social supports. To the extent that these services include valuable training
opportunities, human capital theory suggests that they would be more valuable to
younger mothers than to older mothers. If service utilization were tied to welfare
utilization, then this would give the youngest mothers the greatest incentive to remain on
the welfare rolls. This would tend to mask the effects of time limits, which provide the
youngest mothers with the greatest incentive to leave the welfare rolls. In section VI we
test for age-invariance of the effects of enhanced social services by asking whether,
within the FTP group, young mothers are more likely than older mothers to remain on
aid.
Under the assumptions that the effects of the financial work incentives and the
enhanced social supports are age-invariant, some of the age-specific time limit effects are
identified, as shown in column (6) of Table 2. Since mothers in the oldest age group are
not affected by the time limit, they serve to identify the sum of the effects of the financial
work incentives and enhanced support services, τW I + τ SS . This in turn identifies the
effect of time limits for the two intermediate age groups, since for them, the gross
program effect is equal to the sum of the effects of the time limit, the work incentives,

23

and the support services. Thus with these assumptions, we can estimate τ2TL and τ3TL and
determine whether τ2TL < τ3TL ( < 0) as the theory predicts.
Another potential problem with this strategy is that, prior to 1996, child care
subsidies for the AFDC group may have been less generous than those for the FTP group
owing to general budgetary shortfalls facing the State of Florida (Bloom et al., 1998). If
indeed the subsidies available to the AFDC group were less generous than those available
to the FTP group, then our strategy will fail to identify the effects of time limits if the
effects of child care subsidies vary with the age of the youngest child. Fortunately, the
temporary nature of any shortfalls in child care subsidies allows us to present some
evidence as to their effects on our estimates. We return to this issue in section VI.
We turn now to our main results. These provide consistent estimates of the
effects of time limits under the full set of identifying assumptions that is spelled out in
Table 2. This includes the assumptions based on program rules, the assumption provided
by the Lemma in section II, and the age-invariance assumptions on the effects of the
financial work incentives and enhanced social supports.
V. Estimation and Results
A. Difference-in-difference estimates
The central prediction from the model is that the imposition of time limits reduces
time on welfare for mothers of young children by a greater amount than for mothers of
older children. The outcome that we study in the initial portion of the analysis is thus the
number of months on aid during the first two years after entering the program. In the
regression analysis that follows, we also analyze sequences of monthly welfare utilization
indicators.

24

As suggested above, the randomization that was used to assign participants to the
FTP and AFDC groups simplifies estimation of the general program effects. We initially
compute mean months on aid by age group separately for the FTP participants and the
AFDC participants, and use the difference in these means as estimates of γ a .
Randomization ensures that these estimates are consistent.
Table 3 presents mean months on aid for AFDC and FTP participants and
estimates of γ a for the four age groups defined above. 8 The estimates of the general
program effects, in the next-to-last column, show substantial age variation, ranging from
-0.30 for the youngest age group to 2.79 for the oldest age group. For the sample as a
whole, the general program effect is -0.13. This overall estimate is consistent with the
finding that, as of mid-1997, the program had had little effect on aggregate months on aid
(Bloom et al. 1998). The small negative effects among the larger, younger age groups
cancel out the large positive effects among the smaller, older age groups, leaving a null
effect overall.
Under the identifying assumptions spelled out in section IV, the estimate of γ 4
provides an estimate of τW I + τ SS , as shown in column (6) of Table 2. It suggests that the
financial work incentives and enhanced social services raised time on aid by an average
of 2.79 months. This is consistent with the discussion above, where we showed that a
reduction in the benefit reduction rate should increase welfare utilization. This estimate
has a t-statistic of 1.59.

8

As noted above, the age thresholds for the two oldest groups depend on the length of the family's
time limit. Our classification scheme is based on an imputed time limit, which can be constructed for all
families. The actual time limit, which was determined by county welfare officials, is available only for the
FTP group. When we replace the imputation with the actual time limit for the FTP group, we obtain
similar results.

25

Under the full set of identifying assumptions, we can estimate the specific time
limit effects as τˆ2TL = γˆ 2 − γˆ 4 and τˆ3TL = γˆ 3 − γˆ 4 . These simple difference-in-difference
estimates suggest that time limits reduce time on aid by 2.84 months on average among
mothers in the 3-to-11 age group. They reduce time on aid by only 0.40 months on
average among mothers in the 12-to-14/15 age group. This pattern is consistent with the
prediction from the theory: on average, mothers of younger children spend less time on
aid following the imposition of time limits than do mothers of older children. The tstatistic for τ̂2TL is 1.75 and the t-statistic for τ̂3TL is less than one.
Under our identifying assumptions, the difference in the age-specific effects of
time limits, τˆ2TL − τˆ3TL , is equal to the difference in the corresponding general program
effects, γˆ 2 − γˆ3 . The difference between γˆ 2 and γˆ3 is -2.44, with a standard error of
1.36. The t-statistic is thus -1.79. The estimates from this initial estimation exercise
follow a pattern that is consistent with the prediction from the theory, and the difference
in the effects of the time limit by age group is marginally significant.
B. Regression Estimates
In this section we use regression methods to estimate the effect of time limits on
welfare receipt under the full set of identifying assumptions. The regression approach
has two advantages over the simple difference-in-difference strategy. First, with a
regression we can control for personal characteristics of the experiment participants,
reducing unobservable error that contributes to the imprecision of the estimates. Second,
many of the specific treatments under FTP are actually time-varying. For example,
AFDC mothers who begin the sample period with children under three, who therefore are
exempt initially from the employment and training mandates of the program, become

26

subject to those mandates once their children turn three. Likewise, children of FTP
mothers who are less than 16 at the beginning of the experiment may eventually reach the
age at which the FTP time limit is no longer binding on their mothers. Mothers whose
youngest children turn 18 during the sample period become ineligible for aid; as a result,
we drop them from the sample starting with the month of their youngest child's 18th
birthday.
We analyze monthly welfare utilization sequences, so the unit of observation is
the person-month. The model is given by:
TL
y it = α0 + α1 A1 it + α2 A2 it + α3 A3 it + τ1 A1it Ei + τ TL
2 A2 it Ei + τ 3 A3it Ei + τ4 Ei + X it β + µi + εit

for i = 1,..., n and t = 1,..., 24, where n is the number of persons in the sample. The
dependent variable yit equals one if family i utilized welfare in period t, and equals zero
otherwise. The age group dummies are defined as Ajit = 1 if the youngest child in the ith
family falls into age group j at time t and Ajit = 0 otherwise, for j = 1,..., 4. The variable
Ei is the FTP, or experimental, dummy; Ei = 1 if family i is in the FTP group and Ei = 0 if
family i is in the AFDC group. The vector Xit includes a number of exogenous regressors
including the mother's age at time t; a dummy equal to one if she is black and zero
otherwise; a dummy equal to one if she had a three-year time limit and equal to zero if
she had a two-year limit; the number of children in the family; the mother's years of
schooling; the number of months in which the family had utilized welfare during the 24
months prior to random assignment; the number of quarters of employment during the
year preceding random assignment; and a vector of year dummies. Time is measured in
months from the date of random assignment, so t = 0 is the month of entry into the
program. The α, β, and τ terms are parameters to be estimated from the data. Under the

27

full set of identifying assumptions, this parameterization of the regression model
estimates the effects of time limits for age groups two and three, τ2TL and τ3TL , as the
coefficients on the interactions between the corresponding age group dummies and the
FTP dummy.
The error term consists of two components, µi and εit. The former is a family
effect, which gives rise to dependence among the monthly observations from a particular
family. Since this groupwise dependence may cause conventional OLS standard errors to
be biased downwards, we employ a Huber-White covariance matrix estimator that
corrects for such dependence. It also accounts for heteroskedasticity, which is an
inherent property of the linear regression estimator when applied to a binary dependent
variable.
Results of this specification are reported in Table 4. Before proceeding to the
estimates of the effects of time limits, it is useful to consider the coefficients of the other
regressors in the model. The second row of the table shows that recipients who received
36-month time limits have utilization rates that are 4.7 percentage points higher on
average than recipients with the shorter time limit. Black women have higher utilization
rates as well, which is consistent with previous work showing that African-American
women tend to have longer spells of welfare use than others (O'Neill, Bassi, and Wolf
1987). Neither the mother's age nor the number of children she has have much effect on
welfare utilization, but education, past welfare use, and past employment are strongly
related to current welfare utilization. The next three rows show a strong trend toward
declining welfare use over time. Also worth noting is the high level of significance of
most of the coefficients discussed so far, which would lead one to expect that the effects

28

of time limits would be more precisely estimated by this regression model than by the
simple difference-in-difference approach.
The coefficients on the age-group dummies show patterns of age dependence
within the AFDC sample. The base group is mothers whose youngest children are in the
oldest age group, so the coefficients on the age group dummies measure average
utilization rates relative to that group. Women with the youngest children are 9.4
percentage points more likely to receive aid on average. Women with youngest children
in the 3-to-11 age group are slightly less likely to utilize welfare. Mothers whose
youngest children are in the early teen age group are somewhat less likely to receive aid.
Our primary interest centers on the coefficients of the interactions between the
age-group dummies and the FTP dummy. Since we include no interaction between the
oldest age-group dummy and the FTP dummy, age patterns within the FTP group are
estimated relative to the oldest group. This means that the coefficient on the FTP dummy
provides an estimate of τW I + τ SS ; the coefficient on the interaction between the youngest
age-group dummy and the FTP dummy provides an estimate of τ1TL + τ1ET ; and the
interactions between the FTP dummy and the second and third age-group dummies
provide estimates of τ2TL and τ3TL , respectively.
The coefficient on the FTP dummy is positive, indicating that, under our
identifying assumptions, the combined effects of the financial work incentives and
enhanced social services act to raise welfare utilization. As noted above, this accords
with the prediction that higher disregards and lower tax rates raise welfare use by
providing greater incentives to combine welfare with work.

29

The coefficient on the interaction between the FTP dummy and the youngest agegroup dummy is negative and marginally significant. It shows that the combined effect
of time limits and employment and training mandates reduces aid utilization by 9.5
percentage points relative to families in the same age group who do not face these
constraints. Relative to the mean utilization rate of 51.5 percent, this amounts to a
reduction of 18 percent. 9
The next coefficient, on the interaction between the FTP dummy and the second
age-group dummy, provides an estimate of the effect of time limits on families whose
youngest children are 3 to 11 years old. This effect is negative, as predicted by the
theory, and significant. Subject to the validity of our identifying assumptions, it shows
that time limits reduce monthly aid utilization by 12.1 percentage points on average
within this age group. This is a sizeable effect. Relative to the mean utilization rate, it
represents a 23 percent reduction. 10
Under our identifying assumptions, the effect of time limits on families with
children between 12 and 14 or 15 is estimated by the interaction between the FTP
dummy and the third age-group dummy. This coefficient is negative but smaller in
absolute value than the coefficient for the 3-to-11 age group, as predicted by the theory.
It indicates that time limits reduce aid utilization by 3.4 percentage points among families
with youngest children in this age group.

9

Summary statistics for all variables included in the regression model appear in Appendix Table 1.
10
This coefficient is larger in absolute value than the preceding coefficient, whereas the theory
predicts that the time limit by itself should have a greater negative effect, the younger the youngest child in
the family. Of course, the coefficient on the interaction between the FTP dummy and the youngest agegroup dummy estimates not just the effect of the time limit, but the sum of the effect of the time limit and
the employment and training mandate imposed on this group. The observed pattern in the results would be
consistent with the theory if the employment and training mandates were satisfied largely by participation
in unpaid training activities, which presumably would lead to increased welfare utilization.

30

The exit hypothesis predicts that τ2TL < τ3TL < 0 . The difference τˆ2TL − τˆ3TL equals
-0.087 with a standard error of 0.040, yielding a t-statistic of -2.18. The regression
framework has improved the power of this test; it is now significant at the 5 percent level.
The data thus provide evidence that is supportive of the theory.
This result is fairly robust to alternative specifications of the age relationship. As
one alternative, we split the 3-to-11 age group in two. The coefficient on the interaction
between the FTP dummy and the dummy for the resulting 3-to-5 age group was nearly
identical to that for the interaction between the FTP dummy and the dummy for the 6-to11 age group. Although the evidence in favor of the model would have been stronger if
the former coefficient had been more negative than the latter, both coefficients were
significantly different from the coefficient on the interaction between the FTP dummy
and the dummy for the 12 to 14/15 age group. Moreover, when we allowed the effect of
the youngest child's age to be linear between the ages of 3 and 14/15, the coefficient on
the interaction between the FTP dummy and age was positive (as predicted by the theory)
and significant.
Subject to the validity of our identifying assumptions, our estimates suggest that
time limits substantially reduce welfare utilization among families with young children.
If we weight the estimated age-specific proportionate reductions in welfare utilization by
the fraction of cases in each age group, taking the coefficient on the interaction between
the FTP dummy and the youngest age group dummy as an estimate of the effect of the
time limit on the youngest age group, we calculate that time limits by themselves would
have led to a 19 percent reduction in welfare utilization among the FTP group. This is
particularly striking because our sample period extends only over the first 24 months

31

after the time limit was imposed. This suggests that time limits had a negative effect on
welfare utilization, at least among families with younger children, well before any of the
families in our sample could have actually exhausted their benefits. In other words, time
limits appear to induce families to leave the welfare rolls well before they actually
exhaust their benefits.
An issue of particular interest is whether these apparent responses to time limits
are concentrated among those recipients who are most able to find and keep a job. A
frequently voiced concern is that welfare reform will lead only the most able recipients to
leave the welfare rolls, with the result that only the most disadvantaged will remain on
aid long enough to actually exhaust their benefits (Duncan, Harris, and Boisjoly 1997;
Moffitt 1998; Sawhill and Zedlewski 1995). To address this question, we divide the
sample according to the length of the time limit received by the mother. Whereas twoyear time limits were the default, women with particularly low levels of education, high
levels of past welfare utilization, or low levels of past employment were assigned a threeyear limit. Since these factors are known to predict lengthy spells on aid (Pavetti 1995),
the length of the time limit provides a useful summary measure of relative disadvantage
within the welfare population.
Regression results by the length of the family's time limit are presented in Table
5. These regressions include all of the variables reported in Table 4, but we report only
the coefficients on the FTP-age group interactions in order to save space. The
coefficients are fairly similar between the two groups. In both cases, τˆ2TL < τˆ3TL < 0.
Although dividing the sample has rendered most of the coefficients insignificant, the
estimates suggest that responses to time limits are not concentrated among the most

32

work-ready recipients. The relatively disadvantaged group appears to be leaving the
welfare rolls at about the same rate as the relatively more advantaged group.
VI. Evidence on the Identifying Assumptions
As we have stressed above, our estimates rely on a number of identifying
assumptions. In this section we provide evidence on the validity of some of those
restrictions. The first two involve the age-invariance of the effects of the financial work
incentives and the age-invariance of the effects of the social support services. There is
also a question of whether access to child care subsidies varied between the control and
treatment groups, contrary to the program design. We present some admittedly indirect
evidence on each of these assumptions in turn.
A. Age-Invariance of the Effects of the Financial Work Incentives
We first consider whether the effects of the financial work incentives are invariant
with respect to the age of the youngest child in the family. Our evidence stems from a
simple observation: in order for FTP's financial work incentives to affect the consumer's
income, the consumer must combine work and welfare. If, alternatively, she receives
welfare but does not work, then she simply receives the maximum welfare benefit, which
is the same under both AFDC and FTP and is labeled as G in Figure 2. If she works but
does not receive welfare (i.e., works more than h BFTP hours in Figure 2), then again she
receives the same income under both AFDC and FTP. Either way, her behavior is not
affected by the FTP work incentives. Only if she combines welfare and work does she
benefit from FTP's more generous income disregards. Put differently, if the financial
work incentives affect welfare use, then they must do so by affecting probability of

33

combining welfare and work. Thus we test whether FTP affected the probability of
working and receiving welfare in a manner that varies by the age of the youngest child.
Table 6 presents estimates from a regression in which the dependent variable is a
dummy equal to one if the sample member utilized welfare during a quarter in which she
was employed. Ideally, we would like to know whether she truly combined work and
welfare, that is, whether she worked and received welfare in the same month. Because
Florida’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) system does not reveal when during the quarter
the person worked, however, we cannot determine precisely whether parents were
receiving welfare at the same time they were working. Because we have quarterly
employment data, the unit of observation in Table 6 is the person-quarter, rather than the
person-month as in all of the other tables. The results reported in Table 6 are from a
regression that included all the variables shown in Table 4. Only the coefficients of the
FTP dummy and the FTP-age group interactions are shown in order to save space.
Although the coefficient on the FTP dummy is only marginally significant, it is
positive as predicted by the theory, suggesting that the financial work incentives did
increase welfare utilization by increasing the probability that the typical FTP mother
combined work and welfare. More important for testing the age-invariance hypothesis,
however, are the interactions between the FTP dummy and the age-group dummies. The
coefficients on these terms vary as to their sign and are exceeded by their standard errors.
They are jointly insignificant as well, with an F-statistic of only 1.03. These estimates
suggest that the financial work incentives increase the probability of combining work and
welfare in a manner that is essentially uniform across the child-age distribution. Thus

34

these results lend some support to the assumption that the effects of FTP's financial
incentives are age-invariant.
B. Age-Invariance of the Effects of the Enhanced Social Services
Regarding the effects of the enhanced social services, we noted that the most
likely alternative to age-invariance is that younger mothers would find the services more
valuable than others, and thus be more likely to remain on the welfare rolls in order to
take advantage of them. If so, then an interaction between the mother's age and the FTP
dummy should enter the model significantly and with a negative sign.
Results are shown in column (1) of table 7, where the dependent variable is once
again the monthly welfare utilization dummy. With the exception of the added variables,
the specification used to estimate these models is exactly the same as that reported in
Table 4. In table 7 we save space by reporting only the newly added variables and the
interactions between the age group dummies and the FTP dummy.
The coefficient on the interaction is indeed negative but it is no larger than its
standard error. In the second column, we include an interaction between the FTP dummy
and the mother's education on the grounds that the attractiveness of the enhanced training
services might vary by the mother's education level. In the third column, we include
interactions between the FTP dummy and variables measuring the extent of the mother's
employment over the year prior to random assignment and welfare receipt during the 24
months preceding random assignment. We include these variables as proxies for workreadiness, on the grounds that the attractiveness of the enhanced training services might
vary according to the mother's general employability. None of these interaction terms is
significant. More importantly, although the coefficient on the FTP dummy is sensitive to

35

the inclusion of these interactions, the key coefficients, τ̂2TL and τ̂3TL , are essentially the
same across the different specifications. Thus none of these tests yields evidence
contrary to our assumption that the effects of the enhanced social services are ageinvariant.
There are two possible explanations for this result. The first has to do with the
manner in which aid recipients were assigned to training activities. These assignments
were made by caseworkers rather than being chosen by the recipient. Even with the
possibility of negotiation between the two parties, aid recipients may not always have
received their desired assignment. The second is that the enhanced training services may
not have been perceived by the FTP mothers as offering valuable opportunities to gain
skills. In this case, there would be no reason for younger, better educated, or more
employable mothers to take greater advantage of these services.
More direct evidence on use of social services comes from MDRC’s Two-Year
Client Survey (TYCS), which was administered to a sample of about 600 mothers drawn
equally from the AFDC and FTP groups in early- to mid-1997. This survey included
questions about the use of education, training, and employment services by respondents
in the two years following random assignment. If enhanced social services provide a
greater opportunity to mothers with younger children, then FTP should have induced the
largest increase in use of these services for mothers with younger children. Results of the
survey indicate that it did not. Families did increase their use of services, but this
increase does not appear to be related to age of youngest child. For families with children
between 3 and 11 years of age, about 51 percent of the control group used such services
compared to about 73 percent of the program group, an increase of 22 percentage points.

36

However, the increase for other families was quite similar – about 30 percentage points
for families with children 12 to 15 years old and about 28 percentage points for families
with children 16 to 18 years old. 11
This is consistent with evidence from California’s GAIN program, which also
provided welfare mothers with enhanced employment and training services. As in FTP,
mothers believed to have few job skills were encouraged to increase their human capital
through adult education, while more job-ready mothers were required to enroll in
programs designed to help them apply for and obtain jobs. Also like FTP, GAIN was
evaluated by MDRC using a random assignment evaluation. According to data from that
evaluation, GAIN reduced welfare use by about the same amount for mothers with
younger children as for mothers with older children. In the first 3 years after random
assignment, mothers whose youngest child was 6 to 11 years old reduced their welfare
use by 0.80 quarters (out of a potential 12 calendar quarters over 3 years) and mothers
whose youngest child was older than age 11 reduced their welfare use by 0.68 quarters.
Although families with children younger than 6 were not required to participate in GAIN,
some welfare recipients with young children did volunteer for GAIN. Among mothers
with children between 4 and 5 years old, GAIN reduced welfare use by a similar amount,
0.79 calendar quarters. 12 While these reductions in welfare use are highly statistically
significant, differences across age groups are not.

11

In addition to use of any activity, the survey contains information on individual activities such as
enrollment in adult basic education and attendance at job club. For no activity were the impacts of FTP
statistically significant different by age of youngest child.
12
For more information on the GAIN program and its evaluation, see Riccio et al, 1994. Tabulations
in this paragraph were made by the authors using data made available by MDRC.

37

C. Equal Access to Child Care Subsidies Between FTP and AFDC Groups
The potential problem regarding access to child care subsidies arises due to
funding shortages which may have caused cutbacks in the subsidies available to AFDC
mothers. Our strategy to investigate this problem makes use of the fact that any such
cutbacks had been restored by the beginning of 1996. Those cutbacks that took place
arose due to general budgetary limitations, and those limitations had ended by the end of
1995. Thus any differences in child care subsidies between the AFDC and FTP groups
existed only in 1994 and 1995. After 1995, this particular treatment did not vary between
the experimental and control groups.
Thus we ask whether AFDC mothers had higher utilization rates relative to FTP
mothers in 1994 and 1995 than in 1996 and 1997. It would be damaging to our
identification strategy if increased welfare usage within the AFDC group during this time
showed substantial negative age dependence. To address this issue, we first add to the
regression an interaction between a pre-1996 dummy, equal to one in 1994 and 1995 and
equal to zero in 1996 and 1997, and a control group dummy, equal to one if Ei = 0 and
equal to zero if Ei = 1. We then interact this term with the age group dummies to allow
for age-dependence.
The first column of table 8 reports the coefficient on the interaction between the
pre-1996 dummy and the control group dummy. It indicates that, contrary to expectation,
AFDC mothers actually were less likely to utilize welfare, relative to FTP mothers, in the
early part of the sample period. Results in the second column show no significant age
pattern. Moreover, the coefficients of the age group/experimental dummy interactions
are largely unchanged by the addition of these variables. To the extent that there were

38

differential care subsidies between the AFDC and FTP groups during this time, they did
not lead to greater welfare use on the part of AFDC mothers, nor did the effects of any
shortfalls exhibit an age-dependent pattern. Thus the evidence against our assumption
that child care subsidies were effectively equal between groups is fairly weak.
Further evidence on this point comes from the TYCS, which was administered to
a sample of mothers drawn equally from the AFDC and FTP groups in early- to mid1997.13 Although this survey asked no specific questions about child care utilization, it
did ask a number of questions pertaining to links between child care and work. The
strongest evidence from the TYCS suggesting that there were important differences in
child care subsidies comes from questions posed to women who were neither working
nor looking for work at the time of the TYCS. Among FTP mothers, 7 percent indicated
that an inability to find or afford child care was the reason for their (non-)employment
status. Among AFDC mothers, the corresponding proportion was 17 percent. Since only
20 percent of the FTP mothers, and 27 percent of the AFDC mothers, were neither
working nor seeking employment, however, this means that only 1.5 percent of the FTP
group, and 4.5 percent of the AFDC group, were neither working nor looking for work
primarily due to child care problems.
Other data from the survey, however, are even less suggestive of important
differences in the level of child care support between groups. One question asked people
who worked less than 30 hours per week why they were not working full time. Five
percent of the AFDC group cited child care as the reason. In the FTP group, the
corresponding fraction was four percent. Another question focused on women who had
worked at some point since program intake, but were not working at the time of the

39

TYCS because they had quit their job. AFDC and FTP mothers were equally likely to
say that they had quit for reasons related to child care.
In view of the prominence that was given to discussions of child care shortfalls in
the original FTP evaluation (Bloom et al, 1998), it is worthwhile to discuss how these
shortfalls could have had such seemingly little effect on our results. We offer two
possible explanations. First, as noted in the original evaluation report, it took some time
for the FTP program to start running at full efficiency. Thus start-up issues may have
affected the delivery of child care services to FTP participants at the same time that
budgetary shortfalls affected service delivery to AFDC recipients.
Second, many of the recipients may have had access to free child care, in which
case they would have been unaffected by the availability of subsidies. Although there are
no data on child care utilization for the FTP program, the evaluators of an earlier Florida
welfare reform experiment found that 55 percent of aid recipients had access to free care
from friends or relatives, and that only 15 percent utilized any child care subsidies at all
(Kemple and Haimson 1994). If participants in the FTP program were similarly situated,
then one might expect differences in child care subsidies between the AFDC and FTP
groups to have little effect on welfare receipt.
VII. Conclusions
One of the important contributions of this paper is the theoretical model.
Essentially, we have taken the static model of welfare utilization, which long served as
the basis for analyzing welfare incentives under AFDC, and generalized it to incorporate
the effects of time limits. The solution to this model reveals that the consumer is most
reluctant to utilize welfare at the beginning of her period of eligibility, but that she
13

This paragraph and the next borrow heavily from Bloom, et al. (1997, pp. 57-59)

40

becomes less reluctant as time passes. This has a number of implications for the age
distribution of children leaving and entering the welfare rolls. First, upon the imposition
of time limits, families with younger (youngest) children should be more likely to exit
welfare than families with older (youngest) children. Second, families with younger
(youngest) children should be less likely to enter the welfare rolls than families with older
(youngest) children. Together, this implies that the reduction in welfare expenditures that
results from the imposition of time limits will fall disproportionately on families while
their children are young. For a number of reasons, this result may have substantive
implications for the well-being of poor children.
Using data from Florida's Family Transition Program, which imposed time limits
in 1994 under welfare reform waivers, we attempt to test the first of these empirical
implications. The data do accord with the theory, in that families with younger
(youngest) children do spend less time on welfare after the imposition of time limits than
families with older (youngest) children. Indeed, our estimates suggest that time limits by
themselves resulted in a substantial decrease in welfare utilization that was concentrated
among families with young children.
A number of assumptions were necessary to isolate the effects of time limits from
other features of FTP, however. Tests of those assumptions generally failed to reject, but
the tests were indirect. As a result, our empirical results should be taken as suggestive
rather than definitive. An important agenda item for future research is to better isolate
the effect of this new and important feature of the U.S. welfare system.

41

References
Blank, Rebecca M (1997). "What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?"
National Bureau of Economic Research working paper.
Bloom, Dan, Mary Farrell, and James J. Kemple. The Family Transition Program:
Implementation and Interim Impacts of Florida's Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1997.
Bloom, Dan, Mary Farrell, and James J. Kemple. The Family Transition Program:
Implementation and Interim Impacts of Florida's Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1998.
Council of Economic Advisers (1997). Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in
Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996. Washington, DC: Council of Economic Advisers.
Duncan, Greg J., Kathleen Mullan Harris, and Johanne Boisjoly (1997). " Time Limits
and Welfare Reform New Estimates of the Number and Characteristics of Affected
Families." Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Duncan, Greg J., W. Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith R. Smith. "The
Effects of Childhood Poverty on the Life Chance of Children." American Sociological
Review 63, June 1998, 406-423.
Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein (1997). Making Ends Meet. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Guo, Guang (1998). "The Timing of the Influences of Cumulative Poverty on Children's
Cognitive Ability and Achievement." Social Forces 77: 257-288.
Kornfeld, Robert and Howard S. Bloom. 1999. "Measuring Program Impacts on
Earnings and Employment: Do Unemployment Insurance Wage Reports from Employers
Agree with Surveys of Individuals?" Journal of Labor Economics. 17(1): 168-197.
Kemple, James J. and Joshua Haimson. Florida's Project Independence: Program
Implementation, Participation Patterns, and First-Year Impacts. New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation, January 1994.
Loeb, Susanna, and Mary Corcoran. "Welfare, Work Experience, and Economic SelfSufficiency." Mimeo, February 1999.
Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales (1997). "Do Husbands and
Wives Pool their Resources?" Journal of Human Resources 32, 463-480.

42

Martini, Alberto and Michael Wiseman (1997). "Explaining the Recent Decline in
Welfare Caseloads: Is the Council of Economic Advisers Right?"
http://www.urban.org/welfare/cea.htm.
Moffitt, Robert (1983). "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma." American Economic
Review 73, 1023-1035.
Moffitt, Robert. "Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review." Journal of
Economic Literature 30, March 1992, 1-61.
__________. "Time Limits." Mimeo, Johns Hopkins University, November 1998.
__________. "The Effect of Pre-PRWORA Waivers on AFDC Caseloads and Female
Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior." Working paper, Joint Center for Poverty
Research, May 1999.
Murray, Charles. Losing Ground. New York: Basic Books, 1984.
O'Neill, June, Lauri Bassi, and Douglas A Wolf. "The Duration of Welfare Spells."
Review of Economics and Statistics 69, May 1987, 241-248.
Pavetti, LaDonna. "Who is Affected by Time Limits?" In Sawhill, Isabel, ed., Welfare
Reform: An Analysis of the Issues. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 1995.
Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander, and Stephen Freedman. 1994.
GAIN: Benefits, Costs, and Three-Year Impacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program.
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. New York.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I Wolpin. "Parental and Public Transfers to Young
Women and Their Children." American Economic Review 84, December 1994, 11951212.
Sawhill, Isabel and Sheila Zedlewski. "Assessing the Personal Responsibility Act." In
Sawhill, Isabel, ed., Welfare Reform: An Analysis of the Issues. Washington, DC: Urban
Institute Press, 1995.
Schoeni Robert F.(1997) "Does Aid to Families With Dependent Children Displace
Familial Assistance?" Mimeograph, RAND Corporation.
Swann, Christopher A. "Welfare Reform When Agents are Forward-Looking." Mimeo,
University of Virginia, December 1998.
Wallace, Geoffrey and Rebecca M. Blank (1999). "What Goes Up Must Come Down?
Explaining Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads." Mimeo, Northwestern
University.
</ref_section>

43

Ziliak, J.P., Figlio, D.N., Davis, E.E., and Connolly, L.S. "Accounting for the Decline in
AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth?" Institute for Research on
Poverty Working Paper 1151-97, 1997.

44

</ref_section>

Appendix: Proof of the Rising Reservation Wage Proposition
To begin we adopt some simplifying notation. Let
~ ( S )) ,
Ft ( S t ) ≡ F ( w
t
t

(A1)

Ft ( S t ) = 1 − Ft ( S t ) , and
~ ( S )] + F ( S ) E[ v( w ,0) | w > w
~ ( S )] . (A2)
Eut ( S t ) = Ft ( S t ) E[ v( wt (1 − τ ), G) | wt ≤ w
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
Equation (A1) is simply notation for the probability of utilizing welfare in period t, given
a remaining benefit stock of St. Equation (A2) defines expected current-period utility at
time t as a function of the remaining benefit stock at time t. Finally, let
E[(u t ' ( S t ' ) | S t ]
denote the expectation of current-period utility at time t' as a function of the remaining
benefit stock at t', given that the consumer had St units of benefits at time t and has
followed the optimal reservation wage strategy in periods t, t+1, ..., t'-1.
Our objective is to establish that
EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( St − 1) > EVt + 2 ( S t ) − EVt + 2 ( S t − 1) ,
or equivalently, that
EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt + 2 ( S t ) > EVt +1 ( S t − 1) − EVt + 2 ( S t − 1) .

(A3)

With the definitions above, we can write
T

EVt ( S t ) = ∑ ρ s −t E[u s ( S s ) | S t ] .
s= t

Then since EVt ( S t ) gives the maximized value of the consumer's problem starting from
period t with benefit stock St, we have
EVt +1 ( S t ) ≥ EVt + 2 ( S t ) + ρT −t −1 E[uT ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t ] .

45

Applying similar logic to EVt + 2 ( S t − 1) , we have
EVt + 2 ( S t − 1) ≥ EVt +1 ( S t − 1) − ρT − t −1 E[uT ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t − 1] .
Therefore a sufficient condition for (A3) is
E[uT ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t ] > E[u T ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t − 1] .

(A4)

To evaluate E[uT ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t ] , use the recursion formula and the reservation
wage property to write EVt +1 ( S t ) in terms of E[u s ( S s ) | S t +1 = S t ] for s = t+1, t+2,...,T
and collect terms in T. E[uT ( S T ) | S t +1 = S t − 1] can be evaluated the same way.
Simplifying the resulting expressions, using the fact that EuT ( ST ) = EuT (1) for all ST > 1
since benefits have no value after period T, shows that (A4) holds if and only if
EuT (0) + [1-P(utilizing welfare in St periods)] [ Eu T (1) − EuT ( 0)] >
EuT (0) + P(utilizing welfare in fewer than St -1 periods) [ Eu T (1) − EuT ( 0)] .

(A5)

Expected utility in the final period is equal to EuT (0) , expected utility in the absence of
any remaining benefits, plus the product of the probability of having at least one unit of
benefits at the beginning of period T and the difference in expected utility from having at
least one unit of benefits and having none. The last term is given by [ Eu T (1) − EuT ( 0)] .
Beginning with St units of benefits, the probability of having at least one unit remaining
at the beginning of period T is one minus of probability of utilizing benefits in St periods.
Beginning with St - 1 units of benefits, the probability of having at least one unit
remaining is equal to the probability of utilizing benefits in fewer than St -1 periods.
Simplifying and rearranging terms, (A5) can be re-written as
P(utilizing welfare in St periods) < 1-P(utilizing welfare in fewer than St -1 periods)
or

46

P(utilizing welfare in St periods) < P(utilizing welfare in St -1 or more periods),
establishing the result.

47

Figure 1
The Consumer's Reservation Wage for Welfare Utilization
Panel A
Utility
δ ( wt ) ≡ v ( wt (1 − τ), G) − v( wt ,0)

ρ[ EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( S t − 1)]

∆ t +1 ( S t )

m( 0, G)

~ (S )
w
t
t

wt

Panel B
Utility
δ (w)

ρ[ EVt +1 ( S t ) − EVt +1 ( S t − 1)]

∆ t +1 ( S t )

ρ[ EVt +2 ( S t ) − EVt + 2 ( S t − 1)]

∆ t+ 2 ( S t )

~ (S )
w
t
t
48

~ (S )
w
t +1
t

w

Figure 2
The Effect of Financial Work Incentives on Welfare Utilization

C

C BFTP
C BAFDC
G

h

h BFTP h BAFDC

L

49

L

Table 1
Summary of FTP Treatments and Corresponding Conditions of AFDC Receipt
Type of Treatment

FTP Group

AFDC Group

Time limits

24-month time limit for
most recipients; 36-month
time limit for particularly
disadvantaged recipients.

No time limits.

Financial work incentives

$200 earned income
disregard and 50 percent
benefit reduction rate.

$120 disregard and 67
percent benefit reduction
rate for first four months;
100 percent benefit
reduction rate after four
months; $90 disregard after
12 months.

Support services

Enhanced employment and
training services and social
support services.

Conventional AFDC
services.

Employment and training
mandates

30 hours/week either
working or in training.
Exemptions only for
mothers with infants under
6 months of age.

30 hours/week either
working or in training.
Exemptions for mothers
with children under 3 years
old.

Child care subsidies

In theory, both groups had access to same child care
subsidies. In practice, subsidies for AFDC group may
have been less generous prior to 1996.

50

Table 2
Identification of Specific Treatment Effects from General Program Effects

Age group
(Age of youngest
child)
(1)

Gross
program
effect... Without restrictions, equals...
(2)
(3)

1
(6 mos. to 2 years)

γ1

τ1TL + τ1W I + τ1SS + τ 1ET + τ1CC

With restrictions on
τaET and τaCC derived from
program rules, equals...
(4)
TL
WI
τ1 + τ1 + τ1SS + τ1ET

2
(3 to 11)

γ2

τ TL + τ W2 I + τ2SS + τ ET
+ τ CC
2
2

τ TL + τ W2 I + τ2SS

τ TL + τ W2 I + τ2SS

τ TL + τ W I + τ SS

3
(12 to 14/15)

γ3

τ TL
+ τ W3 I + τ SS
+ τ ET + τ 3CC
3
3

τ TL
+ τ W3 I + τ3SS
3

τ TL
+ τ W3 I + τ3SS
3

τ TL
+ τ W I + τ SS
3

4
(15/16 to 17)

γ4

τ4TL + τ W1 I + τ1SS + τ 4ET + τ 4CC

τ TL
+ τ W4 I + τ4SS
4

τW4 I + τ 4SS

τW I + τ SS

2

3

2

51

Adding the restriction
τ4TL = 0 from the Lemma
in section II, equals...
(5)
TL
WI
τ1 + τ1 + τ1SS + τ1ET

Adding age-invariance of
τWa I and τaSS , equals
(6)
TL
WI
τ1 + τ + τ SS + τ1ET

2

2

Table 3
Mean Months on Aid during First 24 Months after Random Assignment,
by Age of Youngest Child

AFDC Group

FTP Group

Gross
program
effect

Time
limit
effect
(τˆaTL )

N

Mean

N

Mean

6 months to 2 years

555

12.96
(0.38)

557

12.66
(0.37)

( γˆ a )
-0.30
(0.53)

3 to 11

612

12.26
(0.36)

626

12.21
(0.35)

-0.05
(0.50)

-2.84
(1.83)

12 to 14/15

102

9.82
(0.87)

92

12.21
(0.93)

2.39
(1.27)

-0.40
(2.17)

15/16 to 17

42

7.64
(1.15)

37

10.43
(1.34)

2.79
(1.76)

1,311

12.42
(0.25)

1,312

12.35
(0.24)

-0.13
(0.34)

Age group

Total

52

Table 4
Linear Regression Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits on the Monthly
Probability of Receiving Aid
Variable
Constant

Coefficient
0.605

Standard error
0.070

36-month time limit

0.047

0.013

Mother black

0.084

0.014

Mother's age

-0.001

0.001

Number of children

0.001

0.006

Years of schooling

-0.018

0.004

Months of welfare utilization in 24 months prior to random
assignment

0.018

0.001

Quarters of employment in year preceding random assignment

-0.024

0.004

1995 dummy

-0.138

0.009

1996 dummy

-0.308

0.011

1997 dummy

-0.407

0.021

Youngest child between 6 months and 2 years

0.094

0.043

Youngest child between 3 and 11

0.082

0.040

Youngest child between 12 and 14/15

0.049

0.043

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6 months and 2 years

-0.095

0.058

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3 and 11 ( τ̂2TL )

-0.121

0.055

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12 and 14/15 ( τ̂3TL )

-0.034

0.062

FTP dummy

0.105

0.053

τˆ2TL − τˆ3TL

-0.087

0.040

R2

0.214

Sample size: 62,229 observations
Note: Huber-White standard errors in third column account both for groupwise dependence
arising from multiple observations per person and for heteroskedasticity.

53

Table 5
Linear Regression Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits on the Probability of Receiving
Aid, by the Length of the Family's Time Limit
Length of Time Limit
24 months
36 months
-0.108
-0.097
(0.076)
(0.087)

Variable
FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6
months and 2 years
FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3
and 11 ( τ̂2TL )

-0.090
(0.072)

-0.162
(0.085)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12
and 14/15 ( τ̂3TL )

-0.023
(0.079)

-0.008
(0.102)

FTP dummy

0.072
(0.069)

0.149
(0.082)

0.200

0.190

R2

Sample size
35,757
26,472
Note: Huber-White standard errors, in parentheses, account both for groupwise dependence arising
from multiple observations per person and for heteroskedasticity. In addition to the variables
shown, all regressions include all other variables shown in Table 4.

54

Table 6
Estimates of the Effects of the FTP Program on the Probability of Combining
Work and Welfare, by the Age of the Youngest Child in the Family
Variable
FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6 months
and 2 years

Coefficient
(standard error)
0.026
(0.042)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3 and 11

-0.011
(0.044)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12 and
14/15

-0.001
(0.043)

FTP dummy

0.058
(0.038)

R2

0.072

Sample size

20,665

Note: Huber-White standard errors, in parentheses, account both for groupwise
dependence arising from multiple observations per person and for heteroskedasticity.
In addition to the variables shown, all regressions include all other variables shown in
Table 4.

55

Table 7
Linear Regression Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits on the Probability of Receiving Aid,
with Interactions between the FTP Dummy and Maternal Characteristics
Variable
FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6 months and 2 years

(1)
-0.123
(0.063)

(2)
-0.098
(0.057)

(3)
-0.090
(0.057)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3 and 11 ( τ̂2TL )

-0.140
(0.058)

-0.123
(0.055)

-0.122
(0.055)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12 and 14/15 ( τ̂3TL )

-0.040
(0.062)

-0.035
(0.062)

-0.035
(0.062)

FTP dummy

0.182
(0.094)

0.011
(0.094)

0.071
(0.056)

Mother's age * FTP dummy

-0.002
(0.002)

Mother's education * FTP dummy

0.009
(0.007)

Quarters of employment in year preceding random assignment
* FTP dummy

0.014
(0.008)

Months of welfare utilization in 24 months preceding random
assignment * FTP dummy

0.001
(0.001)

R2

0.214

0.214

Note: Huber-White standard errors, in parentheses, account both for groupwise dependence arising from
multiple observations per person and for heteroskedasticity. In addition to the variables shown, all
regressions include all other variables shown in Table 4. Sample size is 62,229

56

0.214

Table 8
Further Linear Regression Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits on the Probability of
Receiving Aid
Variable
FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6 months and 2 years

(1)
-0.101
(0.058)

(2)
-0.110
(0.067)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3 and 11 ( τ̂2TL )

-0.120
(0.055)

-0.113
(0.062)

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12 and 14/15 ( τ̂3TL )

-0.034
(0.062)

-0.019
(0.072)

FTP dummy

0.085
(0.053)

0.080
(0.060)

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child between
6 months and 2 years

-0.011
(0.050)

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child between
3 and 11

0.013
(0.045)

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child between
12 and 14/15

0.026
(0.059)

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy
R2

-0.036
(0.014)

-0.045
(0.045)

0.214

0.214

Note: Huber-White standard errors, in parentheses, account both for groupwise dependence
arising from multiple observations per person and for heteroskedasticity. In addition to the
variables shown, all regressions include all other variables shown in Table 4. Sample size is
62,229.

57

Appendix Table 1
Summary Statistics of Variables Used in Regression Models
Variable
Mean
(Standard deviation)
Welfare utilization indicator (dependent variable)
0.515
36-month time limit

0.436

Mother black

0.520

Mother's age

Months of welfare utilization in 24 months preceding
random assignment

29.5
(7.3)
2.1
(1.2)
11.1
(1.6)
12.4
(9.6)

Quarters of employment in year preceding random
assignment

1.2
(1.5)

Number of children
Years of schooling

1995 dummy

0.487

1996 dummy

0.394

1997 dummy

0.014

Youngest child between 6 months and 2 years

0.262

Youngest child between 3 and 11

0.612

Youngest child between 12 and 14/15

0.085

FTP dummy

0.501

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 6 months and 2
years

0.134

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 3 and 11

0.305

FTP dummy * Youngest child between 12 and 14/15

0.043

Pre-1996 dummy

0.592

AFDC dummy

0.489

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy

0.295

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child
between 6 months and 2 years

0.092

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child
between 3 and 11

0.165

Pre-1996 dummy * AFDC dummy * Youngest child
between 12 and 14/15

0.025

Number of monthly observations

62,229

58

