                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ESTATE TAXES, LIFE INSURANCE,
                                     AND SMALL BUSINESS

                                            Douglas Holtz-Eakin
                                             John W. Phillips
                                             Harvey S. Rosen

                                            Working Paper 7360
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7360


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 1999




We thank Esther Gray for her patience and efforts in preparing the manuscript, and the National Science
Foundation through the NBER and Princeton’s Center for Economic Policy Studies for research support.
Jeffrey Brown, William Gale, William Gentry, David Joulfaian, Jim Poterba, and Karl Scholz provided useful
suggestions on an earlier draft. The views in this article are the authors’ only and do not necessarily reflect
the views of any government agency, research organization, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Douglas Holtz-Eakin, John W. Phillips, and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, John W. Phillips, and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 7360
September 1999
JEL No. H20, G22, J23

                                                ABSTRACT

        One criticism of the estate tax is that it prevents the owners of family businesses from passing their
enterprises to their children. The problem is that it may be difficult to pay estate taxes without liquidating
the business. A natural question is why individuals with such concerns do not purchase enough life
insurance to meet their estate tax liabilities. This paper examines whether and how people use life insurance
to deal with the estate tax. We find that, other things being the same, business owners purchase more life
insurance than other individuals. However, on the margin, their insurance purchases are less responsive
to estate tax considerations and they are less likely to have the wherewithal to meet estate tax liabilities out
of liquid assets plus insurance.


Douglas Holtz-Eakin                                         John W. Phillips
Center for Policy Research                                  Population Studies Center
Syracuse University                                         3718 Locust Walk
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                                    jwp@pop.upenn.edu
djheakin@syr.edu

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hsr@princeton.edu
1.      INTRODUCTION

        The United States estate tax raises little revenue. In 1999, it is projected to generate about $24

billion from the 49,200 estates that are subject to the tax. 1 Nevertheless, the tax engenders many

complaints. Particularly vocal are the owners of family businesses, who bemoan the fact that estate

taxes prevent them from passing their enterprises onto their children. Thus, for example, one Daisy

Crowder, the owner of a small construction company with her husband, pointed out that they had

“plowed the earnings from their business for years into equipment, building, land and other assets to

help expand.” As a result they had little cash or other liquid wealth and she was fearful that her four

children “would be forced to sell some or all of the business to pay the [estate tax] bill when she and her

husband died” (Stevenson [1997]). A case that recently made headlines concerned John Senstacke,

the owner of the nation’s largest chain of African-American newspapers. Senstacke and his children all

wanted to keep the business in the family. But when Mr. Senstacke died, his estate’s tax liability was

$4 million. The estate did not have enough cash to pay the bill, and the children feared that parts of the

chain would have to be sold off in order to pay the taxes (Christian [1998, p. D1]). More generally, a

Wall Street Journal editorial lamented, “You and your heirs [build your] business together. But when

you depart this earth, those heirs often find they have to dissolve your legacy, just to pay the tax bill on

it.”2

        The discussion sometimes becomes quite emotional. The president of the National Federation

of Independent Business argued that because of the estate tax, people who “are dealing with the death

of a loved one [also] have the IRS coming in and trying to rip what’s left
out of the heart of the family” (Stevenson [1997]). Surveys of small businesses suggest that these

concerns are widespread. For example, a survey by Travis Research Associates [1995, p. 13] said

that 65 percent of the family business owners interviewed indicated that the federal estate tax would

make survival of the family business significantly more difficult or impossible.

        As one considers both the overheated rhetoric and the survey results, a natural question arises:

If the owner of a business is truly concerned that it will be difficult to pay estate taxes without liquidating

the enterprise, then why not purchase enough life insurance to pay for the taxes? Indeed, a survey

conducted by Arthur Andersen [1997] indicated that more than two-thirds of family business owners

expected life insurance to be the primary source of funds to cover estate taxes. But the Andersen

sample included only firms with annual sales in excess of a million dollars, and what is true for such large

enterprises may not be true for smaller ones: “smaller businesses don’t generate the surpluses necessary

to be socked away in life insurance policies” (Jenkins [1997, p. A19]). Even if a business owner

purchases insurance, it may not be enough to cover the estate tax. After all, the market value of a

business is often difficult to estimate, leading to problems in predicting estate tax liability (Bosland

[1963, p. 161]). (Of course, such uncertainty could equally well induce business owners to purchase

excessive life insurance.) Indeed, even individuals who do not own businesses may also want to use life

insurance to help pay for estate tax liability if there are illiquid assets in their estates.

        To what extent do people use life insurance to provide the wherewithal to meet estate tax

liabilities? We know of no econometric research aimed at answering this question.3 The purpose of this

paper is to examine whether and how people use life insurance to deal with the estate tax. We focus




                                                     2
particularly on business owners because of the aforementioned concerns that the illiquid nature of their

assets makes the estate tax particularly harmful to them.

        In the next section we sketch the analytic underpinnings of our analysis. In the third section, we

discuss the data and present some preliminary evidence. The fourth section motivates the econometric

specification and reports our results. We find that, other things being the same, business owners

purchase more life insurance than other individuals. However, on the margin, their insurance purchases

are less responsive to estate tax considerations and they are less likely to have the wherewithal to meet

estate tax liabilities with only liquid assets plus insurance. The final section provides a summary and

conclusions.




2.      ANALYTIC PRELIMINARIES

        Our focus is on the incentives to employ life insurance as a means to meet the cash-flow

requirements of the estate tax. To fix ideas, suppose that the business owner has a total wealth of W

consisting of B in business assets and L of liquid assets; W = B + L . The individual obtains utility both

from passing along her wealth (including business assets) in the event of death and consuming her wealth

during life. If ð is the probability of death, the goal is to maximize expected utility:

         (1 - ð ) U ( W l ) + ð V ( W d )                                                           (1)

where Wl is wealth to be enjoyed if the individual lives and Wd is wealth transferred in the event of

death. The presence of the estate tax raises the possibility that the individual will not be able to pass

along the entire business as part of Wd. Specifically, if the tax liability, T, exceeds liquid assets, then the

estate is forced to liquidate the business in order to meet the tax liability.4 However, by their nature, the

business assets are illiquid and have greater value in place than upon liquidation, requiring the sacrifice of

                                                   3
more than a dollar of business value in order to obtain each dollar for the tax collector.5 Alternatively,

the individual could purchase life insurance, I, at a price p to meet the estate tax. The motivation for

purchasing life insurance rather than just saving more is the same as the motivation for buying any

insurance—the presence of uncertainty makes it a cheaper way to meet the objective. By purchasing

insurance, however, the individual reduces liquid wealth:

          L= L - p I .                                                                             (2)

Thus,

          Wl= B+ L - p I .                                                                         (3)

While the purchase of insurance decreases Wl, it reduces cash flow constraints associated with the

estate tax. Specifically,

          W d = B + L + I - T - ø [T - ( L+ I ) ]                                                  (4)

where ø is a positive constant that reflects the penalty for liquidating business assets. 6 For simplicity,

assume that the estate tax is levied at a proportional rate ô on a base that equals the sum of business

assets ( B ), liquid assets (L) and insurance (I)

          T = ô[ B + L + I ] ,                                                                     (5)

so that

          W d = B (1 - (1 + ø ) ô ) + [ L + (1 - p) I ] (1 + ø ) (1 - ô) .                         (6)

          The interior solution to the problem of optimal purchase of insurance is

          (1 - ð ) U ′( W l ) p = ð V ′( W d ) (1 + ø ) (1 - ô) (1 - p) .                          (7)




                                                    4
Assuming that insurance is priced on an actuarially fair basis (p

to7

        U ′( W l ) = V ′( W d )(1 + ø ) (1 - ô) .                                                     (8)

Intuitively, the left hand side of equation (8) is the utility lost by giving up a dollar to obtain insurance.

This dollar of life insurance generates two benefits, which appear on the right hand side. The first is

simply the transfer of $1 to the beneficiary. The second is the value of relaxing the cash flow constraint.




        In the empirical analysis to follow, we focus on the extent to which insurance is used to fill the

“gap” between tax liability and liquid assets, conditional upon the individual’s net wealth, health status,

the structure of the estate tax, and so forth. In the terms of the simple framework we have developed,

we seek to estimate how the individual’s insurance decision changes when the gap, G(= T − L ) ,

changes for fixed values of W , ð, and ô. To interpret such a conceptual experiment within our

framework, notice that a $1 reduction in liquid assets ( L ) that is offset by a $1 increase in business

assets B leaves the individual’s net wealth and estate tax liability (T) unchanged, but generates a $1

increase in the gap between tax liability and liquid assets plus insurance. Thus, our interest is in

∂I ∂I ∂I (1 + ø ) (1 - ô) V" (W d ) [(1 + ø ) (1 - ô) - (1 - (1 + ø ) ô)]
  ≡   -    =                                                              .                           (9)
∂G ∂ B ∂ L     U ′′(W l ) p + (1 + ø )2 (1 - ô) 2 V" (W d ) (1 - p )

                                                                               8



        Our discussion has focused on the illiquid nature of business assets. But the same

considerations apply to other illiquid assets, such as housing. Thus, while one might expect concerns

about illiquidity and estate taxes to be most pronounced for owners of small businesses, they may be

present more generally. At the same time, one must stress that it does not seem safe to assume that


                                                    5
people act consistently with simple models of estate tax behavior. As Poterba [1997, 1998] and others

have pointed out, for example, donors do not take full advantage of even simple estate tax avoidance

strategies such as inter vivos transfers.




3.      DATA

        The basic idea behind our empirical strategy is straightforward. As shown above, to the extent

individuals are concerned that their estates have insufficient liquidity to pay estate taxes, they will buy

insurance to fill the gap. This suggests an empirical specification in which the amount of insurance

demanded is a function of the gap between liquid assets and estate tax liability, inter alia. Estimating

such a model allows us to find the marginal effect of an increase in the gap on insurance demand.

Further, with information on the ownership of business assets, one can determine whether those who

own businesses and those who do not behave differently in this respect. A related but distinct issue is

whether insurance and liquid assets are sufficient to cover the entire estate tax liability. That is, can

estate taxes be paid without the heirs having to sell any illiquid assets?

        The starting point for finding an appropriate data set is the observation that the older segment of

the population is particularly likely to be sensitive to estate tax issues. Thus, for our analysis we pool

two nationally representative samples of older persons, the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and the

Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old Survey (AHEAD).

        The HRS began in 1992 with a random sample of noninstitutionalized men and women aged 51

to 61 and their families. Respondents outside the age range of 51 to 61 can appear in the sample only if

they are married to an age-eligible respondent. A reinterview will occur every two years for the next

decade. Currently, the HRS has two waves of data available for public use; we study the 1992 wave.


                                                  6
The baseline survey contains 12,652 respondents from 7,607 households, which includes an

oversample of blacks, Hispanics, and residents of the state of Florida. The sample also includes a set of

household and respondent level weights that make it possible to compute statistics that are

representative of the national population of individuals aged 51 to 61. A more detailed discussion of the

HRS can be found in Juster and Suzman [1995].

        The AHEAD has 8,223 noninstitutionalized respondents aged 70 and older from 6,052

households who were surveyed between October 1993 and July 1994.9 Much like the HRS,

oversampling of particular groups and exceptions to the age-eligibility screen influence the composition

of the sample, and the survey contains sample weights. (For further details, see Soldo, Hurd, Rodgers,

and Wallace [1997].)

        3.1     Key Variables

        Although the two data sources focus on different populations, pooling them is not difficult

because of substantial overlap in the questions that concern us. The combined sample provides

information on 13,654 households who answered a quite complete set of questions on their financial

circumstances. For our purposes, a critical question is “Do you [or your (husband/wife/partner)] own

part or all of a business?” If the respondent responds affirmatively, he or she is classified as being a

business owner.

        The survey questions distinguish between two types of life insurance, term insurance and

whole insurance.10 Term insurance offers coverage during a specific time period, and it pays a benefit

only if the holder dies during the term. Premiums generally increase as one grows older. Whole

insurance usually has cash surrender value, meaning that one can cancel all or part of the policy, and

receive the cash value as a lump sum. Premiums for whole insurance are paid periodically, and


                                                 7
generally are constant over the policy’s duration. Whole life policies earn annual dividends based on a

variety of considerations, and income taxes on these dividends are deferred. Term insurance generally

does not have any cash surrender value.

        Which type of insurance is more relevant in our context? A whole life policy is an amalgam of

insurance and a tax-preferred savings vehicle, while a term policy is more purely for insurance. Hence,

we believe that term insurance offers a cleaner measure of insurance demand, and it will be our main

focus.11 However, given that there is clearly an insurance component to whole policies, we examine

them as well.12

        As noted earlier, a critical question is the extent to which liquid assets plus insurance cover the

expected estate tax liability. Our data ask about holdings of a variety of assets; deciding which ones are

“liquid” is not obvious because there is a continuum with respect to ease of convertibility into cash.

Rather than commit ourselves to a single definition, we use three: 1) checking accounts, savings

accounts, and CDs; 2) the assets included in (1) plus stocks; and 3) the assets included in (2) plus

bonds. We create the variable GAPi, which is the estimated estate tax liability minus the value of assets

in group i, provided that the difference is positive. If the value is negative, then GAPi is equal to zero.

The reason for the truncation is that, in effect, GAPi represents the component of life insurance demand

generated by the estate tax, and this source of demand disappears when taxes are less than “liquid

        13



        Because the proceeds from insurance policies are subject to the estate tax, the GAPi variables

are likely to be endogenous in any insurance demand equation. Hence, in all our empirical work, we

compute GAPi net of insurance. While solving the endogeneity problem, this slightly complicates the

interpretation of the parameter estimates. Specifically, a $1 increase in insurance raises the gap by an


                                                 8
amount equal to the individual’s marginal estate tax rate. This, in turn, increases the amount of insurance

to cover estate tax liability, with further repercussion on both the size of the gap and insurance demand.

Because the marginal tax rate is less than one, the process converges. In Section 5 below, when we

discuss the implications of our results, we take this process into account.

        Computation of the various GAPi variables requires an estimate of the respondent’s expected

estate tax liability, which is not asked in the survey. We construct a simple tax calculator in which the

taxable estate is computed as net worth (defined below) minus $600,000 for single respondents and

$1,200,000 for married respondents.14 (These were the relevant exemptions in 1992.) The tax liability

is then found by applying the relevant rate schedule. Marginal rates ranged from 37 percent to 55

percent, with the latter figure applying to the amount of the taxable estate exceeding $3,400,000.15

        This tax calculator is quite crude, but it is hard to know how great a handicap this creates. As is

well known, there are many ways to avoid estate tax. There are, for example, several provisions that

allow deferral of tax payments for closely held businesses and farms.16 Several commentators argue that

business owners aggressively exploit the various avoidance techniques: “Most owners of small

businesses and firms do not pay the estate tax” (Burman [1997, p. 675]). To the extent this portrayal is

accurate, our estimates of the gap become less valid. However, this view is not universally held. A

number of stringent conditions must be met in order to qualify for various breaks (see Joint Committee

for Taxation [1998, pp. 4-5]). Indeed, the Arthur Anderson [1997] study argues that “A significant

number are missing out on estate-planning and tax-reduction opportunities, e.g., 43.4 percent do not

routinely use the $10,000 annual gift exclusion for their children.” As noted earlier, Poterba’s [1997,

1998] results support the notion that many individuals fail to exploit opportunities to reduce estate taxes.




                                                 9
        As a rough check on the accuracy of our tax calculator, we compared its predicted total estate

tax collections with actual estate tax receipts. Of course, the estate tax is collected only when an

individual dies, so we need an algorithm for predicting who will die. The AHEAD asks respondents for

the subjective probability that they will live at least another ten years. We arbitrarily assumed that

everyone whose answer was less than 10 percent would die within a year. We then used our tax

calculator to estimate the estate tax liability for these individuals and computed the average estate tax

per taxable estate (using the weights provided in the survey). This yielded an average estate tax liability

of $354,645, which is reasonably close to the actual value of $385,706 (reported in Joulfaian [1998,

Table 7]). On this basis, we think that results generated by a simple tax calculator provide useful

information. Nevertheless, we discuss below some alternative specifications that allow for the possibility

that the calculator produces substantial errors for households with very high wealth.




        3.2      A Preliminary Look at the Data

        In our sample 10.7 percent of the respondents own businesses. (See Table 1 for means and

standard deviations of the variables.) Forty-nine percent of the entire sample owns term insurance; the

incidence is higher among business owners, 54.7 percent. Business owners are also more likely to buy

whole insurance; 51.9 percent versus 32.2 percent of the entire sample. Business owners are not only

more likely to buy insurance; conditional on purchase, they buy a larger amount. The conditional mean

of term insurance for business owners is $111,993. In the sample as a whole, it is $47,854.

        Might some of this insurance be “for” meeting estate tax liabilities? One way to start answering

this question is to see if there is, in fact, a gap between individuals’ estimated estate tax liabilities and

their liquid assets. The figures in Table 1 indicate that for the sample as a whole, there is such a gap:


                                                   10
$12,190 on average using a narrow definition of liquid assets; $8,649 including stocks; and $8,176

including bonds as well. The gaps are substantial relative to net worth. This is particularly true if we

condition on having an estate tax liability (column (4)). The ratios of the mean gaps to mean net worth

range from 12 percent to 18 percent.17

        Perhaps the large gaps are a consequence of prohibitively high prices for insurance. This

consideration leads us to ask what the premium would be for a term policy large enough to cover the

average gap. The answer for any given individual depends on characteristics such as age, health status,

sex, and region of the country. It also depends on the particular concept of the gap and the individual’s

marginal estate tax rate. To get a sense of the order of magnitude involved, we took the sample of

males with positive estate tax liability, and computed their average age and marginal estate tax rate. We

assumed that this “average male” was in standard health and did not smoke. Assuming further that the

gap to be covered was the mean of our three concepts, we consulted a life insurance industry source

and found that the annual premium would be about $3,900.18 While not a prohibitive amount (relative

to a mean income in this group of $117,000), neither is it negligible.

        Turning to the figures for the sample of business owners in column (3), the gaps are

considerably higher than for the rest of the population: $76,590, $60,390, and $57,193, respectively,

for the three definitions of liquid assets.19 It might appear, then, that some of the business owners’

higher demand for insurance is driven by a larger gap between liquid assets and estimated estate tax

liability. But extreme caution is required because, as Table 1 indicates, business owners differ in other

ways from the sample as a whole: they have higher net worth; higher income; and they are less likely to

be female and more likely to be married, among other things.20 Hence, a multivariate approach is

required when investigating the links between business ownership and the demand for insurance.


                                                11
        Thus far we have focused on the overall demand for insurance. A distinct but related question is

whether the sum of insurance and liquid assets is enough to pay the estate tax liability. We define a set

of dichotomous variables COVERi, which take the value of one if the ith concept of liquid assets is

sufficient to cover the taxes, and zero otherwise. These variables are defined only for those individuals

with positive tax liabilities. As the mean values of the COVERi variables in column (4) indicate, about

44 percent of the estates can pay estate taxes out of insurance plus narrowly defined liquid assets; 63

percent including stocks in liquid assets; and 66 percent including bonds as well. The figures are

somewhat lower for business owners: 41 percent, 54 percent, and 58 percent, respectively. Again,

however, one must account for other variables before concluding that business ownership independently

affects the likelihood of having the means to meet an estate tax bill.




4.      A MULTIVARIATE FRAMEWORK

        In this section we develop an empirical specification that allows us to investigate the extent to

which the demand for life insurance depends on the gap between liquid assets and estate tax liability.21

As suggested above, to begin we must specify a set of variables other than the gap that potentially can

influence insurance demand.

        The individual’s resources are likely to be important in this context—the greater one’s assets,

the easier it is to provide for one’s heirs without recourse to insurance, ceteris paribus. Hence, we

include the variable NETWORTH, defined as the sum of the net values of primary residence, all other

real estate, transportation vehicles, businesses, IRA/Keogh accounts, stocks/mutual funds,

checking/saving accounts, certificates of deposit, bonds, trust assets not included in other categories,

and miscellaneous assets, all less debts.22 Since we are trying to explain holdings of insurance, we


                                                 12
exclude the value of insurance from this calculation. Also, the calculation excludes the asset value of

pensions, because this figure is not available in our data. In particular, 401(k) accounts and other such

defined contribution instruments are not included.23 Pension income, however, is included in our

measure of household income (see below). The business value component of NETWORTH is

ascertained by asking, “If you sold the business and paid off any debts on it, how much would you

get?” Thus, the figure relates to the market value of the business, not the book value.

        As is the case in most surveys of household wealth, respondents do not always provide a value

for one or more of their assets. The AHEAD and HRS surveys include a set of categorical unfolding

questions” to place nonresponses into bounded bracket values. The brackets bound the value of the

particular asset to a known interval. 24 Specific values are then imputed by the survey staff using a “hot

deck” technique (see Smith [1995, 1997]). Basically, in each data set a group of economic and

demographic covariates is used to match individuals within a bracket who did not report a specific value

to those who did.

        A measure of the individual’s ability to pay for insurance is annual household income,

INCOME.25 An alternative would be to include a measure of permanent or lifetime income. However,

to do so requires a substantial number of assumptions and imputations (see, e.g., Auerbach and

Kotlikoff [1987]), so we employ the reported annual measure.

        We include a dichotomous variable BUSINESS that equals one if the estate includes a business.

As noted earlier, business owners may face more uncertainty when it comes to estate tax plans, which

could affect their insurance demand, ceteris paribus. Also, business owners might be more

sophisticated financially than other individuals. The BUSINESS variable captures these (and any

remaining) differences.26


                                                13
        Several demographic variables might affect an individual’s demand for life insurance. We have

information on sex, marital status, number of living children, age, education and race. The dichotomous

variables FEMALE and MARRIED take on values of one if the individual is female and married,

respectively. From an estate tax perspective, we would expect married individuals to be less likely to

hold insurance—life insurance for estate tax purposes can be purchased after the first spouse dies.

AGE is the respondent’s age in years.27 One important reason for including the AGE variable is that

individuals may become more sensitive to estate tax issues as they grow older, and re-arrange their

financial affairs accordingly. In addition, life insurance becomes more costly to individuals as they age,

ceteris paribus. We augment the age variable with a dichotomous variable, AHEAD, that takes a value

of one if the observation is from the AHEAD sample. Members of the HRS sample were born between

1931 and 1941; the AHEAD sample was born in 1923 or earlier. Therefore, the AHEAD variable

roughly differentiates those born just prior to World War II and those born around World War I.

Poterba and Samwick [1997] have shown that there are substantial differences in asset ownership

probabilities across different birth cohorts; the presence of the AHEAD variable allows for the

possibility that such differences may be present in life insurance decisions as well.

        EDUCATION and CHILDREN measure years of education and number of children,

respectively. With respect to race, the dichotomous variable BLACK is equal to one if the individual is

black, whites are the omitted group, and OTHRACE is the dichotomous variable for individuals who are

neither black nor white. The racial issue is of some interest in this context because of claims that the

estate tax hits black businesses particularly hard. A survey of the largest black-owned businesses

indicated that estate taxes make the continuation of the business significantly more difficult or




                                                 14
impossible. More than 80 percent said they do not have enough assets to pay estate taxes” (Poole

[1995, p. 3F]).

        An individual’s health status may affect both his desire for life insurance and its availability. The

data contain a self-reported measure of health status from which we create a set of dichotomous

variables: HLTHEXEL is one if health is excellent; HLTHVG is one if health is very good; HLTHFAIR

is one if health is fair; and HLTHPOOR if health if poor. (“Health is good” is the omitted category.)

        The previous section suggested that the demand for term insurance depends on the variables

just described as well as the gap between liquid assets and estate tax liability. The response of

insurance demand to the size of the gap is of particular interest in our context, because it indicates

whether there is a component of demand driven by estate tax considerations. Our specification includes

interactions that allow the effect of the gap to vary with AGE and with BUSINESS. Further, we allow

the effect of business ownership to vary with age.

        In computing our estimates, the fact that 51 percent of the respondents do not have term

insurance implies that ordinary least squares is not an appropriate estimation technique. Instead, we

employ a Tobit estimator. The Tobit approach is sensible because the factors determining the decision

to purchase and the amount purchased are the same.




5.      RESULTS

        5.1       Basic Estimates

        The parameter estimates are presented in Table 2. We discuss first our main concern—the

relationship among business ownership, the estate tax, and insurance demand. In terms of our

theoretical framework, the key issue is the extent to which people purchase life insurance to fill the gap


                                                 15
between expected estate tax liability and liquid assets. Recall, however, that there are several ways in

which liquid assets can be defined. Column (1) excludes stocks and bonds; column (2) includes stocks;

and column (3) includes bonds as well.

        In column (1), the coefficients on the three variables involving GAP1 (the direct effect, and

interactions with AGE and BUSINESS) are jointly statistically significant at all conventional levels—a

test of the hypothesis that all the coefficients are zero yields a chi-squared statistic with three degrees of

freedom of 32.2. Thus, the gap between liquid assets and estate tax liability does affect insurance

demand, other things being the same. The interaction of GAP1 and AGE is negative, implying that the

older the individual, the smaller the impact of a given value of GAP1 upon insurance demand. The

interaction of GAP1 and BUSINESS is also negative—a given gap in the volume of liquid assets needed

to meet the estate tax liability induces a smaller increase in insurance demand for business owners than

for other individuals, ceteris paribus. This is at odds with the conjecture that business owners use

insurance as the marginal source of funds to pay the estate tax. Indeed, given that the probability of

death increases with age, the fact that both these interactions are negative runs counter to the notion that

estate taxes are an important motivation for life insurance.

        Assessing the quantitative significance of GAP is slightly complicated by the fact that it appears

in several interactions. Evaluated at the mean age in the sample (65.5 years) and assuming that the

individual is not a business owner, a dollar increase in GAP1 increases the Tobit index by about $0.043

(= 0.449 - 0.0062*65.5). To compute the change in expected insurance demand, the Tobit coefficients

must be transformed using the normal distribution.28,29 (See Maddala [1983, p. 159].) This

computation suggests that a $1 increase in GAP1 increases the expected amount of term insurance by

$0.027. The positive value is consistent with the theory developed in Section 2. (See the discussion


                                                 16
surrounding equation (9).) As already noted, for a business owner the effect is less (because the

interaction of GAP1 and BUSINESS is negative). Conditional on BUSINESS being equal to one, a $1

increase in GAP1 leads to a $0.017 increase in term insurance. In short, the data reveal a positive but

very small marginal propensity to purchase life insurance for estate tax reasons for non-business owners,

and it is even smaller for business owners.

        This does not, of course, mean that owners of businesses demand less insurance than other

individuals, ceteris paribus. To investigate this issue, we must evaluate the impact of BUSINESS and

its various interactions upon insurance demand. The main effect of business ownership is positive, but it

decreases with age, and, as already noted, it decreases with the size of the gap between liquid assets

and estate tax liabilities. As before, to find the impact of owning a business (i.e., changing BUSINESS

from zero to one) upon expected insurance demand, we must use the appropriate Tobit transformation.

This computation indicates that business owners have $2,285 more insurance, ceteris paribus. Given

that unconditional mean term insurance holdings are only about $24,000 (see Table 1), this is a

substantial amount.

        Turning now to the other variables, we note that insurance demand decreases with net worth

and its square. (The linear and quadratic terms are jointly significant at the 0.03 level.) This is

consistent with Bernheim s [1991] finding that the demand for term insurance falls with lifetime

resources. The coefficient on AGE is negative—within this age group, insurance holdings fall with age,

a result found in both the Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1987] and Bernheim [1991] studies. Married

individuals carry less life insurance, consistent with our earlier conjecture that insurance for estate tax

purposes can be purchased after the death of the first spouse. Females carry less insurance, while the

coefficients on the health variables suggest that the better an individual’s health, the more life insurance


                                                 17
he or she holds, ceteris paribus. Education and income are both positively related to insurance

demand. The coefficient on the dichotomous variable for blacks is negative, but small in magnitude and

statistically insignificant.

         Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 include stocks and the sum of stocks and bonds, respectively,

in the computation of the gap between liquid assets and the estate tax. A glance at these results

suggests that sensible modifications in the way liquid assets are measured affect neither the qualitative

nor quantitative implications of our results. In particular, although the positive main effects of GAP are

larger in columns (2) and (3), so are the absolute values of the negative coefficients on the interactions

with age, leaving the net effect about the same. Regardless of how the gap between estate taxes and

liquid assets is measured, business owners have more term insurance than other people, but do not

respond to the gap as strongly as non-owners.

         5.2       Alternative Specifications

         In this section we examine a variety of specifications to assess the robustness of our results.

         Whole Insurance.       As stated earlier, term life is the type of insurance that makes most sense to

analyze in the context of estate tax planning because there are alternative incentives for purchasing whole

insurance, such as the ability to save while deferring income taxes. 30 That said, the existence of

“survivor whole life insurance” blurs this distinction. It covers a married couple, but pays no benefit until

the second person dies. In other words, a spouse cannot be the beneficiary of a survivorship whole

policy, making it inferior to standard whole policies for purposes of providing wealth to a surviving

spouse. However, the cost of a survivor whole life policy is lower than that of two whole policies to

cover both members of the couple, making it an economical way to provide the means to pay estate

taxes. Indeed, one company markets them as “estate saver policies.”


                                                  18
        Unfortunately, our data do not differentiate between survivor whole life policies and standard

whole life policies. Because we do not know the relative importance of the former and even

conventional whole policies have an insurance component, we re-estimated our canonical equations

using the sum of term and whole policies as the dependent variable. The results are reported in the first

three columns of Table 3. To conserve space, we report only the coefficients on BUSINESS, the GAP

variables, and their various interactions. The results are quite similar to those in Table 2. Hence, while

there may be some conceptual ambiguity with respect to which type of insurance is appropriate to

analyze, as a practical matter, it does not make much difference.

        Tax Calculator.      As noted earlier, the accuracy of our simple estate tax calculator may be

affected by the existence of various tax avoidance schemes, although whether most individuals actually

exploit such opportunities is unclear. To the extent various avoidance techniques are employed, they

are probably more prevalent at the upper end of the wealth distribution. That is, if there is a problem

with the tax calculator, it is likely to be affecting those for whom our estimates of the various gaps are

relatively large. To see whether large avoidance incentives affect our results, we deleted the 5 percent

of the sample with the highest (positive) values of GAP, and re-estimated the canonical equations with

the truncated sample.

        The results are reported in columns (4), (5), and (6) of Table 3.31 The coefficients do not differ

very much from their counterparts in Table 2. This gives us some confidence that our results are not an

artifact of the crudeness of our estate tax calculator. In another exercise in the same spirit, we

computed the estate tax liability on the assumption that the value of business assets reported on the

estate tax return was 20 percent less than the actual value. Again, we found no important differences in

our coefficient estimates.


                                                 19
           Single versus Married Individuals.    Our model assumes that the insurance demands of single

and married individuals differ only by their intercepts, ceteris paribus. Suppose, however, that the

owner of a business is willing to take the risk that he/she and his/her spouse die together (the “plane

crash death”), but worries about the estate tax preventing the heirs from keeping the business in the

event of sequential deaths. In this case, only single individuals have an estate-tax-driven component of

demand for term insurance, and married individuals should be excluded from the sample. We found that

the results for the singles-only sample are qualitatively the same as those reported above. In particular,

the three terms involving the various GAP variables continue to be jointly significant, but imply that the

marginal propensity to purchase insurance to fill the gap between assets and estate tax liability is very

small.32

           Uncertainties about business value.   In Section 4 we noted that some respondents were

unable to provide precise estimates of the values of various assets. In the case of business assets, the

majority of business owners provided a value, but about 35 percent either refused to respond or were

not sure of the value.33 As with other assets, the survey utilized categorical unfolding questions as the

basis for an imputation of business value. If an answer of “not sure” reflects genuine uncertainty, it might

have an independent effect upon insurance demand—an individual who is unsure about the value of his

business, and hence the associated estate tax liability, may have a different demand than someone who

is relatively certain, ceteris paribus. We therefore augmented the basic specification with a

dichotomous variable NOTSURE, which takes a value of one if the imputation procedure was used and

zero otherwise, and interacted it with GAP and AGE. The results in columns (7) through (9) of Table 3

imply that the overall impact of NOTSURE, taking account of all interactions, is modestly negative. To

the extent that NOTSURE reflects uncertainty about estate value, it suggests that such uncertainty has


                                                  20
little impact on insurance demand. We note, however, that this is not the only possible interpretation,

because in some cases imputations were done simply because the respondent refused to answer the

question.

        5.3     Probability that Liquid Assets and Insurance Cover Estate Tax Liability

        So far our focus has been on the amount of life insurance that people purchase. A related but

distinct question is whether the sum of liquid assets and insurance covers the estate tax liability. In

particular, does the probability that business owners’ estates contain the liquid assets and insurance

needed to cover estate taxes differ from that of other individuals? To think about this issue, recall from

Table 1 the COVERi variables, which take the value of one if the individual has enough insurance plus

liquid assets (of type i) in the estate to cover estate taxes, and zero otherwise. A natural strategy is to

investigate whether the probability that COVERi is one differs between business owners and the rest of

the sample. Specifically, we use the sample of individuals with positive estate tax liabilities to estimate

regressions of COVERi on the right hand side variables in our canonical model (without the GAP

variables). Given that the COVERi variables are dichotomous, we use a probit statistical model.

        The results are reported in Table 4. They reveal a number of interesting tendencies. As net

worth increases, the likelihood that there are sufficient liquid assets and insurance to cover estate tax

liability falls. (The negative coefficient or the linear term dominates throughout 99 percent of the

distribution of values for net worth.) Conditional on net worth, though, an increase in income increases

the probability. Being married increases the probability that one’s estate will contain the resources

needed to pay estate taxes, while the number of children and years of education do not exert a

statistically significant effect. Neither does being black, which is noteworthy given the above cited

concerns that blacks are particularly likely to be hurt by the estate tax.


                                                 21
         Our main concern is the impact of business ownership on the probability of being able to pay

the estate tax. In all three specifications in Table 4, BUSINESS and its interaction with AGE are

individually insignificant. However, a test of BUSINESS and AGE*BUSINESS reveals they are jointly

significant in the specifications of columns (2) and (3).34 With respect to the quantitative implications of

the estimates, we first note that, evaluated at the mean value of AGE, the impact is negative—the

estates of business owners are less likely to be able to meet estate tax liabilities than those of other

people, ceteris paribus. As a qualitative matter, this result is not surprising. After all, we know from

Table 1 that business owners have larger gaps between liquid assets and estate taxes. Further, as Table

2 indicates, even though business owners purchase more insurance on average, their propensity to make

additional purchases as the gap grows is lower. The end result is that business owners are less likely to

cover their estate tax liabilities.

         A possible problem with the estimates in Table 4 is that they ignore information with respect to

the amount by which liquid assets plus insurance fall short of estate tax liability. The dichotomous left

hand side variable treats as equivalent one estate in which the shortfall is a few dollars and another in

which it is thousands. We therefore estimate a continuous version of the model, in which the left hand

side variable is the difference between liquid assets plus insurance and estate tax liability.35 The

qualitative results are quite similar, and are not reported here to conserve space.36 Hence, whether we

view the ability to meet estate tax liabilities as a dichotomous or continuous variable, the outcome is the

same—the estates of business owners are less likely to have the wherewithal to pay estate taxes.




6.       SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS




                                                 22
        In this paper we have examined the extent to which life insurance plays a role in dealing with

estate tax burdens, particularly for owners of possibly illiquid business assets. Our results suggest that

owners of businesses buy more insurance than other individuals, but even together with the liquid assets

in their portfolios, there is insufficient money to cover estate taxes. This finding has several

interpretations. One is that there are other means to cover estate taxes that do not show up in our data.

The heirs, for example, might have substantial liquid assets.37 A second possibility is that, contrary to

the popular view that keeping a business in the family is very important to business owners, they make

no special efforts in this respect. In any case, we have found no evidence that business owners fully

exploit life insurance to meet estate tax liabilities.




                                                    23
                                           ENDNOTES

1.   See Joint Committee on Taxation [1998]. Indeed, Bernheim [1987] suggests that the tax is
     actually a net revenue loser because of the interaction with the charitable deduction of the
     individual income tax.

2.   April 15, 1999, page A22.

3.   Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1987] and Bernheim [1991] estimate models of insurance demand,
     but do not consider estate tax issues.

4.   As noted below, certain provisions allow the estate tax payments on some businesses to be
     stretched out over a number of years. This would tend to reduce (but not eliminate) such
     liquidation effects. The value of the estate is also affected by provisions of the individual income
     tax, in particular, the step-up of basis at death. The existence of this provision affects neither
     our theoretical framework nor the interpretation of our empirical results below.

5.   It is not obvious that the second or third generations can run the business as well as the original
     owner. For our purposes the key assumption is that the owner perceives that the enterprise will
     be worth less if it is sold.

6.   If T < (L + I), then there are no cash flow constraints. Here we focus exclusively on the
     case where T > (L + I). Our empirical work considers both regimes.

7.   The qualitative nature of our conclusions is unaffected by the actual pricing of insurance.
     We make this assumption for expositional clarity alone.

8.   Note that the impact of the gap increases with ø. Indeed, for large enough penalties for
     liquidating assets, insurance purchases rise more than dollar-for-dollar with increases in the
     gap. That is

               lim ∂I        1
                      =                >1 .
             ø → ∞ ∂G (1 - ô) (1 - p )


9.   Our statistical analysis accounts for the fact that the AHEAD data are from a different year
     than the HRS data by allowing the intercepts to differ depending on whether the observation
     is drawn from AHEAD or HRS.




                                             24
10.   The survey question is, “Do you have any life insurance, including individual or group
      policies?” The question clearly asks for life insurance from any source and it is placed after
      the questions about assets, in which trusts are explicitly discussed. Hence, it is reasonable
      to assume that the figure reported includes insurance held in trust.

11.   Another reason for focusing on term insurance relates to the fact that there is a minor
      difference in the insurance questions in the two surveys. The AHEAD asks the value of the
      policy if the holder dies, while HRS asks for the face value of the policy. Term policies only
      have value when the policy holder expires, so the answer would be the same in both
      surveys. With whole insurance, if the policy holder has borrowed against the policy, the
      face value and the value at death could differ.

12.   Indeed, as noted below, certain types of whole life policies are specifically intended to
      cover a couple’s estate tax liability.

13.   For information about the portfolio holdings of entrepreneurs, see Gentry and Hubbard
      [1998].

14.   During the time period of our data (1992), if a member of a couple died, the survivor could
      receive the entire estate tax free and transfer up to $600,000 of the estate to children tax
      free. When the survivor died, the remaining estate was taxed normally (i.e., using the
      $600,000 threshold). Therefore, a couple could shelter $1,200,000 from estate tax,
      leading to the $1,200,000 threshold for married respondents. For a survey of estate and
      gift tax issues, see Joulfaian [1998]. A possible problem with our tax calculator in this
      context is that the owner of the business may expect a surviving spouse to take various
      actions to reduce estate tax liability such as inter vivos gifts. As shown below, married
      individuals do in fact demand less insurance, ceteris paribus.

15.   Beginning in 1998, up to $1.3 million of the value of family-owned business may be
      excluded from the taxable estate.

16.   During our sample period, the tax for businesses (depending on their share in the gross estate)
      could be deferred and paid over 14 years (plus nine months filing period). Four percent interest
      was charged on the first million dollars of taxable estate, and interest expenses were deductible
      in computing the estate tax. See Joulfaian [1998] for further details. A related phenomenon is
      that businesses may be undervalued when they pass through probate. To the extent this is true
      and recognized, owners will realize that the estate tax burden will be less than that associated
      with the “true” value, which is reported in the data. We make a rough attempt to deal with this
      below.

17.   When we compute the ratios of the various gap measures to net worth on an individual basis
      (conditional on the gaps being positive), the result is about the same, with the means in the 14 to
      15 percent range. The medians are slightly lower, about 11 to 12 percent.



                                              25
18.   This calculation relied on an internet site called LIFESHOPPER
      (http://www.lifeshopper.com/whyshop.htm), which provides competitive term life quotes. To
      begin, we found the amount of insurance required to fill the respective gaps, taking into account
      the fact that the life insurance itself is subject to estate tax. We then inflated these figures to
      1999 levels, and asked LIFESHOPPER to price a policy in that amount for a 63 year old male
      who did not smoke and was in “standard” health, under the assumption that the coverage would
      last for 15 years. We did the calculation separately for an individual living in each of the four
      census regions, and took a weighted average over the four regions to arrive at the final figure,
      which we then converted back to 1992 dollars.

19    Note again that the GAPi variables do not include insurance.

20.   Such tendencies have been observed in other data; see, for example, Fairlie and Meyer
      [1996].

21.   For alternative specifications with a somewhat less extensive set of regressors, see
      Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1987] or Bernheim [1991].

22.   Trust assets are included in both surveys. In the HRS, trusts are in a catch-all category with
      “valuable collections and miscellaneous assets.” Therefore, we cannot distinguish trusts
      from these other two categories. In AHEAD, the trust question is asked at the end of the
      asset section. After determining if the respondent has a trust and its value, the survey asks if
      the trust assets were already mentioned in the other asset questions. If the answer is yes,
      then the trust value is not added to net worth.

23.   To the extent that households with businesses accumulate a substantial amount of their
      “retirement wealth” in the business, the omission of defined contribution pension plans may bias
      our results. Specifically, our measure of the net worth of business owners may be too high
      relative to the rest of the sample, leading to estimates of the various gaps that are too high
      relative to the rest of the sample. In effect, then, owners of businesses might appear to be
      buying too little life insurance (relative to the rest of the sample) to fill the gap, ceteris paribus.
      To investigate this issue, we took advantage of the fact that the data allow us to form a
      dichotomous variable for whether or not the individual has any kind of pension. We interacted
      this variable both with the respective gap variables and the dichotomous variable for business
      ownership. The interaction terms were insignificant, lending some support to the notion that the
      omission of defined contribution assets does not bias our estimates of how business ownership
      affects the demand for insurance.

24.   For example, if a respondent did not report an exact value, the interviewer asked if the
      value was $50,000 or more. Based upon the answer, the respondent would be asked a
      second question to narrow the categorical amount. The final amount categories for business
      assets are $0-$9,999, $10,000-$49,999, $50,000-$499,999, and greater than $500,000.

25.   Income is computed as the sum of earnings, government transfers (SSI, OASDI, UI, AFDC,

                                               26
      etc.), private pension and annuity payments, and income from assets.

26.   We have no information on the type of business. This impedes investigation of two potentially
      interesting issues. First, some types of businesses are more liquid, collateralizable or divisible
      than others. Second, some kinds of businesses may be intrinsically harder to keep in the family
      than others.

27.   We experimented with a quadratic term in age, and found that it did not significantly
      increase the explanatory power of the equation.

28.   We perform this calculation for each individual in the sample, and then report the mean.

29.   As noted earlier, the purchase of insurance also affects the value of GAPi. Our calculations
      incorporate this feedback. The feedback effects are very small. For example, while the
      point estimate of the coefficient on the interaction between GAP1 and AGE is -0.006180,
      incorporating the feedback changes this to only -0.006178.

30.   The same distinction is made by Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1987] and Brown [1999], who
      focus on the demand for term insurance.

31.   Note that the sample sizes increase as we move from column (4) to column (6). As the
      definition of liquid assets becomes more inclusive, the number of observations with a
      positive value of GAPi decreases. Hence, 5 percent of that number decreases. With fewer
      observations discarded, the number of observations used in the estimation increases.

32.   For the variants using GAP2 and GAP 3, the interaction of GAP and the dichotomous business
      variable is statistically insignificant.

33.   Roughly 80 percent of respondents who did not report a value for their business provided a
      categorical value, while the remaining respondents refused to provide a categorical value.
      For those who provided no response at all, the imputation was based on the sample of
      those who provided bracket values.

34.   In column (1), the chi-square test statistic with two degrees of freedom is 3.89; in column
      (2) it is 21.38; and in column (3) it is 17.74. The critical value at the 0.95 significance level
      is 5.99.

35.   Note the difference between this variable and the GAP variables that are on the right hand
      side in the insurance demand equations of Table 3. The latter do not include insurance in
      them, and hence can be treated as exogenous. In contrast, the variable under consideration
      here does include insurance, and hence is endogenous. Consistent with previous
      specifications, the variable is truncated below at zero.

36.   The only difference is that AGE and AGE x BUSINESS are jointly insignificant.

37.   Our data do not indicate whether or not children or other heirs own insurance policies on the
      respondents’ lives.




                                               27
                                       REFERENCES


Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. “Life Insurance of the Elderly: Adequacy
      and Determinants.” In Gary Burtless (ed.), Work, Health, and Income among the Elderly.
      Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, pp. 229-267.

Arthur Anderson. 1997. The Arthur Andersen/Mass Mutual American Family Business
       Survey 97. URL: [www.massmutual.com/fbn/html/res97.html], June.

Bartlett, Bruce. 1997. “The End of the Estate Tax?” Tax Notes, July 7, pp. 105-110.

Bernheim, Douglas. 1987. “Does the Estate Tax Raise Revenue?” In Lawrence Summers (ed.),
       Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 113-138.

Bernheim, Douglas. 1991. “How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates
      of the Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities,” Journal of Political Economy, 99
      (October): 829-927.

Brown, Jeffrey R. 1999. “Are the Elderly Really Over-Annuitized? New Evidence on Life
      Insurance and Bequests,” NBER Working Paper No. 7193. Cambridge, MA: National
      Bureau of Economic Research, June.

Burman, Leonard E. 1997. “Estate Taxes and the Angel of Death Loophole,” Tax Notes, August
      4, pp. 675-678.

Bosland, Chelcie C. 1963. “Has Estate Taxation Induced Recent Mergers?” National Tax
       Journal, XVI(2) (June): 159-168.

Christian, Nichole M. 1998. “Heirs Try to Keep A Black Press Heritage Alive,” New York
        Times, March 9, p. D1.

Fairlie, Robert and Bruce Meyer. 1996. “Ethnic and Racial Self-Employment Differences and
         Possible Explanations,” Journal of Human Resources, 31(4): 757-93.

Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1998. “Why Do the Wealthy Save So Much?:
       Saving and Investment Decisions of Entrepreneurs.” Working Paper, Graduate School of
       Business. New York, NY: Columbia University.

Herman, Tom. 1997. “Tax Report,” Wall Street Journal, June 25, p. A1.

Jenkins, Holman W., Jr. 1997. “Tax the Rich, Nuke the Poor,” Wall Street Journal, May 27,
       p. A19.

Joint Committee on Taxation. 1998. Present Law and Background Relating to Estate and Gift
       Taxes. Washington, DC: January 27.




                                          28
Joulfaian, David. 1998. “The Federal Estate and Gift Tax: Description, Profile of Taxpayers,
        and Economic Consequences.” OTA Working Paper No. 80, Department of the
        Treasury, Washington, DC.

Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman. 1995. “An Overview of the Health and Retirement
               Journal of Human Resources, 30: S7-S56.

King, Carole. 1997. “Estate Tax Change Poses Opportunity for Some,” National Underwriter,
       May 19.

Maddala, G.S. 1983. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

National Federation of Independent Business. 1997. Death (Estate) Tax Reform.         URL:
       www.nfibonline.com/politics/issue-archive/taxes/etib.html].

Poole, Shelia M. 1995. “Family Businesses Hit Hard by Taxes,” The Atlanta Journal and
       Constitution, September 6, p. 3F.

Poterba, James. 1997. “The Estate Tax and After-Tax Investment,” NBER Working Paper
       No. 6337. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, December.

Poterba, James. 1998. “Estate and Gift Taxes and Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving in the
       United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 6842. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research, December.

Poterba, James and Andrew A. Samwick. 1997. “Household Portfolio Allocation over the Life
       Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 6185. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research, September.

Smith, James P. 1997. “Wealth Inequality among Older Americans,” The Journals of
       Gerontology Series B: Psychological and Social Sciences, 52B: 74-81.

Smith, James P. 1995. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retirement
              Journal of Human Resources, 30: S158-S183.

Soldo, Beth J., Michael D. Hurd, Willard L. Rodgers, and Robert B. Wallace. 1997. “Asset and
       Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old: An Overview of the AHEAD Study,” The
       Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological and Social Sciences, 52B: S1-S20.

Somers, Harold M. 1958. “Estate Taxes and Business Mergers: The Effects of Estate Taxes on
      Business Structure and Practices in the United States,” Journal of Finance, 13 (May):
      201-210.

Stevenson, Richard W. 1997. “Small-Business Owners Mobilize Against Estate Tax,” New
       York Times, June 12.

Travis Research Associates, Inc. 1995. Federal Estate Tax Impact Survey. Costa Mesa, CA:
       Center for the Study of Taxation.


                                         29
</ref_section>
                                             Table 1. Summary Statistics a


                                                              Term Insurance   Business    Positive Estate
                                             Entire Sample       Holders       Owners            Tax
                Variable                          (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)
BUSINESS                                         0.107              0.119         1             0.538
(=1 if business owner)                          (0.310)            (0.324)       (--)          (0.499)

TERM                                             23,640             47,850       61,260        111,020
(value of term insurance)                       (73,338)           (98,630)    (152,300)      (250,075)

DTERM                                            0.494                1          0.547          0.487
(=1 if term insurance)                          (0.500)              (--)       (0.498)        (0.500)

WHOLE                                            15,130             15,972       52,460        112,676
(value of whole insurance)                      (63,690)           (63,100)    (140,800)      (252,697)

DWHOLE                                           0.322              0.331        0.519          0.558
(=1 if whole insurance)                         (0.467)            (0.471)      (0.500)        (0.497)

WHOLE + TERM                                     38,770             63,820      113,700        223,696
(sum of whole and term)                        (105,000)          (129,600)    (219,400)      (370,489)

D(WHOLE + TERM)                                  0.687                1          0.815          0.782
(=1 if whole or term insurance)                 (0.464)              (--)       (0.389)        (0.414)

GAP1 (difference between estate tax              12,190             12,470       76,590        324,495
liability and “liquid assets”)                 (143,100)          (138,200)    (365,300)      (666,533)

GAP2                                             8,649              9,558        60,390        230,214
(“liquid assets” include stocks)               (115,700)          (121,000)    (299,700)      (553,183)

GAP3                                             8,176              8,942        57,193        217,639
(“liquid assets” include bonds)                (112,800)          (116,100)    (290,900)      (542,119)

COVER1b (=1 if estate tax liability can be        ---               0.544        0.409          0.437
met by “liquid assets” plus insurance)            ---              (0.499)      (0.495)        (0.496)

COVER2b                                           ---               0.688        0.540          0.630
(“liquid assets” includes stocks)                 ---              (0.464)      (0.499)        (0.483)

COVER3b                                           ---               0.721        0.576          0.663
(“liquid assets” includes bonds)                  ---              (0.454)      (0.495)        (0.403)

NETWORTH                                        194,900            207,400      624,500       1,797,755
(net worth)                                    (461,100)          (469,100)    (999,200)     (1,489,754)

NOTSURE (=1 if imputation was used to           0.0320             0.0320        0.298          0.214
estimate net worth)                             (0.176)            (0.176)      (0.457)        (0.411)

INCOME                                           37,380             44,530      73,007         117,315
(household income)                              (43,740)           (46,860)    (79,240)       (127,156)
                                                  Table 1. Continueda


                                                                 Term Insurance           Business        Positive Estate
                                             Entire Sample          Holders               Owners                Tax
                   Variable                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)
FEMALE                                            0.553                0.510                0.395              0.376
(=1 if female)                                   (0.497)              (0.500)              (0.489)            (0.485)

MARRIED                                           0.555                0.662                0.821              0.691
(=1 if married)                                  (0.497)              (0.473)              (0.383)            (0.480)

AGE                                                65.5                 63.0                 58.3               62.7
(= age in years)                                  (12.0)               (11.1)               (8.63)             (10.5)

AHEAD (=1 if observation from the                 0.443                0.348                0.162              0.306
AHEAD sample)                                    (0.497)              (0.476)              (0.369)            (0.461)

EDUCATION                                          11.5                 12.0                 13.3               14.4
(years of education)                              (3.62)               (3.38)               (2.77)             (2.59)

BLACK                                             0.170                0.172               0.0688             0.0409
(=1 if black)                                    (0.376)              (0.377)              (0.253)            (0.198)

OTHRACE                                          0.0969               0.0651               0.0620             0.0351
(=1 if neither black nor white)                  (0.296)              (0.247)              (0.241)            (0.184)

CHILDREN                                           2.98                 3.06                 3.10               2.69
(= number of children)                            (2.22)               (2.14)               (2.00)             (2.07)

HLTHEXEL                                          0.168                0.192                0.301              0.333
(=1 if health is excellent)                      (0.374)              (0.394)              (0.459)            (0.472)

HLTHVG                                            0.253                0.275                0.316              0.353
(=1 if health is very good)                      (0.435)              (0.446)              (0.465)            (0.478)

HLTHFAIR                                          0.184                0.163                0.104             0.0858
(=1 if health is fair)                           (0.388)              (0.369)              (0.305)            (0.280)

HLTHPOOR                                          0.106               0.0786               0.0320             0.0234
(=1 if health is poor)                           (0.307)              (0.269)              (0.176)            (0.151)

Observations                                     13,654                6,746                1,467               513
   a
     Figures in cells are means; those in parentheses are standard deviations. Computations based on combined HRS-
AHEAD sample.
   b
     In column (2), based only on 250 observations that also have positive estate tax liability. In column (3), based only
on 276 observations that also have positive estate tax liability.
                       Table 2. Demand for Term Insurancea


            Variable             (1)                   (2)          (3)
    b
GAPi                            0.4492                0.5507       0.6301
                              (0.07938)              (0.1057)     (0.1127)

NETWORTH                       -0.001515            -0.0003044   -0.0006949
                              (0.004843)            (0.004766)   (0.004756)

NETWORTH2 (x10-9)                -2.85                 -3.00        -3.07
                                (1.34)                (1.27)       (1.21)

BUSINESS                       108,600               109,700      109,200
                               (22,040)              (22,058)     (22,045)

AGE                             -1,330                -1,333       -1,335
                               (185.0)               (185.0)      (184.9)

GAPi xAGE                      -0.006180             -0.007895    -0.009091
                              (0.001161)            (0.001677)   (0.001810)

GAPi xBUSINESS                 -0.05674              -0.05475     -0.05830
                              (0.01890)             (0.02274)    (0.02303)

CHILDREN                        -51.16                -62.62       -68.31
                               (467.1)               (467.1)      (466.9)

MARRIED                        -25,950               -25,820      -25,801
                               (2,365)               (2,362)      (2,361)

FEMALE                          -9,050                -8,969       -8,917
                               (2,145)               (2,145)      (2,144)

AHEAD                           -9,311                -9,386       -9,268
                               (4,243)               (4,245)      (4,244)

HLTHEXCEL                      13,160                13,100       13,060
                               (3,009)               (3,009)      (3,007)

HLTHVG                          5,331                 5,306        5,372
                               (2,659)               (2,660)      (2,659)

HLTHFAIR                        -4,378                -4,372       -4,365
                               (3,011)               (3,013)      (3,011)

HLTHPOOR                        -8,552                -8,641       -8,602
                               (3,781)               (3,783)      (3,781)

EDUCATION                       1,837                 1,827        1,830
                               (336.6)               (336.7)      (336.5)

INCOME                          0.6199                0.6233       0.6263
                              (0.02691)             (0.02680)    (0.02682)
                                            Table 2. Continueda


            Variable                           (1)                      (2)                       (3)
BUSINESSxAGE                                  -1,800                   -1,828                    -1,820
                                             (377.6)                  (377.9)                   (377.7)

BLACK                                         -1,623                   -1,520                    -1,537
                                             (2,784)                  (2,785)                   (2,783)

OTHRACE                                     -27,360                   -27,320                   -27,283
                                            (3,780)                   (3,782)                   (3,780)

CONSTANT                                     12,310                    12,507                   12,480
                                            (12,630)                  (12,629)                 (12,620)

Log likelihood                              -90,834                   -90,836                   -90,832

Observations                                 13,654                   13,654                    13,654

  a
     Left hand side variable is the value of term insurance. Estimation by Tobit. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Variables are defined in Table 1.
   b
     In column (1), GAPi excludes stocks and bonds from the computation of liquid assets. Column (2)
includes stocks, and Column (3) includes stocks and bonds.
                                                         Table 3. Demand for Insurance: Alternative Specifications a


                                      Include Whole Insurance                     Delete Returns with Highest Tax                     Include NOTSURE Variable
         Variable               (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)               (7)              (8)           (9)
GAPi b                         0.1526          0.3690            0.4374         0.4075        0.6866         0.7715            0.4863           0.6300          0.6980
                             (0.05355)        (0.0884)         (0.09305)      (0.09405)      (0.1469)       (0.1585)         (0.08012)         (0.1090)        (0.1152)

BUSINESS                      156,500         151,200           149,300       107,831        106,400        106,400           137,000          138,400         138,300
                              (22,670)        (22,710)          (22,700)      (21,990)       (22,050)       (22,037)          (27,370)         (27,390)        (27,370)

GAPi *AGE                    -0.002620        -0.006290        -0.007230      -0.005864      -0.01039       -0.01179          -0.006736        -0.009153       -0.01020
                            (0.0008085)      (0.001439)        (0.00152)     (0.001401)     (0.002477)     (0.002704)        (0.001171)       (0.001746)      (0.001868)

GAPi *BUSINESS                0.03397         0.007685         0.006756        -0.03680      0.03742         -0.04194         -0.02952         -0.02559         -0.02999
                             (0.01892)        (0.02481)        (0.02482)      (0.02432)     (0.02714)       (0.02764)        (0.02005)        (0.02495)        (0.02526)

BUSINESS*AGE                   -2.308           -2.201           -2,165         -1,780        -1,757          -1,756           -2,205           -2,212           -2,224
                              (384.6)          (385.0)          (384.8)        (375.3)       (377.7)         (377.6)          (475.4)          (475.7)          (475.4)

NOTSURE                          --              --                --            --             --             --             -105,800        -107,000         -110,000
                                                                                                                              (44,102)        (44,214)         (44,203)

GAPi *NOTSURE                    --              --                --            --             --             --             -0.07587         -0.07406         -0.07074
                                                                                                                             (0.01941)        (0.02130)        (0.02214)

AGE*NOTSURE                      --              --                --            --             --             --              1,467            1,451            1,492
                                                                                                                               (47.5)           (49.4)          (749.3)

Log Likelihood                -118,990        -118,989         -118,986        -90,657       -90,748         -90,746          -90,816          -90,820         -90,815

Observations                  13,654           13,654           13,654         13,637        13,642          13,643            13,654          13,654           13,654

  a
     In Columns (1) through (3), the dependent variable is the sum of whole and term insurance. In columns (4) through (6), the dependent variable is the value of term
insurance (as in Table 2), but the 5 percent of the sample with the highest values of GAP is deleted. In columns (7) through (9), the dependent variable is the value of
term insurance and NOTSURE is included in the specification. All equations are estimated using Tobit and all equations include the same additional right-hand-side
variables listed in Table 2. Figures in parentheses are standard errors.
   b
     GAPi = GAP1 in columns (1), (4), and (7); GAP2 in columns (2), (5), and (8); and GAP3 in columns (3), (6), and (9).
                      Table 4. Probability that Insurance Plus Liquid
                               Assets Covers Estate Taxes a


           Variable                     (1)                  (2)           (3)
                -6
NETWORTH(x10 )                         -1.88                -1.01         -0.944
                                      (0.329)              (0.131)       (0.123)

NETWORTH2 (x10-14)                      11.9                 5.90         5.48
                                       (1.96)               (1.16)       (1.12)

BUSINESS                               -1.175              -0.8865       -0.5165
                                      (0.8422)            (0.8496)      (0.8648)

AGE                                   -0.01217            0.001415      -0.003322
                                     (0.01570)            (0.01546)     (0.01556)

CHILDREN                              -0.01335             -0.01950      -0.03604
                                     (0.03628)            (0.03817)     (0.03799)

MARRIED                                 1.174              0.8603        0.8354
                                      (0.2430)            (0.1768)      (0.1754)

FEMALE                                 -0.3457             -0.3941       -0.3716
                                      (0.1368)            (0.1403)      (0.1442)

AHEAD                                  -0.1595             0.1366        0.3675
                                      (0.3138)            (0.3070)      (0.3081)

HLTHEXCE                              0.06616             0.04299       -0.01586
                                      (0.1901)            (0.1856)      (0.1874)

HLTHVG                                0.06335             0.08767       -0.01931
                                      (0.1799)            (0.1768)      (0.1774)

HLTHFAIR                               0.2144              -0.1356       -0.2402
                                      (0.2829)            (0.2597)      (0.2585)

HLTHPOOR                               0.1831              0.3189        0.0922
                                      (0.4255)            (0.5929)      (0.5615)

EDUCATION                             0.05502              0.04712       0.04398
                                     (0.02852)            (0.02921)     (0.02888)

INCOME(x10-6)                           2.97                 2.34          2.04
                                      (0.939)              (0.631)       (0.597)

BUSINESSxAGE                          0.01489             0.003724      -0.001336
                                     (0.01319)            (0.01333)     (0.01356)

BLACK                                  -0.4235            0.05202       -0.07636
                                      (0.3300)            (0.3508)      (0.3423)
                                       Table 4. Continueda


            Variable                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)
OTHRACE                                    -0.3210                -0.5963               -0.7178
                                          (0.3768)               (0.3522)              (0.3463)

CONSTANT                                    1.565                0.8088                  1.218
                                           (1.073)               (1.089)                (1.094)

Log likelihood                             -233.8                 -253.8                -248.5

Observations                                 513                   513                   513

  a
     The left hand side variable is a one if the sum of insurance (term plus whole) and “liquid
assets” exceeds estate tax liability. Estimation is done with probit and figures in parentheses are
robust standard errors. Variables are defined in Table 1.
   b
     In column (1), GAPi excludes stocks and bonds from the computation of liquid assets.
Column (2) includes stocks, and Column (3) includes stocks and bonds.
