NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY’S TREATMENT
OF POSTWAR AMERICANS:
HOW BAD CAN IT GET?
Jagadeesh Gokhale
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Working Paper 7362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7362

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999

We thank Steven Caldwell for providing data from his CORSIM microsimulation model that plays a critical
role in this study. Laurence Kotlikoff thanks Boston University and the National Institute of Aging for
research support. The authors thank Economic Security Planning, Inc. For permitting the use for this study
of Social Security Benefit Calculator -- a detailed OASI tax and benefit calculator. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, or Boston University.
© 1999 by Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to

exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Social Security’s Treatment of Postwar Americans:
How Bad Can It Get?
Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 7362
September 1999
JEL No. H55
ABSTRACT
As currently legislated, the U.S. Social Security System represents a bad deal for postwar
Americans. Of every dollar postwar Americans have earned or will earn over their lifetimes, over 5 cents
will be lost to the Old Age Survivor Insurance System (OASI) in the form of payroll taxes paid in excess
of benefits received. This lifetime net tax rate can also be understood by comparing the rate of return
postwar contributors receive from OASI and the return they can earn on the market. The OASI return -1.86 percent -- is less than half the return currently being paid on inflation-indexed long-term government
bonds, and the OASI return is much riskier. Of course, Social Security is an insurance as well as a net tax
system. But, viewed as an insurance company, the insurance OASI sells (or, rather, forces households to
buy) is no bargain. The load charged averages 66 cents per dollar of premium.
These findings, developed in an extensive micro simulation study by Caldwell, et al. (1999),
assume that current law can be maintained through time. But Social Security faces a staggering long-term
funding problem. Meeting the system’s promised benefit payments on an ongoing basis requires raising the
OASDI 10.8 tax rate immediately and permanently by two fifths!
How bad can Social Security’s treatment of postwar Americans get once adjustments are made
to “save” the system? This paper examines that question using the machinery developed in Caldwell, et
al. Specifically, it considers Social Security’s treatment of postwar Americans under alternative tax
increases and benefit cuts that would help bring the system’s finances into present value balance. The
alternatives include immediate tax increases, eliminating the ceiling on taxable payroll, immediate and
sustained benefit cuts, increasing the system’s normal retirement ages beyond those currently legislated,
switching from wage to price indexing in calculating benefits, and limiting the price indexation of benefits.
The choice among these and other alternatives have important consequences for which postwar generations
and which members of those generations will be forced to pay for the system’s long-term financing
problems.

Jagadeesh Gokhale
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
1455 East 6th Street
Cleveland, OH 44101
ajgokhale@stratos.net

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd.
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikof@bu.edu

I. Introduction
As currently legislated, the U.S. Social Security System represents a bad deal for postwar
Americans. Of every dollar postwar Americans have earned or will earn over their lifetimes, over
5 cents will

be lost to the Old Age Survivor Insurance System (OASI) in the form of payroll taxes

paid in excess of benefits received. OASI 's five percent lifetime net tax rate can also be described

in terms of the internal rate of return it delivers to contributors. This rate -- 1.86 percent -- is less

than half the rate currently being paid on inflation-indexed long-term government bonds, which
are much safer. Of course, Social Security is an insurance as well as a net tax system. But viewed

as an insurance company, the insurance OASI sells (or rather foxves households to buy) is no
bargain. The load charged averages 66 cents per dollar of premium.

The bad deal that Social Security offers postwar Americans is, of course, payback for the
great deal it offered and still offers prewar Americans. These generations got in at the beginning

of the Social Security chain letter, and received very generous benefits compared with their tax

contributions to the system. That postwar Americans are receiving less than a market rate of
return on their contributions is not news. What is news is the precise degree to which postwar
Americans are being hurt by the system. Understanding their treatment necessitates an actuarial
approach because Social Security's benefit pay-out depends on the vagaries of longevity, fertility,

marital arrangements, and lifetime earnings. Capturing the full range of these outcomes requires

longitudinal data that follows individuals from their initial encounters with the OASI system
through the end of their lives. Actual data of this kind are not available, but simulated data are
available. The data used here are from CORSIM, an extensive micro simulation model developed
by Steven Caidwell and his colleagues at Cornell University (see Caldwell, 1996 and Caidwell and

Morrison, 1997).

Caidwell et al. (1999) married CORSIM's simulated data to a highly detailed Social
Security benefit estimator developed by Economic Security Planning, Inc. as part of its financial
planning software package, ESPlanner. The resulting study, which produced a range of fmdings,

including those mentioned above, adopted one major counterfactual assumption—that Social
2

Security would be able to deliver on its benefit promises without raising its rate of taxation.
Unfortunately, this assumption is a far dy from reality. Instead, Social Security faces astaggering

long-term funding problem. According to the system's own actuaries, meeting promised benefit

payments on an ongoing basis requires raising the OASDI 10.8 tax rate immediately and
permanently by two fifths!

This paper uses the machinery developed in Caidwell et al. (1999) to study how bad Social

Security's treatment of postwar Americans would be under alternative tax increases and benefit

cuts that help bring the system's finances into present value balance. The alternatives include
immediate tax increases, eliminating the ceiling on taxable payroll, immediate and sustained
benefit cuts, increasing the system's normal retirement ages beyond those currently legislated,
switching from wage to price indexing in calculating benefits, and limiting the price indexation of

benefits. The choice among these and other alternatives has important consequences for which

postwar generations and which members of those generations pay for the system's long-term
funding shortfall.

The paper proceeds in Section II with a brief literature review. Section III describes
CORSIM and ESPlanner's Social Security Benefit Estimator.1 Section IV reviews the fmdings of
Caldwell et. al.(1999). Section V describes ten alternative tax increases and benefit reductions that

would improve the system's present value finances. Section VI shows the distribution of the
additional burden that these policies impose both across postwar cohorts and across different
demographic groups within each postwar cohort. This section also reports the contribution that
each policy option makes to shoring up the system's finances.

II. Some Relevant Literature
A number of past studies have examined Social Security's treatment of its participants by
focusing on stylized cases -- particular types of married couples and single individuals who differ
'This section draws heavily on Caidwell, et. al.'s (1999) description of CORSIM and ESPLanner's benefit
calculator.

3

by age of birth, sex, race, and lifetime earning and who all live for the same number of years.
These studies include Nichols and Schreitmueller (1978), Pellechio and Goodfellow (1983),
Myers and Schobel (1993), Hurd and Shoven (1985), Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert, and Shoven
(1987), Steuerle and Bakija (1994), and Diamond and Gruber (1997).

Steuerle and Bakija's study is fairly representative of the past literature and may be the
best known prior study. It considers three alternative lifetime wage patterns: low, average, and
high, where "low" refers to 45 percent of the average value of Social Security-covered earnings,
"average" refers to the average value of Social Security-covered earnings, and "high" refers to the

value of the maximum taxable level of Social Security-covered earnings. For each cohort
reaching age 65 between 1940 and 2050, Steuerle and Bakija calculate the lifetime net benefits

from Social Security for singles and married couples for alternative sets of these three lifetime

wage patterns. For example, they consider married couples in which both spouses have low

earnings, one spouse has low earnings and the other average earnings, and one spouse has
average earnings arid the other high earnings. Steuerle and Bakija use their assumed earnings

trajectories to compute retirement, dependent, and survivor benefits. In the case of survivor
benefits, the authors consider all possible truncations of the earnings trajectories resulting from all

possible alternative dates of early death, although not from any other sources. Each of the various
state-contingent benefits is actuarially discounted to form a lifetime net benefit.

Steuerle and Bakija's fmdings generally accord with those of previous studies: It shows
that today's and tomorrow's workers will fare much worse under Social Security than current and
past retirees; that men are being disadvantaged relative to women; and that single individuals and

two-earner couples face higher net taxes than do single-earner couples. The authors also claim

that "for most of Social Security's history, the system has been regressive within generations.
That is, within a given cohort of retirees, net transfers have been inversely related to need: people

4

with the highest lifetime incomes have tended to receive the largest absolute transfers above and
beyond what they contributed."2

Like our paper, Coronado, Fullerton, and Glass (1999) represents a different approach—

namely, considering the dispersion of all potential outcomes. But unlike our paper, Coronado,
Fullerton, and Glass examine actual data (from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics), rather than

synthetic data. Their paper represents a real step forward in determining exactly how postwar
Americans are being treated. Although their focus is on post-retirement benefits and they don't
include as much detail in their calculation of OASI benefits, Coronado, et. al.'s (1999) findings
are broadly consistent with those presented here and in Caidwell, et. at. (1999).

III. CORSIM and ESPlanner's Social Security Benefit Calculator
As mentioned, we use two tools in our analysis CORSIM—a dynamic micro simulation
model—and ESPlanner's Social Security benefit calculator to calculate OASI lifetime net taxes
(taxes paid less benefits received) for baby boomers and their children.

CORSIM

CORSIM begins in 1960 with the representative sample of Americans surveyed in the
1960 U.S. Census Public-Use Microdata Sample. This data set is a one-in-one-thousand sample,

i.e., one of every thousand Americans alive in 1960 is included. The Census survey provides
much, but not all, the information needed as baseline data. The remaining information is imputed
2Steuerle and Bakija's study pays careful attention to detail and provides an impressive and extensive array of
calculations. Yet, it raises five concerns. First, in considering only uninterrupted earnings histories, the study
omits a potentially very important source of intra- and intergenerational heterogeneity in lifetime Social Security
net benefits. Second, in assuming fixed lifetime marital status, the study ignores the role of divorce and remarriage
in altering Social Security net benefits. Third, in assuming that receipt of Social Security retirement benefits starts
at worker's ages of normal retirement, the study ignores benefit reductions for age, delayed retirement credits,
benefit recomputation, and the earnings test -- all of which can materially affect Social Security's lifetime net
benefits. Fourth, the study uses an extremely low real interest rate, just 2 percent, in discounting future net benefits.
And fifth, in failing to consider workers who earn above the taxable maximum, the study fails to capture an
important regressive element of the system -- the fact that for very high income single individuals and couples,
Social Security's net lifetime taxation is a smaller fraction of lifetime earnings than it is for Steuerle and Bakija's
"high" earners.

5

to the 1960 sample from a variety of sources. CORSIM "grows" the 1960 sample
demographically and economically in one-year intervals through the year 2100. Demographic
growth refers to birth, death, and immigration, entry into the marriage market, family formation,

family dissolution, and the attainment of schooling. Economic growth refers to working or not
working, choosing annual weeks worked, and determining weekly labor earnings.3

As detailed in Caidwell et a!. (1996), these and other CORSIM processes are determined

by over one thousand distinct equations, hundreds of rule-based algorithms, and over five
thousand parameters. Data used to estimate and test the separate equation-based modules were

drawn from large national Microdata files, including High School and Beyond (HSB), the
National Longitudinal Survey (NLS), the National Longitudinal Survey of youth (NLS.Y), the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the National Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS), the

Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), and the U.S. Census Public Use Microdata Sample
(PUMS). Data used to construct the rule-based modules and to compute alignment factors are
drawn from another six files plus miscellaneous sources.

CORSIM's alignment procedures ensure that the model's in-part deterministic and in-part

stochastic modules are benchmarked to historical aggregates. These aggregates are typically
group specific, such as the average earnings of white females ages 19 to 25 who are married with

children in the home and working part time, Benchmarking is performed by calculating group-

specific alignment factors which are applied within each group to the values of the sample
member's predicted continuous variable (such as earnings) and probabilities (such as the chance of

divorcing). These adjustment factors are then used in a second pass of the model through the
population.4
3CORSIM's other economic processes include consumption expenditures, saving, federal, state, and local income
and property taxation, individual asset holdings, inheritance, and disability.

4For example, if the model generates fewer (more) than the expected number births in a given period, the fertility

probabilities for women of childbearing age in the period are scaled upward (downward). One can scale
continuous variables in a simple linear fashion or by using more complex non-linear methods (see, for example,
Johnson (1996) and Neufeld (1996a, 1996b).

6

Our CORSIM data was produced by running CORSIM from 1960 through 2100. From
this master sample, we selected a) all never married males and females born between 1945 and
2000 who lived to at least age 15, b) all males born between 1945 and 2000 who married women

born between 1945 and 2010 and lived to at least age 15, and c) all females born between 1945
and 2000 who married males born between 1945 and 2000 who lived to at least age 15. Selecting
the sample in this manner omits a) males born between 1945 and 2000 who married females born

either before 1945 or after 2010 and b) females born between 1945 and 2000 who married males

born either before 1945 or after 2000. Thus, at the early end of the sample we lose some males

who married older women and some women who married older men. At the late end of the
sample we lose some males who married very much younger women and some females who
married younger men.

Whatever bias this selection process introduces should be absent for cohorts born in the

central years of our sample. For these cohorts, we are presumably omitting very few, if any,
observations. Take, those born in 1965. The males born in 1965, who are left out of the sample,
are those who either married women 20 or more years older than themselves or married women
45 or more years younger than themselves. Those females born in 1965 who are omitted from the
sample either married males 20 or more years older than themselves or married males 35 or more
years younger than themselves.

Sample Size

Table I decomposes the number of observations by birth cohort, lifetime earnings quintile,

sex, race, and education. The total number of sample observations is 68,688 individuals. The

observations are almost equally divided among men and women. They are also fairly evenly
distributed across our 11 cohorts defined over 5 years of birth (6 years for the youngest cohort).
For convenience, we refer in the text to each of the cohorts by their oldest members' year of birth.

Those Cohort 45 refers to those born between 1945 and 1949, Cohort 50 refers to those born

7

between 1950 and 1954, etc., up through Cohort 90, which refers to six, rather than five, separate
birth cohorts, specifically, those born in the years 1995 through 2000.

Sixteen percent of the observations are non-white, and 41 percent have one or more years

of college education. These percentages increase for successive cohorts. Eleven percent of
Cohort 45 is non-white, compared with 21 percent of Cohort 95. Thirty-one percent of Cohort

45 observations have at least one year of college education, compared with 46 percent of
observations in Cohort 95.
The table sorts observations into three lifetime earnings quintiles: the lowest 20 percent of

lifetime earners, the middle 20 percent of lifetime earners, and the top 20 percent of lifetime
earners. Lifetime earnings is defined as the present value of an individual's annual earnings from

age 18 through the end of his or her life discounted at a 5 percent real interest rate. The lifetime

earnings quintiles are defmed with respect to the overall distribution of lifetime earnings. This
quinuile definition holds even when we consider results for specUIc demographic groups. Thus,

when we refer to the non-college educated in the highest quintile of the lifetime earnings
distribution we do not mean the 20 percent highest earners among those without a college
education, but rather those non-college educated who end up being among the top 20 percent of

all lifetime earners. As one would expect and as Table 1 shows, 29 percent of all female
observations fall in the lowest lifetime earnings quintile compared to only 12 percent in the highest

quintile. Similar remarks apply to the distribution of observations for the non-white and noncollege-educated groups.

Longevity

Since Social Security pays its benefits in the form of annuities, how long one lives is a
critical factor in determining how much one benefits from the system. Table 2 reports average

ages of death by cohort and demographic group. As one would expect, later-born cohorts live

longer, females outlive males, whites outlive non-whites, and those with a college education
outlive those without. The average age of death for the first five cohorts is 79.5 compared with
8

81.1 for the last five. Across the entire sample, females outlive males by 6.3 years, but this gap in

longevity narrows somewhat between the earliest and latest cohorts. The longevity gaps between

whites and non-whites of about 2 years and between the college educated and non-college
educated of about 1.5 years are fairly stable over time.

There is also a clear correlation between lifetime earnings and average length of life. Part

of this correlation runs from earnings to lifespan; i.e., the mortality probabilities used in the
CORSIM model are smaller the higher is the level of earnings. But part runs from lifespan to
earnings: Those with shorter lifetimes have fewer years during which to work and may, for that
reason, have lower lifetime earnings. Across all cohorts, the difference in longevity between those

in the bottom and those in the top quintiles is 1.2 years. However, if one looks within male and

female subpopulations, these differences are much larger. Compare, for example, highest- and
lowest-quintile life expectancies for men who are in Cohort 85. The difference is 7.1 years. For
females in the same cohort, the gap is 2.8 years between the top and bottom quintiles.5

Longevity differences between the college-educated and non-college-educated are worth
noting. As mentioned, there is a significant college—non-college difference in average longevity.

But given the level of education, there is very little difference in life expectancies across lifetime

income quintiles. Indeed, college graduates in the lowest quintile of the lifetime earnings
distribution have a higher life expectancy than do non-college graduates in the top quintile. Thus,
education appears to trump income in explaining longevity.

Lifetime Earnings

Note that the male and female Cohort 85 gaps in life expectancies between lowest and highest quintiles is smaller
than the corresponding gap for male and female observations combined. The reason is that in forming the overall
life expectancies, low quintile males and high quintile females receive relatively little weight because there are
relatively few of them. This weighting pattern makes the average life expectancy of all those in the lowest quintile
closer to that of females in that quintile and makes the average life expectancy of all those in the highest quintile

closer to that of males in that quintile. Since, other things equal, males have lower life expectancies than do
females, this weighting pattern reduces the size of the top-bottom quintile gap relative to the gaps of either sex
calculated separately.

9

Table 3 shows the huge gulf that separates high and low earners with respect to the
present value of lifetime earnings. For Cohort 45, average lifetime earnings in the top quintile are

33 times those in the bottom quintile. For Cohort 95, the corresponding factor is 39. The table

also shows that postwar males have much higher average lifetime earnings than do postwar
females. In Cohort 85 for example, females average $398,300 in lifetime earnings compared with

$731,800 for males. This over-$300,000 differential is much larger than the white—non-white
and college—non-college educated differentials in Cohort 85. Indeed, in this cohort, the white—
non-white differential is less than $100,000 and the college—non-college differential is less than
$200,000. In combination, these differentials can be vely sizeable, although their interactions are

not necessarily positive. Take white, college-educated males in Cohort 85 and non-white, noncollege educated females in the same cohort. The lifetime earnings difference, which is in excess

of $500,000, is, nonetheless, smaller than the sum of the separate male-female, white-non-white,
and college-educated—non-college-educated differentials.

Although lifetime earnings are higher in general for men than for women, for whites than
for non-whites, and for the college-educated than for the non-college-educated, these differences

don't necessarily extend to within quintile comparisons. For example, the lowest quintile males
have lower lifetime earnings than the lowest quintile females.

Another prominent feature of Table 3 is the growth over time in lifetime earnings
measured in 1998 dollars. This reflects historic as well as projected growth in real wages. As a

comparison of results for different members of Cohorts 1945-49 and 1995-00 makes clear,
lifetime earnings of successive generations are growing much more rapidly for women than for
men, and somewhat more rapidly for whites than for non whites and for the college-educated than

for the non-college-educated.

ESPLanner's Social Security Benefit Calculator (SSBC)
ESPlanner's OASI benefit calculator calculates retirement, spousal, widow(er), mother,

father, children, and divorcee benefits as well as OASI taxes. It does so taking into account
10

Social Security's earnings test, family benefit maximums, actuarial reductions and increases,
benefit re-computations, eligibility rules, the ceiling on taxable earnings, and legislated changes in

normal retirement ages. Although the benefit calculator considers the OASI system in great

detail, it leaves out the DI portion of Social Security. It also ignores the taxation of Social
Security benefits under federal and state income taxes. Both of these omissions lead to an
understatement of Social Security's redistribution from the lifetime rich to the lifetime poor.

Calculation of OASI benefits is extremely complex. The Social Security Handbook
describing the rules governing these benefits runs over 500 pages. Even so, on many key points,
the Handbook is incomplete and misleading. This assessment is shared by Social Security's senior

actuaries who were consulted in developing SSBC. Their assistance, which proved invaluable,

came in the form of both extensive discussions and the transmittal of numerous documents
detailing various aspects of Social Security's benefit formulae. The Social Security actuaries also

introduced us to their ANYPIA program, which calculates primary insurance amounts (PIAs).
Unfortunately, ANYPIA considers only one person at a time and does not permit the calculation

of multiple, inter-dependent benefits of household members. Consequently, ANYPIA did not
provide an alternative to developing SSBC, although we have used it, where possible, to check
SSBC's accuracy. We refer readers to Caldwell et al. (1998) for a detailed discussion of SSBC's
calculation of each type of benefit.

IV. OASI's Treatment of Postwar Americans Assuming No Tax Hikes or Benefit Cuts
Tables 4 through 6 summarize a number of the findings in Caldwell et al. (1999) about
Social Security's treatment of current generations assuming no future change in Social Security

tax and benefit provisions. Table 4 reports cohort-specific OASI lifetime net tax rates for the
lowest, middle, and highest lifetime earnings quintiles and for different demographic groups.
These tax rates are calculated by dividing a) the sum of lifetime net taxes of all individuals in a
given cell by b) the sum of those individuals' lifetime earnings. These lifetime variables are present

values (discounted at a real rate of 5 percent) measured in 1998 dollars and calculated as of the
-

II

year the individual is age 18. The taxes and benefits used in forming the lifetime net tax rate are

all OASI taxes paid by cell members plus those paid by their employers and all OASI benefits

received by cell members. Thus, a spousal benefit paid to a husband is counted as his benefit
notwithstanding the fact that the benefit is based on his wife's earnings record.

Table 5 reports cohort-specific OASI internal rates of return again broken down by
lifetime earnings quintiles. The cell-specific internal rates of return were determined by finding
the discount rate that equated the present value of the tax payments of all cell observations to the
present value of the benefit receipts of all cell observations.

Table 6 shows cell-specific OASI equivalent wealth tax rates. These tax rates are
calculated by 1) present valuing to age 65 (accumulating to age 65 or, as appropriate, discounting

to age 65) all lifetime OASI taxes paid by all cell members, 2) doing the same for all lifetime
OASI benefits received by all cell members, and 3) forming the number I minus the ratio of the

collective within-cell lifetime benefits to the collective within-cell lifetime taxes. Again, a 5
percent rate of discount is used in finding present values. If the lifetime benefits of cell members
equals their lifetime taxes, the implicit OASI wealth tax rate equals zero. If lifetime benefits of cell

members are zero, the implicit wealth tax rate is 100 percent.

The reason we refer to this tax rate as an implicit wealth tax is that the accumulated-toage-65 lifetime tax payments of cell members would be the extra net wealth they would have at

age 65 if 1) there were no OASI program, 2) all OASI payroll tax contributions saved and
invested by cell members as a group and 3) these savings earned a real rate of return of 5 percent.6

If the OASI wealth tax rate is .66, this means that Social Security has, in effect, taxed away two-

thirds of that net wealth when the surviving cell members reach age 65. Another way to think
about OASI is that it represents an insurance policy. From this perspective, the contributions are

insurance premiums and the implicit wealth tax is the load charged by the OASI insurance
company. A wealth tax rate of .66 translates into a load of 66 cents per dollar of premium.
6

We

take a 5 percent real rate of return as a reasonable approximation to available market rates of return,

comprising of a risk free rate of 3.5 percent and a risk premium of 1.5 percent.

12

Since we are pooling together the outcomes of all cell observations in forming the cell
entries in Tables 4 through 6 as well as subsequent tables, we are making actuarial calculations.
Individuals who die young and receive benefits for only a few years are pooled with those who die

old and receive benefits for many years. Individuals who parent multiple children and, if they die

when the children are young, endow their children with child survivor benefits and their spouses
with mother/father benefits, are pooled with those who have no children and, therefore, generate

no such benefits. Individuals who are married for 10 or more years and, because they have the
right constellation of earnings and death dates vis-a-vis their spouses, provide their spouses with

spousal and survivor benefits, are pooled with both a) individuals who marry, but get divorced

before 10 years and, consequently disqualify their former spouses for such benefits7 and b)
individuals who never married, etc.8

L?fetime Net Tax 1?ates Under the Existing System

Table 4 documents several key features of the current OASI system. First, with the
exception of Cohort 50, lifetime net tax rates exceed 5 percent for all postwar cohorts. Second,

there is no clear cohort time trend; i.e., younger cohorts are not, under current law, generally
facing higher lifetime net tax rates than older cohorts. Third, lifetime net tax rates are negative for

members of all cohorts who fall within the lowest 20 percent of their cohort's lifetime earnings
distribution. And fourth, the lifetime net tax rates of the middle class (the middle or third quintile

of the lifetime earnings distribution) exceed those of the rich (the highest quintile of the lifetime
earnings distribution).
7Since surviving spouses are eligible for survivor benefits provided they have been married for 9 or more months,
we refer here only to the case of marriages of less than 10 years that end in divorce in which a spouse dies after the
couple has divorced.

Note that we allocate benefits to recipients rather than to the individuals whose earnings records generated the
benefits. Hence, load factors are likely to be understated for those demographic groups who receive sizable benefits

based on the earnings of individuals belonging to some other demographic group. Women, for example, have
lower earnings and live longer than men, on average and, therefore, receive spousal and survivor benefits based on
their husbands' earnings histories. The opposite would be true for men. Hence, in drawing conclusions about the
size of load factors, it may be appropriate to focus on average wealth tax rates across all groups.

13

Thus the current OASI system represents an overall bad deal for postwar Americans when

viewed from an actuarial perspective. One might expect the deal to be getting worse over time

given that the OASI tax rate has risen over time. However, life expectancy has increased and

work expectancy has decreased. So younger cohort members are receiving benefits for more
years and paying taxes for fewer years than are older cohorts.
The OASI program significantly hurts Americans as a group, but it also significantly helps

poor postwar Americans. Take, for example, members of Cohort 80 in the lowest lifetime
earnings quintile. OASI is, in effect, handing them 4.8 cents on balance for evely dollar they earn.

Although the system is highly progressive at the bottom of the lifetime earnings distribution, it is
somewhat regressive at the top. This reflects the ceiling on covered earnings that limits the payroll

tax contributions of the rich as well as the benefits the rich receive. Although the rich are facing

somewhat lower rates of lifetime net OASI contributions than the middle class, they are still
paying, in absolute terms, much more than the middle class. To see this, multiply, for example,
Table 4's 5.3 percent lifetime net tax rate for the highest quintile in Cohort 80 by $1,671,700 -Cohort 80's average lifetime earnings. The resulting $88,600 is over five times the corresponding

absolute net tax of $15,372 paid, on average, by members of Cohort 80's middle quintile.

Table 4 breaks down the lifetime net tax rates by demographic group. Men pay about 1
percent more of their lifetime earnings to OASI in net taxes than do women. The higher male net

tax rates obtain even within the same lifetime earnings quintiles. Indeed, the poorest one fifth of

males in each cohort all face positive lifetime net tax rates, whereas the poorest one fifth of
women in each cohort all face negative lifetime net tax rates. These results reflect males' shorter
life expectancies and less frequent receipt of OASI dependent and survivor benefits. Non-whites,
because of their shorter life expectancies, face slightly higher (aboUt a third of a percentage point)

lifetime OASI net tax rates than do whites. This is true within as well as across lifetime earnings

quintiles. College-educated workers face somewhat lower (about three fifths of a percentage

point) lifetime OASI net tax rates than non college-educated workers. This difference is

14

particularly pronounced among college-educated and non college-educated observations in the
first quintile.

Internal Rates of Return Paid by the Existing System

Table 5 indicates that postwar cohorts, as a group, are receiving a roughly 2 percent rate

of return on their OASI contributions. Relative to the close to 4 percent safe rate of return
currently available on inflation-indexed long-term government Treasury bonds, 2 percent is quite

low, particularly given the fact that future OASI tax payments and benefit receipts are highly
uncertain. Indeed, the non-idiosyncratic component of these tax payments and benefit receipts is
closely linked to overall labor productivity growth (see Baxter and King, this volume). And since

labor productivity growth is highly correlated with the economy's performance, whicl in turn, is
highly correlated with the performance of the stock market, the stock market's real rate of return

may be a reasonable rate to compare with the 2 percent being paid Social Security. The average
real return on the stock market since 1926 is 7.7 percent — a vexy far cry from 2 percent!

While postwar Americans are, as a group, receiving a quite low rate of return from the
system, the poorest among them are earning a very respectable return -- roughly 6 percent. The

counterpart of this much better deal for the poor is a much worse deal for those in the top
quintile. Their rate of return is below 1 percent. In addition to this large difference between rates

of return for the rich and the poor, there is a large difference in rates of return between men and

women. The differences between male and female internal rates of return are smaller at higher

quintiles. In the case of Cohort 70 for example, the difference is 2.6 percentage points in the
lowest quintile versus 0.8 percentage points for the highest quintile. This may reflect the fact that

a larger fraction of women in the lower lifetime earnings quintiles have longer spells of nonparticipation in the labor market. Hence, women in these quintiles may collect benefits based on
their spouses' earnings records with greater frequency than do men—making their benefits larger

relative to their earnings. In contrast, women in higher lifetime earnings quintiles mostly collect

benefits based on their own earnings records. Their internal rates are, nevertheless, larger than
15

those of men because women collect survivor benefits based on the spouses' higher earnings
records and because they possess greater longevity.

The differences between male and female internal rates of return are smaller for later
cohorts. For Cohort 95, for example, the difference in the lowest quintile is only 1.4 percentage

points. In the highest quintile, it is only 0.5 percentage points. The decline in the difference for
later cohorts may reflect the increase over time in women's labor force participation—leading to
fewer women collecting benefits based on the spouse's earnings records. Interestingly and unlike
the lifetime net tax measure, the rate of return criterion suggests that non-whites fare just as well
as whites and that the non-college-educated fair just as well as the college educated.

Implicit Wealth Taxes Levied by the Current System

Table 6 shows the point made above, that roughly two-thirds of evely dollar paid by
postwar Americans to the OASI system represents a pure tax. The implicit tax rate is close to 8

cents on the dollar for top earners. For low earners, the system not only pays back in full each
dollar paid in. It also provides about 45 cents on the dollar as a subsidy. Not all poor individuals
receive a subsidy, however. None of the poorest fifTh of males in the 11 cohorts can expect to get

back more than they pay in; instead they can expect to lose about 27 cents on the dollar. Poor
women, on the other hand, can anticipate receiving 1.67 cents per dollar paid in (a subsidy of 67

cents). OASI's implicit wealth tax rates are also higher for non-whites than whites and for the
college-educated than the non-college-educated.

V. Alternative Policies to Shore-Up Social Security's Finances

This section examines 10 potential policy reforms that would help shore-up Social
Security's long-term finances. To set the stage for their analysis, we first point out that the
system's present value budget imbalance is very much larger than is generally undstood or being
publicly acknowledged by the system's trustees.

16

Social Security's Financial Dilemma

How large is the total present value imbalance of the OASI system? If we discount all
future taxes and benefits at a 3 percent real rate, we arrive at a present value imbalance of $8.1
trillion.9 This figure represents the difference between a) the present value of all future benefit
payments and b) the sum of the present value of future payroll tax revenue plus the current OASI
trust fund.1°
The immediate and permanent tax hike required to generate $8.1 trillion more in present

value and, thus, eliminate the OASI budget imbalance is 4 percentage points or 38 percent of the

post-2000 OASI tax rate of 10.6 percent.11 This requisite 38 percent tax hike is over twice the

required rate increase reported in the 1999 Trustee's Report of the Social Security
Administration. The discrepancy between the tax hike that is needed and the one the Trustees say

is needed is easily explained. Unlike our calculation, the Trustees Report uses a truncated
projection horizon -- 75 years -- which ignores the enormous deficits forecast in years 76 and
thereafter.

One might think that looking our 75 years is far enough, but with each passing year,
another "out-year" is added to the current 75-year projection horizon. And, if these out-years
involve large deficits, the current 75-year present value imbalance will worsen. This is precisely
what has been happening since 1983, when the Greenspan Commission "saved" Social Security.

Indeed, about one third of the current 75-year long-term imbalance in Social Security's fmances

reflects the fact that since 1983 16 years of very large deficits have been added to the 75-year
While we follow the actuaries in using a 3 percent real discount rate in assessing the present value budget impact
of alternative policies, a 3 percent discount rate seems far too low for the individual money's worth calculations we
do in forming lifetime net tax rates and implicit OASI wealth taxes. Why? Because future OASI taxes and benefits
are highly uncertain and, from an individual perspective, should be discounted for their risk. One could argue that
the actuaries should also risk adjust their discount rate in assessing the system's long-term finances.
10
In forming the present values, we use SSA's most recent projections of payroll tax revenue and OASI benefits.

We take average annual growth rates of OASI taxes and benefits during the final 20 years of the 75-year
projections and grow the year-75 taxes and benefits through the year 2300. Discounting the difference between
taxes and benefits at a real discount rate of 3 percent per year, adding the current value of the OASI trust fund, and
making an adjustment for the post 2300 imbalance, yields the total present value imbalance reported in the text.
"In a telephone conservation, Social Security's Deputy Chief Actuary, Steven Goss, indicated that he also fmds a
38 percent present value imbalance, although his calculations include the Dl system. According to Goss, the tax
hike required to balance the OASDI system in present value would be 4.7 percentage points.
-

17

projection horizon. Another third of the 75-year imbalance that has arisen since 1983 reflects

mistakes the actuaries made in their forecasting techniques. The final third reflects overly
optimistic assumptions the actuaries made about the growth of taxable payroll, take-up rates of
disability benefits, and demographics.

The size of the tax hike (38 percent) needed to produce present value balance, not just
over the next 75 years, but over the entire long-run, is even more remarkable given that it was
calculated using the relatively optimistic "intermediate" demographic and economic assumptions.

There are two assumptions, in the intermediate set, that seem particularly sanguine. One is that
improvements in longevity will slow down over the next several decades compared with the rate

of such improvements observed over the past 20 years. Indeed, if one believes the intermediate
longevity forecast, it will take the U.S. until the middle of the next century to achieve the current
Japanese life expectancy. The other assumption is real wage growth. Here the actuaries assume a
growth rate that is over twice that observed, on average, over the past quarter century.

Under more pessimistic, but arguably more realistic assumptions, a more-than-6percentage-point (close to a 50 percent) immediate and permanent payroll tax hike is needed to

ensure that the present value of all future OASDI taxes plus the combined OASDI trust funds
equal the present value of all future OASDI benefits. If such tax hikes are not enacted in the short
term, even larger tax hikes will be required in the long term. Alternatively, Social Security benefits
will have to be dramatically reduced.

Alternative OASI Reforms

The first two of the ten policies considered here were also examined in Caidwell, et. al.
(1999). These are an immediate and permanent 38 percent increase in the OASI payroll tax rate

and an immediate and permanent 25 percent cut in all OASI benefits. The benefit cut policy
generates roughly the same amount of saving in present value as the tax hike. Our third policy is

entitled "Accelerated Increase in the NRA." This policy raises the normal retirement age by 6
months per year after the year 2000 until the normal retirement age is raised to 70 by the year
18

2010.12 Policy 4 uses the CPI, rather than the OASI nominal wage index, to index average

monthly covered earnings in forming recipients' Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME).
Unlike the OASI nominal wage index, which reflects both inflation and improvements in labor

productivity, the CPI index reflects only inflation. Hence, in placing past earnings on an equal
footing with current earnings, CPI indexing provides a credit against inflation during the interim

years, but none for productivity growth. Because productivity growth is generally positive, this
method reduces progressively the contribution of earnings that accrued earlier during a workers

lifetime and results in a lower AIME. A lower AIME, in turn, yields a lower Primary Insurance
Amount (PIA)—the retirement benefit that the worker would receive if he or she begins to collect

at the applicable normal retirement age (NRA). Note that this policy does not alter the scheduled
growth in the bend-points used in calculating workers' PIAs from their AIMEs.13
Our fifth policy maintains the current formula for calculating initial benefits, but once these

benefits commence, they increase over time, not by the CPI, but by the CPI minus one percent.

Policy 6 is called "Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits." This policy calculates retirees' primary
insurance amounts as prescribed by current law, but then reduces these amounts by post-year-

2000 growth in labor productivity. This growth reduction factor means that real OASI benefit
levels do not keep pace with economy-wide increases in labor productivity and real wages. Policy
7 maintains the current benefit formula in all respects except one: it grows the bend points used in

the calculating PIAs according to inflation rather than according to the growth in the OASI wage
index. Consequently, as real wages grow, successive generations of retirees will find themselves

experiencing real "bracket creep," meaning that an ever larger percentage of retirees will have
their benefits computed using the less progressive parts of the benefit formula.
12

Those achieving age 65 during the year 2001 are assigned a normal retirement age (NRA) of 65 years and 6
months; those achieving age 65 during the year 2002 are assigned NRA=66, and so on, until the NRA reaches 70.
13
The PIA equals 90 percent of the first X dollars of AIME plus 32 percent of the AIME exceeding X dollars but
less than Y dollars plus 15 percent of the AIME in excess of Y dollars. The nominal values X and Y (the bendpoints) are announced each year by the Social Security Administration and are scheduled to increase at the rate of
growth of average wages lagged by two years. For example, the bend points for 1999 axe obtained by multiplying

the corresponding 1979 bend- point amounts by the ratio between the national average wage index for 1997
($27,426) and that for 1977 ($9,779.44). These results are then rounded to the nearest dollar.

19

Policy 8 eliminates the ceiling on taxable earnings, but does not alter the method of
determining benefits. So earnings that are above what would otherwise be the ceiling will be
included by OASI in the calculation of benefits. Policy 9 is equivalent to policy 8 except for this
last feature — it collects taxes without any earnings ceiling, but calculates benefits based on the

existing earnings ceiling provisions that apply to the future as well as the present. The final
policy, 10, increases the years used in computing covered workers' AIME from 35 to 40 yvars.

Impact of the Alternative Policies on OASI's Unfunded Liability to Postwar Americans

As mentioned, policies I and 2 (the 38 percent immediate and permanent hike in the
OASDI tax rate and the 25 percent immediate and permanent benefit cut) both suffice, under the

Social Security actuaries' intermediate assumptions, to bring the system's finances into present
value balance when its future net cash flows are discounted at a 3 percent real rate of return; i.e.,
both policies generate approximately $8 trillion more in net taxes when measured in present value.

These additional net taxes would be paid not just by postwar Americans, but also by other
Americans either alive now or expected to be born in the future.

Table 7 shows how these two policies as well as our other eight would affect the net taxes
(taxes minus benefits) that postwar Americans will pay, measured in present value. The first row

of this table indicates that, under current policy, postwar Americans' future benefits exceed their
future taxes by about $1.2 trillion; i.e., the present value of postwar Americans' future net taxes is
negative. This is hardly surprising given that the baby boom generation is nearing retirement.

Although OASI's $1.2 trillion unfunded net OASI liability to postwar Americans is large,

it represents less than 15 percent of the total $8.1 trillion present value budget gap identified

above. Thus, the overwhelming majority of OASI's present value imbalance consists not in
obligations to postwar Americans, but in obligations to the Americansborn before 1945—most of

whom are now retired.

As Table 7 indicates, all ten of the policies reduce the system's liability to postwar
Americans. Indeed, eight of the ten policies wipe out the liability entirely; of these, six transform
20

postwar Americans' net tax payments into a major implicit asset of the system by making their
future benefits far smaller in present value than their future taxes. Take policy I —the 38 percent

tax hike. This policy reduces the unfunded net OASI liability to postwar Americans by over $4
trillion! A more direct way of saying this is that this policy forces postwar Americans to resolve,
on their own, almost 50 percent of the system's current long-term fiscal imbalance. The same can
be said of policies 2, 6, and 9.

Lifetime Net Tax Rates Under Alternative Policies

Tables 8 through 16 show the impact on lifetime net tax rates of our 10 different methods
of dealing with OASI's long-term funding shortfall. These and subsequent tables show results for

Cohorts 45, 70, and 1995 cross-classified by quintiles of lifetime earnings. Table 8 considers
results for all observations, and Tables 9 through 16 examine demographic subgroups.

Look first at the results for policies 1 and 2 in Table 8. Implementing either policy would
raise the lifetime net tax rates of all postwar generations. But the two policies have quite different

intergenerational incidence. The tax hike hits later generations much harder than it does earlier
ones. The benefit cut affects all generations roughly the same. Consider Cohorts 45 and 96. The
tax hike policy raises Cohort 45's lifetime net tax rate from 5.3 percent to just 5.7 percent, but it
raises Cohort 95's lifetime net tax rate from 5.4 to 8.4 percent. In contrast, the benefit cut policy

leaves Cohort 45's and 95's lifetime net tax rates at 6.0 percent and 6.1 percent, respectively.
Clearly, earlier generations fare better under the tax hike because they have limited remaining

labor earnings that are subject to the higher payroll tax rate. In the case of the benefit cut, all
generations are similarly hurt because none has yet begun to receive Social Security retirement
benefits, which is the lion's share of OASI benefits.

Both of these policies are tougher on the lifetime poor than on the lifetime rich in terms of

their impact on lifetime net tax rates. For those in the lowest quintile in Cohort 95, a 38 percent

tax hike means losing close to 4 cents more per dollar earned to the system.'4 For their

'

This percentage point increase precisely equals that required for eliminating the OASI imbalance.

21

contemporaries in the highest quintile, the policy means losing only 2.6 percent more per dollar
earned. Under the benefit cut policy, these differences are much more striking. The poorest one
fifth of Cohort 95 lose 3.3 percent of their lifetime incomes, whereas the richest fifth lose only 0.4

percent. Finally, it's worth noting that for the bottom quintile in Cohort 95, both the tax hike and
benefit cut policies transform OASI from a net subsidy into a net tax.

How do policies 3 through 10 compare with policies 1 and 2? In terms of their impact on

lifetime net tax rates, the answer is that they fall between policies 1 and 2. Several points are,
however, worth stressing. First, policy 3 (the accelerated increase in NRA) hurts older cohorts

more than younger cohorts. For example, the overall increase in the lifetime net tax rate for
Cohort 45 is 0.6 whereas it is only 0.4 for Cohort 95. This occurs because current rules already

incorporate an increase in the NRA.'5 The acceleration of the increase in NRA hits those about to
retire in the near future particularly hard. For example, those reaching age 65 in 2010 would have

a normal retirement age of 66 under current rules, but 70 under policy 3. In contrast, the NRA
of those reaching age 65 after 2022 will increase from 67 under current rules to 70 under policy 3.

Second, policies 6, 7, 8, and 9 ("Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits," "Eliminate Earnings

Ceiling," and "Eliminate Earnings Ceiling without Benefit Change") hurt younger cohorts much

more than older ones. Policy 6 eliminates the real growth in benefits under the current system

associated with economy-wide productivity growth. Hence, later retiring generations, whose
benefits would otherwise be higher than of those retiring earlier, lose the most from this policy.
As mentioned earlier, policy 7 imposes bracket creep: slower growth in nominal bend point values

exposes a greater fraction of each person's AIME to the relatively progressive regions of the PIA
formula. Under policy 8, the incremental lifetime earnings subject to payroll taxes are much larger

for younger than for older generations because a greater fraction of the former generations'
working lifetimes lies the future. However, because of the progressive benefit formula, younger

IS

Under current rules, the NRA is scheduled to increase from 65 for those who will achieve age 65 in 2002 or

earlier to 66 for those who will achieve age 65 between the years 2007 and 2019. Thereafter, the NRA will
increase from 66 for those achieving age 65 before the year 2020 to 67 for those achieving age 65 in 2025.

22

generations' benefits do not keep pace with the increase in their lifetime payroll taxes. The effect
is even more pronounced when benefits are held constant under policy 9.

Third, policy 6 (and, to a lesser extent, policy 7) is extremely tough for poor members of

young cohorts. For the bottom quintile of Cohort 95, policy 6 transforms OASI's 2.9 percent of
lifetime earnings net subsidy into a 6.8 percent net tax and leaves this quintile with a higher net tax

rate than the top quintile! Note that this policy has a much bigger impact than does policy 4 —
"CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings" — on the lifetime net tax rates of poor members of young

cohorts. The same can be said of middle and upper-income young cohort members. The reason is

that policy 6 directly eliminates all growth in benefits due to overall real wage growth, whereas
policy 4 works by reducing the AIME. For those at the upper range of the distribution of lifetime

earnings, a 1 percent reduction in the AIME translates into only a 0.15 percent reduction in
benefits under policy 4. Policy 7— "Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms" —is particularly damaging

to the lifetime poor because it pushes them into lower marginal benefit brackets.

Fourth, policy 9—raising the earnings ceiling without concomitant benefit increases
(without permitting the higher covered earnings to be including in the calculation of AIME)—is
particularly grievous on young cohort members in the highest lifetime earnings quintile. As can be

verified in the bottom panel of Table 8, policy 9 raises the lifetime net tax rate of Cohort 95's top

20 percent of lifetime earners by 3.3 percentage points. In contrast, the poorest members of this
cohort experience no change in their lifetime net tax rates.16

Fifth, policy 10 — "Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40 — leaves unchanged the

lifetime net tax rates of the top earning quintiles, whereas it raises those of the lowest and middle

quintiles. The lowest quintile in each cohort is especially hard hit. The reason is that members of

this quintile have many yrs in their earnings histories during which they don't work. Including
those years in calculating AIME lowers their AIMEs and, thus, their benefit levels.
16

In the case of policy 8, the lowest quintiles in all cohorts experience declines in their lifetime net tax rate. The
explanation is that many of the observations in these quintiles receive benefits based on their spouse's earnings
record and these benefits go up when all of their spouses' earnings are included in the calculation of dependent and
survivor benefits, not simply their spouses' earnings up to the covered earnings ceiling.
23

Lifetime Net Tax Rates of Demographic Groups Under Alternative Policies

The male and female results displayed in Tables 9 and 10 show the same patterns
mentioned above. Males and females would generally rank the policy alternatives in the same
way, provided they were in the same earnings quintile within the same cohort. Take Cohort 95.
For middle-income males in this group, the tax hike policy produces the highest net tax rate — 9.8

percent. For the bottom quintile males, policy 6 — "Stabilize Real Per Capital Benefits" is the
worst, leaving this group facing a 7.9 percent lifetime net tax rate—a full 1.3 percentage points
higher than the corresponding rate facing those in the top quintile of this cohort. And for the top
quintile of males, eliminating the earnings ceiling with no benefit change is the worst alternative,

producing an 8.7 percent lifetime net tax rate. Middle quintile and bottom quintile females are
both harmed the most by policy 6, but in the case of middle quintile females, the tax hike policy is

almost as bad. And like the top quintile males, the top quintile females find policy 9 the worst
overall.

Whites and non-whites within the same cohort and quintile would also rank the policy
changes the same. This is also the case for the college- and non college-educated. As Tables 11
through 14 confirm, the really adverse policies for Cohort 45 members, regardless of their race or

education, are policy 2 (immediate benefit cut) and policy 1 (accelerated increase in NRA). For

those in the middle quintile of Cohort 95, policies 1 (tax hike) and 6 (stabilization of real per
capita benefits) are the worst policies independent of race and education. If, on the other hand,
one doesn't control for quintile, it's clear that certain policies that are worse for the rich are better

for non-whites than whites and for the non-college-educated than for the college-educated
because the former groups are over-represented in the lower quintiles. Policy 9—eliminating the
earnings ceiling without altering benefit calculations—is an example. For Cohort 95, this policy
would lower the non-white/white and non college-educated/college-educated lifetime net tax rate
differentials from 0.7 to 0.1 and from 0.8 to —0.5 percent, respectively.

Tables 15 and 16 show the impact of the proposed reforms on college-educated, white
males, on the one hand, and non-college-educate, non-white females on the other. Again, how
24

individual members of these groups fare is primarily a matter of their cohort, their quintile, and the

policy chosen. But if one fails to consider quintile position, policies 8 and 9 are particularly
detrimental to white, college-educated males relative to non-white, non college-educated females.

Internal Rates of Return Under Alternative Policies

Table 17 considers how the ten policies alter internal rates of return. With the exception
of the benefit cut and accelerated increase in normal retirement age policies, the reforms produce

rather small changes in overall internal rates of return for Cohort 45. But for Cohort 95, the story

is quite different. Six of the ten policies reduce the overall internal rate of return by 0.5 or more
percentage points. Policy 6, which stabilizes real benefits, produces a negative 2.3 percent rate of

return. This is to be expected given that the policy cuts initial benefits based on a compound
productivity growth factor.

Higher earners in all three cohorts experience the sharpest reductions in internal rates of
return. In Cohort 95, four of the ten policies reduce the internal rates of return of those in the top

quintile by 0.9 percentage points or more. Policy 6 lowers the internal rate of return of those in
the top quintile in Cohort 95 from 0.6 percent to —3.8 percent! Of the ten policies, 8 leave top
quintile earners in Cohort 95 with negative to very close to zero rates of return.

While all ten policies substantially lower rates of return earned by the lifetime rich, only
policy 6 dramatically reduces the rate of return earned by the lifetime poor and only in the case of

Cohort 95. Take, as an example, the tax hike policy. For the bottom quintile in Cohort 95, the
internal rate or return declines from 5.7 percent to 4.8 percent. Although this may seem small, its
also consistent with Table 7's finding that the policy raises this group's lifetime net tax rate by 3.8
percentage points—not a small amount. The point that must be kept in mind, then, is the standard

25

one about the power of compound interest; in this context, it means that small differences in
internal rates of return can translate into very large differences in lifetime net tax rates.

As expected, policy 9 -- eliminating the earnings ceiling without changing benefits -significantly reduces the internal rates of return for those in the highest quintile, especially for

later-born cohorts. The patterns shown in Table 17 are reproduced to varying degrees in Tables
18 through 25, which break down the policy effects on internal rates of return by demographic

subgroup. Policy 3 — the accelerated increase in NRA — impacts older men more than older
women, but the same is not true for younger men versus younger women. For example, (not
controlling for quintile) the internal rate of return falls by 0.9 percentage points for men but only

by 0.5 percentage points for women in Cohort 45. In contrast, the corresponding changes are
0.6 percentage points for men and 0.5 percentage points for women in Cohort 95. This result
may arise because the longevity difference between men and women is greater for Cohort45 than

for Cohort 95. As a result, postponing the normal retirement age affects men more than women
in the older cohort, but this effect is not as pronounced for younger men versus women. Tables
18 through 25 reveal no other significant differences across demographic groups with respect to
the manner in which internal rates of return respond to particular policy changes.

Implicit Wealth Tax Rates Under Alternative Policies

Table 26 shows how OASI implicit wealth taxes would be altered by the ten policies.
Each policy would raise implicit tax rates for all postwar cohorts, but for the oldest cohorts, the

effects would be small. In the case of Cohort 45, the current rules implicit tax rate is 66.3
percent. Policy 2 — the explicit benefit cut — produces the largest increase in this tax rate, but the

increase is only to 74.8 percent. For Cohort 95, the implicit tax rate under current law is 65.8

26

percent. Policy 6 generates the biggest increase in this tax rate — to 91.5 percent; policy 2
generates the second biggest increase — to 75.2 percent.

The increases in implicit wealth tax rates are more dramatic for the bottom quintile of
Cohort 95. This quintile faces a negative current rules tax rate equal to —28.9 percent, meaning

the government is returning in benefits 1.289 cents per dollar paid in taxes. Policies 1, 2, and 6
reverse the sign of this group's implicit tax rate. Indeed, policy 6 raises the tax rate all the way to

67.1 percent. For the top quintile in Cohort 95, six of the policies generate implicit wealth tax

rates in excess of 80 percent; policy 6 imposes an implicit tax rate of 94.4 percent. Tables 27
through 33 provide demographic breakdowns of these results. As in the case of lifetime net tax
rates and internal rates of return, the basic patterns of policy impacts experienced by the overall
samples in each cohort carry over to the demographic subgroups.

Benefit Reductions of Retirees by Quintiles ofAverage Social Security Benefits

Our final set of tables, Table 35 through 43, show how the various policies alter the
average OASI benefits received by a subset of observations in Cohorts 45, 70, and 90 — namely,

those who receive benefits for at least one year after reaching age 62. In these tables, rather than
classifS' observations within the three cohorts on the basis of lifetime earnings quintiles, we sort

the observations based on quintiles of average OASI benefits received after reaching age 62.
Before sorting the observations, we calculate for each observation the average amount of benefits

received (in 1998 dollars) over just the years in which the observation is age 62 or older and
actually receives benefits. Since roughly 40 percent of retired American households appear to be

living almost exclusively from Social Security benefits, the lowest quintile of Social Security
benefit recipients represents individuals for whom Social Security income is critically important.

27

Under current rules, average benefits are generally higher in constant 1998 dollars for later

retiring cohorts—reflecting the projected growth in benefits due to real wage growth. This
statement is not true for those in the lowest quintile of average benefits, presumably because this
cohort (and others close to it) will bear the brunt of the increase in the NRA already scheduled to
occur during the first two decades of the next century.
Among the 10 policies considered here, policies 1 and 9 do not affect OASI benefits at all.

Policy 2 generates precisely what it's supposed to: a 25 percent benefit cut across all cohorts and

quintiles. Policy 3 — the accelerated increase in NRA — reduces benefits by less than policy 2
across all cohorts and quintiles. It hurts earlier born generations by more because, given the
increase in NRA already scheduled under cunent rules, policy 3 exposes these cohorts to a larger

increase in NRA compared to later born generations. Although in dollar terms policy 3 hurts

those in the highest quintiles the most, it reduces the benefits of the benefit-poor by more in
percentage terms. For Cohort 95 for example, it reduces the average benefit by $921—a 19
percent reduction—at the lowest quintile and by $3338—a 12 percent reduction—at the highest
quintile of average benefits.
Policy 4—CPI indexing of Covered Earnings—exhibits a similar pattern across quintiles as

policy 2. In percentage terms, it harms the benefit-poor by more than the benefit-rich. In this
case, however, the reason is that a marginal reduction in the AIME of better-offindividuals does
not translate into a proportional reduction in their benefits because they face lower marginal PIA
rates. Policy 5—Indexing benefits by CPI minus 1 percent—yields the most uniform percentage

reduction in average benefits across all cohorts and quintiles—of about 11 percent. At 75
percent, policy 6—Stabilizing Real Per Capita Benefits—generates very large benefit reduction

28

for Cohort 95. The reduction is a sizable 40 percent for Cohort 70 and is only 11 percent for the
oldest cohort. The percentage reductions for the respective cohorts are uniform across quintiles.

As expected, policy 7 generates a larger percentage benefit reduction for the youngest
cohort—about 20 percent overall. As mentioned earlier, this occurs because the bracket-creep
effect is most severe for later born generations. Policy 8 leads to an increase in future benefits for

the middle and highest quintiles of all cohorts but this effect is strongest in percentage terms for

members of the highest quintile of Cohort 70. Their average annual benefit (conditional on
receiving a benefit) increases by more than $7,000 — an increase of 35 percent over that under
current rules. Finally, policy 10— increasing Computation Years from 35 to 40 — leads to fairly

modest reductions in average benefits across all cohorts and quintiles. Tables 36 through 43
report reductions in average benefits by demographic group. The benefit reductions in these
tables are similar to those in table 35.

VI. Summary and Conclusion

This paper uses CORSIM, a dynamic microsimulation model developed by Steven
Caidwell and his colleagues, and Economic Security Planner's detailed Social Security benefit

calculator to study how potential reform of Social Security's Old Age Survivors Insurance
(OASI) program would affect postwar Americans. We consider ten alternative reforms including

a major and immediate increase in the OASI tax rate, a major and immediate cut in benefits, an

accelerated increase in the age of normal retirement, two alternative methods of moving from
wage-indexed to price-index benefits, and the elimination of the ceiling on taxable payroll. We
present results for different postwar cohorts and different lifetime earnings groups within those
cohorts and decomposed these results by sex, race, and education.

29

Our measures of the impacts of reform are four: how the reforms alter OASI lifetime net
tax rates, internal rates of return, implicit wealth tax rates, and average benefit levels received by

retirees. Regardless of which measure we examine, the message of our paper is clear: reforms to

the OASI system of the type needed to bring the system's fmances into present value balance e

likely to greatly worsen OASI's treatment of postwar Americans. Although sex, race, and

education play a role in determining current and prospective OASI treatment of postwar
Americans, the primary determinant of this treatment is an individual's cohort and position in the
distribution of lifetime earnings.

The youngest postwar generations have the most to worry about in this regard since tax
increases will affect them over their entire working careers and benefit cuts will be fully phased in

when they retire. Under current law, today's newborns are slated to surrender 5 cents of every
dollar earned to the OASI system in taxes paid net of benefits received. That lifetime net tax rate
could rise as high as 8 percent under some of the reforms being contemplated by Social Security's

actuaries. For the poorest members of today's newborn generation, a number of the reforms

would transform the system from a net subsidy to a net tax. And for the richest members of
today's newborn generations, some of the reforms translate into large negative internal rates of
return on contributions and implicit wealth taxes of close to 100 percent.

To conclude, none of the reforms that the OASI system is likely to adopt will be pleasant.

But some reforms are more even handed than are others with respect to their distribution of
additional fiscal burdens both across and within generations. Microsimulation analysis of the kind
presented here can help policymakers better sugarcoat what will inevitably be a bitter pill.

30

References

Boskin, Michael J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Douglas J. Puffert, and John B. Shoven, "Social
Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations," National Tax Journal. vol. 40,
no.1, March 1987, 19-34.
Caidwell, Steven B., CORSIM 3.0 Technical and User Documentation, unpublished manuscript,
Department of Sociology, Cornell University, 1996.

_______________ and Richard J. Morrison, "Validation and Alignment in Dynamic
Microsimulation,t' unpublished paper, Department of Sociology, Cornell University, 1997.

Caldwell, Steven B., Melissa Favreault, Alla Gantman, Jagadeesh Gokhale, Thomas Johnson, and
Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans," in Tax Policy and the
Economy, James Poterba, ed., 13, 1999, 109-48.
Caldwell, Steven B., Melissa Favreault, Alla Gantman, Jagadeesh Gokhale, Thomas Johnson, and

Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans," NBER working
paper, 1998.

Diamond, Peter and Jonathan Gruber, "Social Security and Retirement in the U.S.," NBER
Working Paper no. 6097, July 1997.

Favreault, Melissa, "Whose Social Safety Net? The Life-Course Impacts of the OASDI program

on Social Stratification in the United States," Department of Sociology, Cornell University,
dissertation in progress, 1998.

Favreault, Melissa and Steven B. Caldwell, "Whose Social Safety Net? Differential Life Course

Patterns and the Progressivity of the OASDI System," paper delivered to the American
Sociological Association Population Section session, Toronto Canada, August 1997.

Coronado, Julia Lynn, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass, "Distributional Impacts of Proposed
Changes to the Social Security System," in Tax Policy and the Economy, James Poterba, ed., 13,
1999, 149-86.

Hurd, Michael D. and John B. Shoven, "The Distributional Impact of Social Security," in
Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, David Wise, ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago
Press, 1985.
Johnson, Thomas, "On Methods for Alignment in CORSIM/DYNACAN," unpublished paper,
Cornell University, 1996.
Lee, Ronald and Shripad Tuljapurkar, "Death and Taxes: Longer Life, Consumption, and Social
Security," Demography, vol. 34, no. 1, 1997, 67-81.

31

Lee, Ronald and Shripad Tuijapurkar, "Demographic Trends and Economic Consequences:
Uncertain Demographic Futures and Social Security Finances," American Economic Review, vol.
88, no. 2, May 1998, 237-247.

Myers, Robert J. and Bruce D. Schobel, "An Updated Money's-Worth Analysis of Social
Security's Retirement Benefits," Transactions, Society of Actuaries, no. 44, 1993, 247-75.

Neufeld, Christopher, "Aligning Sub-groups and Aggregates Simultaneously in Two Passes,"
unpublished paper, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada, 1996a.

__________________ "Final Report on a New Variance Reduction Method for CORSIM and
DYNACAN," unpublished paper, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada,
1996b.
Nichols, Orb R. And Richard G. Schreitmueller, "Some Comparisons of the Value of a Worker's
Social Security Taxes and Benefits," Actuarial Note no. 95, Baltimore, Md.: U.S. Social Security
Administration Office of the Actuary, 1978.
Pellechio, Anthony and Gordon Goodfellow, "Individual Gains and Losses from Social Security

before and after the 1983 Amendments," NBER working paper no. 272, Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.
Steuerle, C. Eugene and Jon M. Bakija, Retooling Social Security for the 21st Century,
Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 1994

32

1109
1265
1319
1366
1486

1121

1109
1265
1319
1366
1486

651
779

604

513
569
660
620
563
546
522
663

1171
1121

1171.

210
272
362
324
322
323
297
334
371
398
428

1000
1209
1415
1273

1000
1209
1415
1273

791
891
986
841
808
779
730
885
891
928
1023

2462
2925
3418
3013
2859
2735
2661
3139
3130
3294
3699

5545
6329
6598
6832
7434

1109
1269
1322
1368
1490

Men

5001
6045
7076
6366
5857
5605

1001
1209
1416
1274
1173
1121

All

All

238
353
425
389
377
399
424
504
501
532
558

249
367
475
448
456
478
494
584
598
591
656

College
456
546
630
614
552
607
599
721
757
750
854

930
1068
1123
1145
1231

924
1035
1076
1068
1152

928
1044
1091
1089
1168

957

958
912

1076
1286
1124
1028
960

1031
1217
1103

1090
1254
1110
1015

923

875

912

White

Lowest Middle Highest

33

Women
Men, White, College
Birth Cohort
45
103
351
210
2539
790
487
1945—49
391
72
153
318
3120
937
640
1950—54
207
410
85
430
3658
1053
755
1955—59
170
375
3353
88
653
433
949
1960—64
166
344
2998
81
608
365
849
1965—69
180
372
342
2870
99
575
1970—74
798
93
172
339
379
2884
812
587
1975—79
427
92
233
384
3190
931
602
1980—84
454
109
229
715
431
3468
948
1985—89
449
119
193
715
440
3538
968
1990—94
276
517
3735
110
707
467
1058
1995—00
Source: Author's calculations PVE — present value of lifetime earnings.

Cohort
Birth
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

Lowest Middle Highest

Table 1: Number of Observations by Selected
Middle

744
977
1104
1011
945
1011
981
1219
1250
1248
1424

545
663
786
660
621
514
510
548
565
618
636

3471
4009
4617
3980
3565
3155
3068
3417
3584
3724
4014

963
1097
1164
1343
1586

877
929

859

868

766

553

All

118
154

90

41
52

57

70
94

78

411
487

351.

Women, Non-White, Non-College
41
9
194
50
279
70
33
63
310
76
80
30
35
300
71
64
267
59
30
59
63
26
269
72
277
66
52
37
35
318
77
65

Non-College
751
842
940
825
715
643
615
681
721
775
830

185
230
243
298
334
181
221
228
277
318

4582
5232
5434
5489
5848

762
856
990
884
794
722
685
761
818
834
928

179
201
199
223
259

213
209

156
164

1530
2036
2459
2386
2292
2450
2477
2912
3014
3108
3420

150
145
161

125
178
198
170

78
133
130

Highest

88
119
161
163

Non-White

Lowest

Quintiles

4448
5279
6208
5507
4980
4676

All

PVE

Source:

81.6
80.9
80.2

80.9

81.5
82.6
82.2
82.7
82.2
83.2
83.1
83.8
83.7
83.4

70.2
69.2
71.6
71.9
70.7
71.9
72.4
73.8
73.8
74.2
79.8
80.1
79.8
79.7
80.5
80.9
81.0
79.7

78.4

78.3
77.9

Man

81.7
81.2
82.0
82.1
82.7
82.4
81.0

81.3

80.0

79.6
79.4

WE

—

81.6

77.6

82.2
82.3
82.8

81.4
81.5
81.0
82.0
82.2
82.7
82.8
81.4

80.2

79.5
79.4.

Highest

34

value of lifetime earnings.

77.7
76.3
77.3
77.7
77.5
78.3
79.2
78.9
79.8
79.4
79.4

82.1
82.0
82.4
81.6
81.3

81.4

80.4
79.5
80.3
80.8
80.9

81.9
81.5
81.0

81.3
81.4

80.2
80.4
81.0

79.8

79.3
79.1

78.1
78.4
82.2
80.5

79.8

82.1

80.7

80.2
83.4
80.0
79.9

80.2
80.2
80.6
79.5

79.4

78.8
79.3
78.7
79.6
78.7
79.6

81.6
82.4
82.1
80.3

80.4
80.8
80.8
80.0

80.1

83.4
82.2
82.4
83.5
80.8

77.7
80.5
77.6
85.1
82.5

84.0
86.3
87.1
80.8

84.3

83.7
84.6
85.0

82.7

84.0

82.0
81.6
82.5
81.2

79.9
83.0
81.7
82.8

80.7
81.2

Non-White, Non-College
84.0
79.8
79.8

80.8
80.2
80.6
80.6
80.1

78.5
78.6
79.1
79.4
79.8
80.2

Non-College
79.7
78.0
77.5
79.5
79.1
79.1
80.6
78.6
79.8
81.3
80.5
81.5

79.8

78.2
79.2
79.2
79.7
79.6
79.9
79.8
78.9
76.3
80.7
80.2
80.9
80.6
80.4
80.1
78.4
77.0
75.1
77.1
77.7
76.7
77.5
77.7
77.7

77.6

76.7
77.4

81.1
82.7
82.8
81.6
81.8
82.9
80.8
79.2

81.2

All

79.9
78.9

77.8

75.5

74.8

75.6
76.4

Middle Highest

74.7

Lowest

Quintiles

All

WE

College
78.3
77.7
79.7
80.6
80.2
79.3
81.4
81.2
81.2
82.2
80.6

College
79.5
81.0
79.4
78.7
81.2
79.4
82.0
80.7
82.1
80.7
81.0
82.3
81.9
83.0
82.5
81.9
82.9
82.7
81.3
82.7
81.5
80.3

79.8
80.0
81.6
80.7
81.0
81.8
81.1
80.7

79.2
78.2
79.4

Middle

Men, White,
75.0
74.4
75.1
73.1
76.2
72.2
78.7
72.6
75.1
69.6
79.4
74.9
76.5
75.3
77.8
78.9
79.8
76.6
77.4
75.5

82.0
80.9
80.9

82.6

80.6

77.8
78.3
78.2
78.0

80.4
80.2
81.4
80.7
79.7

81.5
80.7

81.6

.

82 1

79.6
80.1
80.0
80.4
79.6
80.5
80.7

Lowest

75.8
75.3
76.0
76.6
76.9
77.3

80.7
81.0
81.1
81.5
81.2
80.6

80.2

79.9

79.1
78.9
79.5

All

present

Woman
84.5
83.5
83.8
80.9
83.8
82.5
84.2
82.6
85.1
84.4
84.5
83.7
86.2
83.8
85.9
84.4
86.5
84.1
85.4
84.3

78.5
77.2
77.3

77.8

74.3
74.5
75.4
76.0
75.6
78.8
77.3

81.0

81.1

80.7

80.8

79.9

80.2

79.3
80.1

79.5
81.3

79.2

79.6

79.0
80.0

78.8
77.9

79.1

All

Middle Highest

Authors calculations.

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

Lowest

Table 2: Average Age of Death by Selected

36.6
35.1
37.4
36.2
35.7
36.1
37.8
37.1
42.0
45.3
49.1

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Average

1105.0
1129.8
1325.3
1519.2
1459.0
1466.8
1551.4
1636.0
1815.2
1718.8
1881.9

Men

All
1107.7
1117.7
1307.1
1465.3
1435.8
1509.0
1516.6
1671.7
1773.3
1717.1
1872.6

Women
250.6 1117.7
246.7 1083.7
247.7 1265.4
240.4 1360.7
251.2 1384.5
253.2 1605.1
262.7 1449.6
269.2 1753.9
283.1 1686.6
289.6 1713.6
320.6 1852.4

258.8
251.1
256.8
243.2
255.6
257.6
265.3
279.2
285.7
295.2
329.0

254.8
248.8
251.9
241.8
253.4
255.4
263.9
274.5
284.3
292.2
325.0

Middle Highest

3:

334.3
361.1
358.7
392.2
398.3
410.0
444.8

332. 6

244.6
263.1
308.9

549.2
533.8
570.7
611.1
605.7
607. 9
630.7
668.9
731.8
705.4
768.1

605.7

394.6
394.1
435.4
464.4
466.8
481.5
489.3
529.4
556.5
552.4

College
258.0 1185.2
251.0 1208.7
251.8 1414.8
239.8 1629.6
253.1 1556.2
256.2 1613.6
266.6 1587.0
276.1 1787.8
285.8 1818.8
295.1 1862.6
330.4 2027.5
739.5

634.4
659.3
662.0

514.1
490.3
533.2
588.5
557.4
581.1
572.2

399.3
398.1
445.0
466.5
478.0
487.0
499.4
546.3
571.3
568.3
628.3

All

Men, White, College
15.8
264.4 1202.4
733.1
23.6
257.8 1247.9
677.2
27.3
258.2 1485.6
729.3
29.8
240.9 1665.4
794.8
27.0
257.3 1639.4
787.6
29.1
257.6 1561.2
753.1
31.6
267.1 1700.7
786.5
28.4
280.4 1763.4
824.2
37.7
288.1 1931.5
909.8
31.1
302.1 1868.5
890.6
42.1
335.6 2091.9 1002.1

41.1
47.1

42. 6

35.5
34.2
33.3
35.2
36.6
36.4

31. 9
32. 1

35.2
38.1
35.8
41.7
42.7
49.0

34. 6

33.0
33.7
36.5
35.7

Middle Highest

35

Middle Highest

341.9
345.2
383.3
390.0
408.5
404.2
422.3
440.0
470.1
461.0
491.7

356.4
366.6
366.4
451,1
402.9
453.7
440.9
448.9
487.5
487.5
522.3

All

Non-White, Non-College
248.0 1089.3
242.6
250.1
942.1
278.9
247.8 1111.8
286.0
250.8 1081.0
298.8
256.2 1151.1
309.9
251.4 1425.6
311.7
268.6 1403.3
366.6
263.4 1048.2
330.4
275.4 1560.6
379.9
289.8 1390.9
373.8
314.5 1741.6
403.5

Non-College
253.8 1042.8
247.8 1042.7
252.0 1220.8
242.8 1312.5
253.5 1328.8
254.7 1385.4
261.7 1433.9
273.1 1519.0
283.0 1712.4
290.1 1540.6
320.7 1664.7

Non-White
254.4 1046.8
247.9 1024.0
249.5 1186.1
244.5 1560.2
252.2 1322.1
253.8 1533.4
261.6 1359.3
272.3 1384.6
283.2 1610.2
288.5 1617.7
322.4 1745.8

Women,
37.5
24.3
24.3
31.0
29.0
31.3
34.0
31.2
38.0
46.7
42.3

33.9
34.0
36.5
35.9
35.1
35.9
38.6
36.2
41.3
45.2
49.0

38.0
31.1
34.4
33.3
33.6
38.4
36.5
38.7
41.9
47.1
45.9

Lowest

Quintiles (thousands of 1998 dollars)

White
254.9 1112.8
248.9 1129.2
252.3 1319.3
241.3 1452.7
253.6 1451.8
255.7 1504.9
264.4 1546.9
274.9 1725.7
284.5 1802.2
293.3 1736.5
325.7 1899.3

WE

Lowest

by Selected

All

WE

Authors calculations. WE — present value of lifetime earnings.

21.6
27.5
32.8
33.2
31.4
34.5
38.1
33.9
41.2
39.3
46.4

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Source:

33.4
33,4
36.2
35.4
34.5
35.6
37.8
36.3
41.8
43.6
48.3

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Lowest

Table

—5.2
—10.1
—7.2
—6.8
—6.4
—6.2
—6.5
—7.7
—6.4
—5.4
—4.6

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

5.9
6.5
6.7
6.8
6.4
6.5
6.3
6.1
6.1
5.9

I'VE

—

present

4.8
4.5
4.6
4.4
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.0
4.9
5.0
5.0

4.9
4.9
5.0
5.0
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.2
5.0
5.3
5.3

Highest

College
5.5
4.7
5.4
5.5
5.9
5.4
5.6
5.4
5.1
5.3
5.4

5.9
5.7
5.7
5.5
5.3
5.3
5.3

5.4
5.7

5.0

White
6.1

Middle

Men, White, College
1.5
6.5
5.0
.5
5.7
4.5
1.3
6.4
4.6
6.2
4.6
4.1
7.1
4.9
2.3
3.3
6.2
5.4
2.8
6.5
5.0
2.0
6.2
5.2
4.9
.7
5.6
6.0
5.1
.6
5.0
—.2
5.6

—6.0
—9.4
—6.7
—6.0
—6.3
—4.3
—5.1
—6.1
—4.6
—5.3
—4.9

—4.3
—8.0
—5.1
—4.6
—4.0
—3.8
—3.2
—5.2
—4.3
—4.5
—3.3

Lowest

36

I'VE

5.4
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.4
5.6
5.4
5.6
5.2
5.4
5.1

5.0
4.5
4.8
4.8
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.2
5.0
5.1
5.0

5.3
4.7
5.0
5.2
5.5
5.4
5.4
5.3
5.1
5.3
5.2

AU

(Current Rules) by Selected

value of lifetime earnings.

4.3
3.7
4.2
4.6
4.9
4.6
4.7
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.9

5.4
5.5
5.4
5.1
5.3
5.4

5.5

5.3
4.8
5.1
5.2

Women
5.4
4.0
4.3
4.6
4.7
4.7
4.8
5.0
5.1
5.1
5.1
4.7
5.1
5.0
4.8
4.7
4.9
4,7
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.2

5.0
4.9
5.0
4.9
5.3
5.3
5.4
5.3
5.0
5.3
5.4

5.8
5.4
5.6
5.6
5.9
5.9
5.9
5.9
5.5
5.7
5.7

Men

All

All

Rates

5.2
5.0
5.2
5.0
5.4
5.6
5.5
5.6
5.1
5.5
5.5

6.8

5.7
5.8
5.6
5.5
5.4
5.5

6.0

5.1
5.5
5.9

6.1

Highest

Lifetime Net Tax

Middle

4:

Source: Author's calculations.

2.2
1.8
2.1
2.7
3.7
3.7
4.0
4.1
2.2
1.9
1.3

—4.0
—3.5
—2.9

—4.8

—4.2
—7.9
—5.0
—4.6
—3.9
—3.4
—3.7

Birth Cohort
1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

Lowest

Table

5.1
5.3
5.5
5.5
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.2
5.8
6.0

5.2
5.3
5.5
4.4
5.6
5.0
6.0
6.2
5.3
5.3
5.9

Highest

Non-College
6.3
5.2
5.6
6.1
6.0
6.0
5.9
5.7
5.7
5.5
5.5

Non-White
6.4
5.5
6.0
6.6
6.0
6.1
6.2
5.8
6.0
5.8
6.2

Middle

5.6
5.0
5.3
5.6
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.3
5.6
5.8

5.7
5.3
5.6
5.1
5.8
5.4
5.9
6.0
5.5
5.5
5.9

All

Women, Non-White, Non-College
—4.8
6.1
3.9
5.1
—22.2
5.1
4.8
4.5
5.0
—14.1
5.6
5.5
6.3
6.1
5.9
—6.7
5.6
6.5
5.8
—13.6
—8.7
5.6
5.2
5.2
5.2
—12.0
5.7
5.7
7.3
6.0
—11.1
5.3
5.4
—8.1
5.4
5.6
5.3
5.3
—1.2
5.2
5.7
5.9
5.6
—3.1

—3.7
—7.3
—4.4
—4.0
—2.8
—3.0
—2.8
—3.9
—3.7
—2.5
—1.8

—1.4

.0

—5.9
—3.2
—2.9

—3.8
—7.0
—4.2
—4.1
—3.2
—1.7

Lowest

Quintiles (percent)

Internal Rates

5.8
5.7
Men

All

3.2
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.2

6.0
PVE

Return

—

.9

2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.6

2.7

3.2
3.2
2.9
2.7

1.3
1.3
1.3

1.1
1.1

1.0

.8
.9
.8
.8
.8
.6
.9
.8
.9
.9
.7

.8
.8
.7
.6
.7
.6
.8
.7
.8
.9
.7

2.2
2.0
2.1
2.6
2.3
2.5

1.8
2.1
1.6

.6

.7

.6

.5

.5
.5
.5
.4
.4
.2
.6

37

lifetime earnings

4.0
4.4
4.8
4.8
5.1

3.9

4.8
4.5
3.3
4.2

1.7
1.9

3.1
3.0
2.9

2.9

2.7
2.9
2.7
3.0
2.9

2.9

2.8

College

2.8
2.7
2.8
3.0
2.9
2.9

2.6

2.5
2.7
2.6
2.6

White

Middle Highest

Men, White, College

4.5

6.1
6.1

6.0

6.2
6.3
5.9
6.0
6.2

present value of

1.4
1.3

1.3

1.4

.7
.4

.6

.4
.4
.5

.9
.9

6.4

6.9

1.1

.5
.4
.3
.4

1.0

6.0

6.7
6,2
6.0
5.9
5.9
5.7
6.1
6.0
6.0
5.8

5.7

Lowest

1.3
1.3

1.1
1.0
1.2

.9
.8
.8
.8

1.0

.9

1.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.9

1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.0
1.9

2.1

2.0

All

(Current Rules) by Selected

1.0

1.9

2.0
2.0

1.9
1.9

1.8
1.8

1.8

1.9
2.1
1.9

All

of

.5

.9
.6

.6
.8
.7
.9

.7

.8
.8
.7
.6

Women
3.0
1.7
3.2
1.6
3.1
1.3
3.2
1.2
3.2
1.3
3.2
1.2

2.0
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.4

1.7
1.7
1.7
2.1

6.3
6.3
6.3
6.5
6.3
6.1

6.4

7.0
6.5

5.9

4.4
4.6

4.3

3.6
3.6

3.7

3.7

4.0

4.3
4.3
4.3

1.6
1.8

2.9
2.9
2.8

5.9

2.8

2.4
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.8
2.7

6.2
6.0
5.9
5.8
5.8
6.0

6.7

5.7

Source: Authors calculations.

1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

1965— 69

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960— 64

Birth Cohort

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

5:

Lowest Middle Highest

Table

PVE

2.5
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.8

2.5

.5
.5
.6
.7
.6
.7
.8
.9
.5

.8

.9

.8
.3

1.0

.7
.7
.9
.9
.8
.7

1.0
1.0

Highest

Non-College
2.3

2.6
2.6
2.6
2.3

2.5

Non-White
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.6
2.6

Middle

2.1
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.1
1.9

2.0

1.9
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.7

All

Women, Non-White, Non-College
5.9
2.5
1.7
2.6
9.1
2.5
1.4
2.6
8.2
2.5
1.0
2.5
.9
2.0
6.5
2.1
1.0
2.4
8.2
2.9
6.8
2.8
1.1
2.5
7.2
2.8
1.0
2.5
7.3
2.9
1.0
2.4
6.5
2.8
1.1
2.4
5.3
3.0
1.6
2.5
5.7
2.7
.4
2.2

5.9
5.6
5.7
5.6
5.9
5.8
5.6
5.4

6.0

5.7
6.6

5.7
5.0
5.4

5.7

5.7
6.7
6.1
6.0
5.8
5.4
6.2

Lowest

Quintiles (percent)

—33.7
—35.9
—46.8

1965—69

1970—74
1975—7 9
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Source:

—44.7

—75.8
—63.6
—54.0

—63.8

—115.7
—78.7
—69.8
—62.5
—61.3

—43.1

13.2

21.4
19.1

39.7

36.4
36.1
39.6

26.5

20.6
20.0
22.3

—28.9

—34.7

767

49.9
47.3
48.4
47.2
48.9

49.4

50.0

49.7
50.6

PVE —

58.1

56.8

56.4
55.7

57.4
57.0
56.4

46.7
53.3
57.3

49.8

70.6

59.8
55.1

62.2
55.8

68.1
60.2
64. 9

78.2
76.5
77.1

78.1
78.6

80.1.

76.5
77.6
78.6
79.1

77.9

38

of lifetime earnings.

—2.3

31.3
29.9
19.1
7.3
5.9

39.6
23.6

14.0

5.7

13.8

67.9
64.2
65.1
61.8

53.4

74.7

53.7
56.8
54.4
57.7
52.6
55.2
53.1
50.5
52. 9
75.9
77.1
77.3
78.6
76.5
77.4
76.5
76.0
77.0

76.2

56.0

College

White
75.7
60. 9
75.0
55.5
57.1
76.9
57.2
77.7
77.9
58.0
54. 9
78.4
56.1
77.4
54.5
77.6
76.9
52.5
52. 6
75.8
51.8
77.0

Men, White, College

—49.5

-51.4

—59.5
—45.4

—42.2
—50.6

present value

73.1
74.4
73.2
74.0
76.3

74.3
75.2

74.5

72.8

78.0

71.1

72.2

78.3
76.8

Women
67.8
70.0
48.0

53.2

58.1

60. 6

59.7

73.5

73.8

79.4

64.3
61.7

78.9

74.8
74.1

79.3
79.5

66.7
62.1

74.6

—74.8
—60.3
—64.3

—109.5

72.4
73.7

—51.2

—32.6

—44.7

—50.8
—42.4

—31.8

—35.1
—90.6
—55.9
—47.2
—39.1
—36.9

Lowest Middle Highest

74.5

79.2

78.6

77.4

Men

77.5

65.7
65.4
65.8

67. 1

67.5
67.0

66.3
63.3
66.0
67 .7
68.1

All

66.4

66.4

65.3

69.4

53.6
53.8

76.7
75.9

77.6

56.7

55.0
53.6

77.8

77.7

76.9

75.0

75.6

78.2
77.4

All

55.6

61.5
56.3
57. 8
58.4
58.1

Middle Highest

Author's calculations

1945—4 9
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—7 9
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

1945—49
1950—54
1955—59
1960—64
1965—69
1970—74
1975—79
1980—84
1985—89
1990—94
1995—00

Birth Cohort

1960—64

1955—59

—40.0

—38.1

1945—49

1950—54

—35.3
—89.9
—54.8
—46.5

Birth Cohort

Lowest

—30.1
—.5

67. 1

65.6
65.2
65.2

—26.8
—29.1
—27.5
—38.3
—36.5
—24.8
—17.3

68. 6

71.6
70.0

75.2
72.8
74.1
75.2
75.7
75.4
73.7
74.3
72.6

67.4
68.1
66.6
66.6
66.4

—29.6

—127.4
—84.0
—121.8
—107.6
—80.4

—68.5

—250.8
—160.2

—45.2

—40.6

68.2

68.5

—30.7
—82.5
—46.8

67.5
64.6
66.9

—14.3

-28.5

—16.7
—57.6

—82.5
—45.6
—41.1
—31.2

—37 4

79.5

67 . 5
67 . 0

65.2

55.6

79.4

75.7
75.3
75.2
75.3
74.8

75.8

64.6
53.2
54.5
54.9
53.0
54.4

70.4
74.5

66.2

64.3
78.1

63.0

60.1
60.2

60.0
59.4
58.7

64.2

54.7
58.1

56.4

66.1
64.7

66.6

66.6

67.4
67.7

65.6
62.5
65.3

78.4
77.8
77.1
75.8

78.2
77.7

78.2

77.7

75.2

75.0

56.7
57.7

60.0

56.2
54.2
54.1

56.6

57. 9
57. 9

58.4

58.3
60.5

63.3
57.4

68.3

67.4
66.1
66.6

67.2
76.6
77.1
77.3
75.7
76.8

66.3
68. 7

65.3

67 . 1

All

76.6

74.7
74.6
76.9
77.6

Non-College

60.6

65.8
61.3
61.7
65. 6
58.7
58.7
59.8
57.5
58.4
57.3

Non-White

Lowest Middle Highest

67 . 5

67.0

68.2

67. 6

65.9

66.2
63.0

All

Table 6: Wealth Tax Rates (Current Rules) by Selected PVE Quintiles (percent)

38% Tax Hike Beginning in 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in 2000
Accelerated Increase in NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Index Benefits by CPI minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms

Source: Authors' calculations.

8

39

Eliminate Taxable Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Taxable Ceiling wlo Changing Benefits
10 Increase computation years from 35 to 40

7

4
5
6

2
3

1

Current Rules

Policy
1172.9
-2874.0
-2004.3
-1089.7
145.9
-231.0
-3312.7
-194.9
-1048.5
-2276.7
737.9

-4046.9
-3177.2
-2262.5
-1026.9
-1403.9
-4485.6
-1367.7
-2221.4
-3449.6
-435.0

Present
Change
Value
From
Imbalance Current
Rules

Table 7: Change in Social Securitys Net Liability to Postwar Generations

Table 8: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates

All Observations

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase in NRA
Cr1 Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-4.2
-3.9
-.2
-1.7
-3.0
-2.5
-2.3
-3.8
-4.4
-4.2
-3.5

Cohort 1945-49
6.1
6.4
7.1
6.9
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.3
6.1
6.1
6.3

5.0
5.3
5.4
5.4
5.1
5.1
5.2
5.0
5.3
5.4
5.0

5.3
5.7
6.0
5.9
5.6
5.6
5.7
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.4

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-3.4
-1.1
.0

-1.6
-2.2
-1.9
1.9
-2.2
-4.1
-3.4
-2.6

5.7
8.4
6.9
6.5
6.1
6.2
7.5
6.3
5.7
5.7
5.9

5.3
7.1
5.7
5.6
5.4
5.4
5.9
5.5
7.7
8.2
5.3

5.4
7.6
6.1
5.9
5.6
5.7
6.5
5.8
6.9
7.3
5.5

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
Cr1 Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

40

-2.9
.9
.4

-1.3
-1.7
-1.5
6.8
-.9
-3.3
-2.9
-2.2

5.5
9.3
6.7
6.2
5.9
5.9
9.0
6.4
5.5
5.5
5.7

5.4
8.0
5.8
5.6
5.5
5.5
6.6
5.7
8.2
8.7
5.4

5.4
8.4
6.1
5.8
5.6
5.6
7.5
5.9
7.1
7.5
5.5

Table 9: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax
Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Rates

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

2.2
2.8
4.4
4.0

2.9
3.0
3.2
2.5
2.1
2.2
2.9

Cohort 1945-49

6.8
7.1
7.5
7.5
7.0
7.0
7.1
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.9

5.2
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.3
5.4
5.4
5.3
5.5
5.6
5.3

5.8
6.2
6.4
6.4
6.0
6.0
6.1
5.9
6.0
6.1
5.9

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3.7
6.3
5.4
5.0
4.5
4.3
6.4
4.0
3.6
3.7
4.3

6.4
9.3
7.4
7.2
6.7
6.8
8.0
6.9
6.4
6.4
6.5

5.6
7.5
6.0
5.9
5.7
5.7
6.2
5.8
7.9
8.3
5.6

5.9
8.2
6.5
6.3
6.1
6.1
6.8
6.2
7.5
7.8
6.0

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

41

1.3
5.1
3.5
2.5
2.4
2.1
7.9
2.3
1.3
1.3
2.0

5.9
9.8
7.0
6.6
6.3
6.3
9.2
6.7
5.9
5.9
6.1

5.5
8.1
5.9
5.7
5.6
5.6
6.6
5.8
8.3
8.7
5.5

5.7
8.7
6.3
6.0
5.8
5.9
7.4
6.1
7.6
7.9
5.7

Table 10: The

Impact of

Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates
Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-5.2
-4.9
-.9
-2.6
-3.9
-3.4
-3.2
-4.7
-5.5
-5.2
-4.5

Cohort 1945-49

5.4
5.7
6.6
6.2
5.8

5.9
6.0
5.6
5.4
5.4
5.6

4.0
4.3
4.5
4.4
4.1
4.2
4.2
4.1
4.4
4.7
4.1

4.3
4.6
5.3
5.0
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.5

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-6.2
-4.0
-2.1
-4.2
-4.8
-4.3
.1

-4.7
-7.0
-6.2
-5.3

5.1
7.5
6.4
5.8
5.5
5.6
7.1
5.7
5.0
5.1
5.3

4.7
6.3
5.0
4.9
4.8
4.8

5.3
4.9
7.3
8.0
4.7

4.6
6.6
5.5
5.1
4.9
5.0
6.0
5.0
6.0
6.4
4.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

42

-4.6
-.7
-.8
-2.7
-3.2
-2.9
6.4
-2.1
-5.1
-4.5
-3.8

5.0
8.8
6.3
5.7
5.4
5.5
8.9
6.0
4.9
5.0
5.2

5.2
7.8

5.6
5.4
5.3
5.4
6.4
5.5
8.0
8.7
5.2

4.9
8.0
5.7
5.4
5.2
5.2
7.5
5.6
6.3
6.7
5.0

Table 11: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates
White

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
Current Rules
2. 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-4.3
-3.9
-.2
-1.7
-3.0
-2.5
-2.3
-3.8
-4.5
-4.3
-3.5

Cohort 1945-49
6.1
6.4
7.1
6.9
6.4
6.5
6.5
6.2
6.1
6.1
6.2

4.9
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.0
5.1
5.1
5.0
5.3
5.4
5.0

5.3
5.6
6.0
5.9
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.4

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-3.8
-1.4
-.3
-1.9
-2.5
-2.2
1.7
-2.5
-4.5
-3.8
-2.9

5.7
8.3
6.8
6.4
6.0
6.1
7.5
6.2
5.6
5.7
5.8

5.3
7.2
5.7
5.6
5.4
5.5

5.9
5.5
7.7
8.2
5.4

5.4
7.6
6.1
5.9
5.6
5.7
6.5
5.8
6.9
7.3
5.5

Birth Cohort 1995-00

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning fl Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
Source: Author's calculations.

43

-3.3
.5
.1.

-1.6
-2.1
-1.9
6.8
-1.2
-3.7
-3.3
-2.5

5.3
9.1
6.5
6.0
5.7
5.7
9.0
6.2
5.3
5.3
5.5

5.3
7.9
5.7
5.5
5.4
5.4
6.5

5.6
8.2
8.7
5.3

5.2
8.3
5.9
5.7
5.5
5.5
7.3
5.8
7.1
7.4
5.3

Table 12:

Quintile

The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates
Non-White

Lowest Middle Highest All

of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-3.8
-3.6
-.3
-1.6
-2.4
-2.2
-2.1
-3.4
-3.8
-3.8
-3.1

Cohort 1945-49
6.4
6.7
7.3
7.0
6.7
6.8
6.8
6.5
6.4
6.4
6.5

5.2
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.3
5.4
5.4
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.3

5.7
6.0
6.4
6.3
6.0
6.0
6.1
5.8
5.8
5.9
5.8

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NBA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-1.7
.5

1.3
-.3
-.6
-.3
2.8

-.9

-2.0
-1.7
-1.1

6.1
8.8
7.2
6.8
6.4
6.5
7.7
6.5
6.0
6.1
6.2

5.0
6.8
5.4
5.3
5.1
5.2
5.6
5.3
7.6
8.1
5.1

5.4
7.6
6.1
5.9
5.7
5.7
6.5
5.8
6.9
7.3
5.5

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
B
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Bike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NBA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

44

-1.4
2.4
1.5
.0

-.2
-.1
6.8
.2

-1.7
-1.4
-

.8

6.2
10.0
7.2
6.8
6.5
6.5
9.2
6.9
6.1
6.2
6.3

5.9
8.8
6.3
6.2
6.0
6.1
7.1
6.3
8.4
8.8
6.0

5.9
9.2
6.6
6.4
6.2
6.2
8.0
6.5
7.3
7.5
6.0

Table 13: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates

College
Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-6.0
-5.8
-1.5
-3.2
-4.7
-4.1
-3.9
-5.5
-6.5
-6.0
-5.3

Cohort 1945-49

5.5
5.8
6.6
6.3
5.8
5.9
6.0
5.6
5.4
5.5
5.6

4.8
5.1
5.2
5.2
4.9
4.9
5.0
4.8
5.1
5.3
4.8

5.0
5.3
5.6
5.5
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.1

Birth Cohort 1970-74
Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-4.3
-2.1
-.7
-2.4
-3.1
-2.6
1.3
-3.0
-5.4
-4.3
-3.4

5.4
8.0
6.6
6.2
5.8
5.9
7.3
6.0
5.3

5.4
5.6

5.0
6.7
5.3
5.3
5.1
5.1
5.5
5.2
7.7
8.3
5.0

5.2
7.2
5.8
5.6
5.4
5.4
6.1
5.5
7.0
7.4
5.3

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

45

-4.9
-1.2
-1.2
-3.1
-3.6
-3.3
6.1
-2.5
-5.4
-4.9
-4.1

5.4
9.3
6.7
6.2
5.8
5.9
9.0
6.3
5.4
5.5
5.6

5.0
7.5
5.4
5.2
5.1
5.1
6.1
5.3
8.2
8.8
5.0

5.0
7.9
5.7
5.4
5.3
5.3
7.0
5.6
7.2
7.7
5.1

Table 14: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime
Non-college

Net

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Tax Rates

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-3.7
-3.3
.2

-1.3
-2.5
-2.0
-1.8
-3.2
-3.8
-3.7
-2.9

Cohort 1945-49

6.3
6.7
7.3
7.1
6.7
6.7
6.8
6.5
6.3
6.4
6.5

5.1
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.2
5.3

5.3
5.2
5.4
5.5
5.2

5.6
5.9
6.3
6.2
5.8
5.9
5.9
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.7

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-3.0
-.6
.3

-1.2
-1.7
-1.5
2.2
-1.8
-3.3
-3.0
-2.3

6.0
8.7
7.1
6.7
6.4
6.4
7.7
6.5
6.0
6.0
6.1

5.7
7.6
6.1
6.0
5.8
5.8
6.3
5.9
7.7
8.1
5.7

5.7
8.0
6.4
6.2
6.0
6.0
6.8
6.1
6.8
7.1
5.8

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

46

-1.8
2.1
1.3
-.2
-.6
-.5
7.2
.1

-2.1
-1.8
-1.1

5.5
9.3
6.7
6.2
5.9

5.9
9.0
6.4
5.5
5.5
5.7

6.0
8.9
6.4
6.3
6.1
6.2
7.3
6.4
8.2
8.6
6.0

5.8
9.1
6.5
6.2
6.0
6.1
8.1
6.4
6.9
7.2
5.9

Table 15: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates
White, College-Educated Men
Quintile

of

Lowest Middle Highest All

Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

1.5
2.4
3.8
3.2
2.3
2.3
2.5
1.7
1.5
1.5
2.4

Cohort 1945-49
6.5
6.9
7.3
7.3
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.6
6.5
6.5
6.6

5.0
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.1
5.1
5.1

5.0
5.3
5.5
5.0

5.4
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.5
5.5
5.6
5.4
5.7
5.8
5.4

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3.3
6.2
5.1
4.7
4.2
3.9
6.2
3.6
3.1
3.3
3.8

6.2
9.3
7.3
7.1
6.5
6.6
7.9
6.7
6.2
6.3
6.4

5.4
7.2
5.7
5,6
5.4
5.5
5.9
5.5
8.0
8.4
5.4

5.6
7.8
6.1
6.0
5.8
5.8
6.4
5.9
7.7
8.0
5.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

47

-.2
3.6
2.4
.7

1.1
.6

7.6
.8

-.3
-.2
.6

5.6
9.5
6.8
6.3
6.0
6.0
9.2
6.5
5.6
5.7
5.8

5.0
7.4
5.3
5.2
5.0
5.1
6.1
5.3
8.3
8.8
5.0

5.1
7.9
5.7
5,4
5.3
5.3
6.8
5.6
7.6
8.0
5.2

Table 16: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Lifetime Net Tax Rates
Non-White, Non-College-Educated Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling wfo Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-4.8
-4.6
-.9
-2.4
-3.3
-3.0
-2.9
-4.4
-4.8
-4.8
-4.0

Cohort 1945-49
6.1
6.5
7.2
6.8
6.5
6.6
6.6
6.3
6.1
6.1
6.3

3.9
4.2
4.5
4.4

4.1
4.1
4.2
4.0
4.5
4.7
4.0

5.1
5.4
6.1
5.8
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.2

Birth Cohort 1970-74

Current Rules
2. 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-8.7
-6.3
-3.9
-6.9
-7.0
-6.1
-1.8

-7.4

-8.7
-8.7
-7.8

5.6
8.4
6.8
6.3
6.0
6.2
7.4
6.1
5.5
5.6
5.8

5.2
7.0
5.6
5.5

5.3
5.4
5.8
5.4
7.3
7.9
5.2

5.2
7.5
6.1
5.7
5.5
5.6
6.5
5.6
6.1
6.4
5.3

Birth Cohort 1995-00

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
Source: Author's calculations.

48

-3.1
.9
.3

-1.5
-1.6
-1.5
6.3
-1.2
-3.1
-3.0
-2.4

5.7
9.6
6.8
6.4
6.1
6.1
9.1
6.5
5.6
5.7
5.9

5.9
8.7
6.3
6.2
6.0
6.1
7.0
6.2
8.3
8.8
5.9

5.6
8.9
6.4
6.1
5.9
5.9
8.0
6.2

6.8
7.0
5.7

Table 17: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
All Observations

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49
Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.7
5.0
5.3
5.5
5.5
5.4
5.7
5.8
5.7

2.3
1.6
2.2
2.1
2.1

.5

—.1
.0
.6
.4
.4
.7
.6
.4

1.7
1.1
1.3
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.8

1970 —74

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms

8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling

w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
Source: Author's calculations.

49

5.8
5.2
5.0
5.4
5.5
5.5
4.5
5.5
5.9
5.8
5.6

5.7
4.8
4.9
5.3
5.4
5.4
2.0
5.2
5.8
5.7
5.5

2.8

.6

—.2
—.2
.1
.4
.2

1.8
1.1
1.0
1.3
1.6
1.5

1.4

—.9

.4

2.8

.2
.2

1.5
1.5

—.7

1.1.

.6

1.7

—.4
—.3
.1
.4
.2

—1.3

—3.8
—.1
.1

—.8

.9

1.0
1.4
1.7
1.5
-2.3
1.2
1.5
1.1

Table 18: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

4.3
4.2
3.5
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.0
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.1.

1.6
1.4

.5
.2

1.0

.7
.7

—.4
-.4

1.4
1.3
1.2
1.5
1.6
1.6

.3
.1
.1
.4
.4

.1
.1
.8
.6

1.5

.7

.6
.9

.9
.8
.9

.1
.4

Birth Cohort 1970—74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
S
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Bike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3.7
3.0

2.9
3.1
3.3
3.4
2.2
3.6
3.8
3.7
3.5

.4

1.0

-.5
—.5
—.3

.1
.1
.4

1.9
1.8

.2

.8
.6

.6

—1.2
—.1
—.1
—.9

2.1
1.3
1.2
1.5

1.8
2.1
2.1
2.0

.0

—.5
.6

.6
.2
.9

.3

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase ComputatiOn Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

50

3.6
3.7
4.2
4.2
4.3
.2

4.2
4.6
4.6

1.4
1.4
1.8
2.1
2.0
—2.1
1.8
2.4
2.4
2.3

—.6
—.5
—.1

.3
.4
.8

.3

1.1
1.0
—3.2

.1

—4.1
—.3
—.1
—1.0
.4

.6
.8
.4

1.2

Table 19: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Pates of Return
Women
Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Lowest Middle Highest All
Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.9
5.8
5.2
5.5
5.7
5.6
5.6
5.8
5.9
5.9
5.7

3.0
2.9
2.3
2.6
2.8
2.7
2.7
3.0
3.1
3.0

2.9

1.7
1.5
.9

1.1
1.6
1.3
1.4
1.6
1.5
1.1
1.6

3.2
3.0
2.4
2.7

29
2.8
2.8
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.0

Birth Cohort 1970-74
Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

6.3
5.8
5.5
5.9
6.0
6.0
5.0
6.0
6.4
6.3
6.1

3.2

1.2

2.6
2.5
2.8
3.0
2.9
1.9
2.9
3.3
3.2
3.1

.4
.3
.7

1.0
.8

—.2
.7
.7

—.5
1.1

2.8
2.1
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.4
1.4
2.4
2.4
2.1
2.6

Birth Cohort 1995-00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

51

6.0
5.1
5.2
5.6
5.7
5.7
2.4
5.5
6.1
6.0
5.8

3.2
2.4
2.4
2.8
3.0
2.9
—.6
2.6
3.2
3.2
3.1

.9
.0
.1
.4
.7

.5

—3.2
.2

.5

—.5
.9

2.6
1.7
1.8
2.2
2.4
2.3
—1.3
2.0
2.3
2.0
2.5

Table 20: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
White

Lowest Middle Highest Al].

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.7
5.7
5.0
5.3
5.5
5.5
5.4
5.7
5.8
5.7
5.6

2.5
2.3
1.7
1.9
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.4

.8
.5

—.1
.0
.6
.4
.4
.7
.6
.3
.7

2.0
1.7
1.1
1.3
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.8

Birth Cohort 1970—74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.9
5.3
5.1
5.5
5.6
5.5
4.5
5.6
6.0
5.9

2.8
2.1
2.0
2.3
2.6
2.5
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.8

.2

1.8
1.0
1.0
1.3
1.6
1.5

—.9

.4

.1
.1

1.4
1.5
1.1

.6

—.3
—.3
.0
.4

—.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Authorts calculations

52

5.8
4.9
5.0
5.4
5.5
5.5
2.0
5.3
5.8
5.8
5.6

2.9
2.0
2.1

2.5
2.7
2.6
—1.2
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.8

.7

—.3
—.2
.1
.5

.3

—3.7
—.1
.1

—.8
.6

1.9
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.7
1.6
—2.3
1.3
1.5
1.1
1.8

Table 21: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
Non-White

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.7
5.7
5.1
5.3
5.5
5.5
5.4
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.6

2.1
1.9
1.3
1.6
1.8
1.7
1.7
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.0

1.0
.8
.2
.2
.8

.6
.7

.9
.9
.8
.9

1.9
1.7
1.1
1.2
1.7
1.5
1.5
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.8

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

4.9
4.6
5.1
5.1
5.1
4.2
5.2
5.5
5.4

1.8
1.7

.1

2.1
2.3
2.2
1.2
2.2
2.6
2.5

.3

.0
.7

.5

1.1
1.0
1.4
1.6
1.5

—.6

.5

.4
.4

1.5
1.5

—.6

1.1.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

53

5.4
4.5
4.6
5.0
5.1
5.0
2.0
5.0
5.4
5.3
5.2

2.3
1.4
1.5
1.8

2.1
2.0
—1.7
1.8
2.3
2.3
2.2

.3

1.7

—.7
—.6
—.2

.8
.8

.1

—.1
—4 .

0

—.4
—.2
—.9
.3

1.2
1.4
1.3
—2.4
1.0
1.4
1.1
1.6

Table 22:
Quintile

The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
College

of

Lowest Middle Highest All

Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

6.0
5.9
5.3
5.6
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.9
6.0
6.0
5.9

2.8
2.7
2.1

2.3
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.7

.8
.5

—.1
—.1
.6
.4
.4
.7
.6
.3
.7

Birth Cohort

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.4
5.2
5.6
5.7
5.6
4.6
5.7
6.1
5.9

2.3
2.2
2.5
2.8
2.6
1.6
2.6
3.0
3.0

1.9
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.8

1970 —7 4

—.3
—.3
.0
.4

.1

—.9

.3

.1

1.4

.1

—1.0

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

54

6.1
5.2
5.3
5.7
5.8
5.8
2.5
5.6
6.1
6.0
5.9

2.9
1.9
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.5
—1.2
2.3
2.9
2.8
2.7

.7

—.3
—.2
.1
.5
.3

—3.7
—.1
.3.

1.9
.9

1.0
1.4
1.6
1.5
—2.3
1.2
1.3

—1.0

.8

.6

1.8

Table 23: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
Non-College

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.7
5.6
5.0
5.2
5.5
5.4
5.3
5.6
5.7
5.7
5.5

2.3
2.1
1.5
1.7
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.2
2.3
2.3
2.2

.9
.5

—.1
.0
.7
.5

.5
.7
.7

.5
.8

2.0
1.8
1.1
1.3
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9

Birth Cohort 1970—74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.7
5.1
4.9
5.3
5.4
5.4
4.4
5.4
5.8
5.7
5.5

2.6
1.8
1.8
2.1
2.3
2.2
1.2
2.2
2.6
2.6
2.5

.7

—.1
—.2
.1
.5
.3

1.9
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.7
1.5

—.8

.5

.3
.4

1.5
1.7
1.4
1.8

—.4
.6

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

55

5.4
4.6
4.6
5.1
5.2
5.1
1.6
5.0
5.5
5.4

2.8
1.8
1.9
2.3
2.5
2.4
—1.4
2.2
2.8
2.8

.5

—.5
—.4
—.1
.3
.1
-'3.9

—.3
.1

—.5

1.9
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.7

16
—2.3
1.3
1.7
1.5

Table 24: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
White, College-Educated Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
IncreaSe Computation Years from 35 to 40

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning fl Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NBA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
Source: Author's calculations

56

4.5
4.1
3.4
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.0
4.4
4.5
4.5
4.1

3.9
3.0
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
2.3
3.7
4.0
3.9
3.6

4.1
4.2
4.8
4.7
4.8
.6

4.7
5.1
5.1
4.8

1.7
1.5

.5

.8

—.5
—.5

.8

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.6

2.2
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.9
1.8
.6

1.8
2.2
2.2
2.1

1.5
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.2
—2.1
1.9
2.5
2.5
2.4

.1

.9
.6

.3

.0
.0
.7

.1

.5

.1
.3
.2

.5
.8
.7

—.1

.5

.4

.8

.2

.8

—.7
—.7
—.4

—.1
—.1

.0

.6
.4

—.2
—1.3
—.2
—.4
—1.3

.2

—.7
.4
.3

—.2

.2

.7

—.5
—.4

.3
.4

.0
.4
.2

—4.0
—.2
—.1
—1.2
.5

.8

1.1
1.0
—3.2
.6
.7
.1

1.3

Table 25: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Internal Rates of Return
Non-White, Non-College-Educated Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

5.9
5.9
5.2
5.5
5.7
5.6
5.6
5.8
5.9
5.9
5.8

2.5
2.3
1.7
2.0
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.4

1.7
1.4
.8
.9

1.5

1.3
1.3
1.6
1.4
1.0
1.6

2.6
2.4
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.5
2.6
2.5
2.5

Birth Cohort 1970-74

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NBA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8. Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

6.8
6.2
5.9
6.5
6.5
6.4
5.5
6.6
6.8
6.8
6.6

2.8
2.1
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.4
1.6
2.5
2.9
2.8
2.7

1.1
.3
.2
.5
.9
.6

—.3
.7

.5

—.5
1.0

2.5
1.8
1.7
2.1
2.3
2.1
1.2
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.4

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

57

5.7
4.8
4.9
5.4
5.4
5.4
2.3
5.3
5.7
5.7
5.6

2.7
1.8
1.9
2.3
2.5
2.4
—1.3
2.1
2.8
2.7
2.6

.4

—.6
—.5
—.1.

.2
.0

—3.9
—.3
.0

—.9
.4

2.2
1.2
1.3
1.7
1.9
1.8
—1.9
1.5
1.8
1.6
2.1

Table 26: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit
All Observations

Wealth

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9
10

Tax Rates

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—35.3
—31.6
—1.5
—14.1
—24.8
—20.9
—19.4
—31.3
—37.1
—35.3
—29.0

Cohort 1945-49

61.5
62.7
71.4
69.4
64.6
65.3
66.1
62.8
61.3
61.5
63.0

75.6
76.7
81.7
81.6
77.1
77.9
78.5
76.7
75.3
77.1
76.3

66.3
67.6
74.8
73.6
68.8
69.6
70.3
67.5
66.3
67.3
67.5

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—33.7
—8.8
—.1
—16.0
—21.6
—18.9
18.3
—21.9
—39.8
—33.6
—25.9

55.6
64.8
67.0
63.1
59.4
60.1
73.3
60.9
55.1
55.7
57.3

78.2
82.8
83.7
82.2
79.6
80.4
86.8
81.2
79.7
84.7
78.6

67.5
74.3
75.8
73.1
70.2
70.9
80.4
71.6
70.1
73.6
68.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Bike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

58

—28.9
6.5
3.6
—12.5
—16.6
—15.2
67.1
—8.8
—32.7
—28.8
—21.5

53.8
66.5
65.7
60.8
57.7
58.1
88.8
62.6
53.6
53.9
55.6

77.5
83.7
83.1
81.1
78.9
79.7
94.4
82.4
79.9
84.8
77.9

65.8
75.2
74.5
71.1
68.6
69.2
91.5
72.9
69.5
72.8
67.0

Table 27: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

20.6
25,0
40.7
37.0
26.9
27.8
30.1
23.0
19.3
20.6
26.9

69.4
70.4
77.3
77.3
72.0
72.0
73.1
70.4
69.3
69.4
70.4

77.4
78.4
83.1
83.3
78.8
79.5
80.1
78.4
77.3
78.6
78.0

74.5
75.5
81.0
81.1
76.5
76.8
77.6
75.5
74.5
75.3
75.3

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

36.1
48.9
52.1
48.1
43.9
41.7
61.4
38.9
34.4
36.1
41.2

62.1
70.5
71.9
69.7
65.2
65.6
77.5
66.5
61.9
62.2
63.5

79.5
83.9
84.6
83.4
80.7
81.5
87.6
82.3
81.2
85.1
79.8

74.1
79.7
80.7
79.2
76.1
76.6
84.4
77.5
76.3
79.0
74.9

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Authorts calculations

59

13.2
37.0
35.0
24.6
23.6
20.5
79.1
22.7
12.6
13.2
19.6

58.1
69.6
69.0
64.8
61.6
61.7
90.0
65.7
58.2
58.2
59.6

78.0
84.0
83.5
81.6
79.3
80.0
94.5
82.8
80.6
85.0
78.4

70.6
78.6
78.0
75.2
72.8
73.2
92.8
76.8
73.9
77.0
71.4

Table 28: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

-43.1
-.39.7

—7.4
—21.2
—31. 9
—27. 6

—26.2
—38. 9
—44. 9

—43.1
—36.7

Cohort 1945-49

53.2
54.6
65.1
61.1
56.8
58.2
58.8
54.8
53.0
53.3
55.2

67.8
69.4
75.8
74.4
69.7
71.2
71.6
69.2
67.5
71.1
68.9

49.8
51.6
62.4
58.7
53.6
55.1
55.8
51.6
50.0
51.4
52.0

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Bike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—61.3
—32.2
—20.7
—41.4
—47.5
-42. 9

1.2
—45.9
—69.1
—61.2
—52.4

49.4
59.1
62.2
56.8
53.7
54.8
69.3
55.5
48.4
49.5
51.4

75.2
80.3
81.4
79.2
76.9
77.9
84.9
78.6
76.5
83.9
75.8

57.0
65.5
67.9
63.3
60.8
61.8
73.9
62.2
60.3
64.9
58.8

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NBA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

60

—44.7
—5.0
—8.3
—26.5
—31.8
-28.7
62 .

6

—20.7
—49.8
—44. 6

—36.9

48.9
62.9
61.9
56.3
53.2
54.1
87.5
59.0
48.5
49.1
51.1

76.3
82.8
82.3
80.2
78.0
78.8
94.0
81.5
78.2
84.4
76.9

58.1
69.6
68.7
64.3
61.8
62.5
89.5
66.6
61.9
65.7
59.8

Table 29: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
White

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—35.1
—31.3
—1.5
—13.9
—24.8
—20.7
—19.2
—31.2
—37.0
—35.1
—28.8

60.9
62.1
70.9
69.0
64.0
64.7
65.5
62.2
60.7
60.9
62.4

75.7
76.8
81.8
81.7
77.1
78.0
78.5
76.7
75.4
77.2
76.4

66.2
67.5
74.7
73.6
68.7
69.5
70.2
67.4
66.2
67.3
67.4

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—36.9
—11.2
—2.5
—18.5
—24.7
—22.0
16.7
—24.4
—43.7
—36.9
—28.7

54.9
64.2
66.5
62.6
58.7
59.5
72.9
60.3
54.4
55.0
56.6

78.4
83.0
83.9
82.4
79.8
80.6
86.9
81.4
80.0
84.8
78.9

67.5
74.4
75.8
73.1
70.2
70.9
80.4
71.6
70.2
73.6
68.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NBA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

61

—32.6
3.8
.8

—15.8
—20.4
—18.7
67.0
—11.5
—36.8
—32.5
—24.8

51.8
65.1
64.2
58.9
55.8
56.4
88.4
61.0
51.7
52.0
53.8

77.0
83.3
82.8
80.8
78.5
79.3
94.3
82.1
79.5
84.7
77.5

65.2
74.8
74.1
70.5
68.0
68.6
91.4
72.4
69.1
72.7
66.4

Table 30: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
Non-White

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—37.4
—34.8
-2.6
—15.8
-24.3
—22.2
—20.8
—33.4
—37.5
—37.4
—30.6

Cohort 1945-49

65.8
66.8
74.6
72.2
68.6
69.3
69.9
66.8
65.8
65.8
67.1

74.7
75.8
81.1
80.8
76.3
77.1
77.7
75.8
74.5
75.8
75.4

67.1
68.2
75.4
74.1
69.7
70.3
71.1
68.3
67.1
67.6
68.4

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—16.7
3.9
12.5
—3.3
—5.4
—2.5
26.7
—8.5
—19.0
—16.7
—11.0

58.7
67.5
69.4
65.6
62.4
63.1
75.0
63.5
57.8
58.8
60.3

76.6
81.5
82.5
80.8
78.1
79.0
85.7
79.8
78.1
84.1
77.1

67.5
74.3
75.7
72.9
70.2
70.9
80.2
71.4
69.8
73.5
68.6

Birth Cohort 1995-00

Current Rules
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

38% Tax Hike Beginning in

Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change

Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

62

—14.3
17.1
14.4
.3

—2.0
—1.2
67.6
1.7
—16.4
—14.1
—8.2

60.6
71.5
70.7
67.4
64.0
64.2
90.3
67.9
60.5
60.7
62.1

79.5
85.1
84.6
82.9
80.8
81.5
94.8
83.9
81.5
85.2
79.8

68.3
77.0
76.4
73.6
71.0
71.5
92.0
74.8
71.1
73.2
69.4

Table 31: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
College
Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Lowest Middle Highest All
Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—51.2
—47.8
—12.8
—26.9
—40.0
—34.6
—33.4
—46.5
-55.2
—51.2
—44.7

56.0
57.5
67.2
64.4
59.4
60.6
61.3
57.6
55.8
56.1
57.8

76.2
77.3
82.2
82.2
77.7
78.5
79.0
77.3
75.8
78.0
76.9

67.5
68.8
75.7
74.7
69.8
70.7
71.4
68.7
67.5
69.0
68.7

Birth Cohort 1970-74
Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
-3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9- Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—42.2
—16.7
-6.5
—23.7
—30.0
—25.9
13.1
—29.4
—53.1
—42.2
—32.9

52.6
62.3
64.7
60.6
56.6
57.5
71.5
58.3
51.7
52.7
54.4

78.6
83.2
84.0
82.4
80.0
80.7
87.0
81.5
80.2
85.9
79.0

68.5
75.2
76.5
73.9
71.1
71.8
81.0
72.5
71.6
75.8
69.6

Birth Cohort 1995-00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

63

—49.5
—8.4
—11.9
—31.2
—35.8
—33.4
61.9
—25.5
—54.7
—49.3
—41.4

53.4
66.2
65.4
60.5
57.3
57.8
88.7
62.2
53.2
53.6
55.3

77.0
83.3
82.8
80.6
78.5
79.2
94.3
82.0
79.8
85.5
77.4

66.4
75.6
74.9
71.5
69.1
69.7
91.7
73.4
70.8
75.0
67.5

Table 32: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
Non-college

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—30.7
-27.0
1.7
—10.4
—20.4
—16.9
-15.4
—27.0
—31.8
—30.7
—24.5

63.3
64.4
72.7
71.0
66.3
66.8
67.6
64.5
63.1
63.3
64.7

75.0
76.2
81.3
81.1
76.5
77.5
78.0
76.1
74.9
76.3
75.8

65. 6

66.9
74.3
73.0
68.2
68. 9

69.7
66.8
65. 6

66.3
66.9

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—29.1
—4.6
3.4
—11.9
—17.0
—15.1
21.1
—17.8
—32.6
—29.0
—22.1

57.9
66.6
68.7
65.1
61.5
62.1
74.7
62.8
57.6

57.9
59.5

77.7
82.4
83.3
81.8
79.2.

80.0
86.5
80.8
79.0
83.2
78.1

66.6
73.6
75.1
72.3
69.3
70.0
79.8
70.7
68.6
71.1
67.7

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

64

—17.3
14.9
12.2
—2.0
—5.9
—5.0
70.0
.5

—20.4
—17.3
—10.3

54.1
66.7
65.9
61.0
58.0
58.4
88.9
62.8
54.0
54.2
55.9

78.1
84.1
83.6
81.8
79.5
80.3
94.6
82.9
80.0
83.6
78.5

65.2
74.8
74.0
70.7
68.1
68.6
91.4
72.4
67.8
70.0
66.4

Table 33: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
White, College-Educated Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings

Birth Cohort 1945-49
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

13.8
20.7
35.7
30.1
21.6
21.3
23.6
15.8
14.0
14.0
22.3

67.9
69.1
76.2
76.5
70.6
70.7
71.8
69.0
67.7
67.9
69.0

77.9
78.9
83.5
83.7
79.3
80.0
80.6
78.9
77.7
79.6
78.5

75.2
76.2
81.5
81.7
77.0
77.5
78.1
76.2
75.1
76.5
75.9

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

31.3
46.2
48.5
44.1
40.0
37.1
58.3
34.6
29.0
31.3
36.4

60.2
69.3
70.6
68.4
63.4
63.9
76.4
64.7
60.3
60.4
61.8

80.1
84.5
85.1
84.0
81.3
82.1
88.0
82.9
82.0
86.4
80.5

75.4
80.8
81.6
80.2
77.1
77.7
85.2
78.6
77.9
81.3
76.0

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

65

—2.3
25.8
23.3
7.0
10.6
5.7
74.6
8.3
—2.9
—2.3
5.6

55.1
67.5
66.8
61.8
58.8
58.9
89.4
63.2
55.1
55.1
56.8

77.1
83.4
82.9
80.7
78.5
79.3
94.4
82.0
80.2
85.7
77.5

70.0
78.2
77.6
74.4
72.2
72.7
92.7
76.3
74.3
78.6
70.8

Table 34: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Implicit Wealth Tax Rates
Non-White, Non-College-Educated Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Lifetime Earnings:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—45.2
—42.6
—8.3
—23.1
—31.4
—28.8
—27.7
—41.3
—45.3
—45.2
—38.1

60.0
61.3
70.3
66.6
63.1
64.6
64.8
61.2
60.0
60.0
61.6

66.2
67.7
74.7
73.7
68.2
69.3
70.0
67.6
66.3
70.0
67.4

56.4
58.0
67.4
64.6
59.9
60.7
61.6
57.8
56.6
57.3
58.1

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

—84.0
—50.2
—37 .

9

—66.5
—67.4
-59.2
—17.7
—71.5
—84.5
—84.0
—75.4

54.5
64.3
66.4
61.3
58.5
60.1
71.9
59.5
53.0
54.5
56.2

75.3
80.5
81.5
79.6
76.8
78.1.

84.8
78.7
76.4
82.4
75.7

59,4
67.9
69.8
65.5
62.8
64.1
75.0
64.1
61.2
64.4
60.8

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

66

—29.6
6.0
2.9
—14.5
—15.9
—14.4
61.4
—11.8
—29.7
—29.2
—23.2

55.6
67.8
67.0
62.4
59.6
59.9
89.1
64.0

55.1
55.6
57.3

79.4
85.0
84.5
82.8
80.5
81.6
94.8
83.7
80.6
85.1
79.7

63.0
73.2
72.4
68.8
66.3
67.0
90.5
70.3
65.9
68.3
64.3

Table 35: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits

All

Observations
Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Cohort 1945-49

Current Rules
3814. 8612. 17203.
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
3814. 8612. 17203.
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
2863. 6518. 12968.
Accelerated Increase In NRA
2871. 6881. 13695.
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
3450. 7883. 16243.
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
3438. 7680. 15401.
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
3374. 7644. 15241.
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
3695. 8364. 16494.
3814. 8651. 18735.
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change 3814. 8612. 17203.
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
3599. 8279. 16742.

9614.
9614.
7267.
7620.
8931.
8589.
8532.
9271.
9949.
9614.
9274,

Birth Cohort 1970-74
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3757.
3757.
2830.
3048.
3284.
3363.
2287.
3410.
3757.
3757.
3511.

9313.
9313.
7054.
7781.
8505.
8239.
5760.
8354.
9410.
9313.
8949.

20305, 10757.
20305. 10757.
15264. 8108.
17203. 9008.
19112. 9928.
18013. 9537.
12415. 6601.
17602. 9445.
27425, 12254,
20305. 10757.
19973. 10421.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

67

4919.
4919.
3688.
3998.
4317.
4401.

12212.
12212.
9258.
10336.
11172.
10847.

26868.
26868.
20188.
23530.
25204.
24034.

14143.
14143.
10643.
12040.
13049.
12610.

1216. 3143. 6903. 3606.
4078.
4921.
4919.
4602.

10108.
12355.
12212.
11742.

21246.
35777.
26868.
26378.

11275.
16028.
14143.
13696.

Table 36: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3640.
3640.
2733.
2819.
3266.
3252.
3247.
3524.
3640.
3640.
3404.

Cohort 1945-49

8611. 17365. 10934.
8611. 17365. 10934.
6479. 13087. 8291.
6925. 13548. 8277.
7874. 16388. 10188.
7677. 15521. 9886.
7636. 15387. 9734,
8351. 16660. 10534.
8649. 18803. 11335.
8611. 17365. 10934.
8297. 16897. 10598.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3789.
3789.
2839.
3102.
3225.
3264.
2281.
3432.
3783.
3789.
3523.

9327.
9327.
7131.
7878.
8522.
8270.
5807.
8391.
9424.
9327.
8949.

20397. 11958.
20397. 11958.
15330. 9024.
16951. 9736.
19146. 11106.
18162. 10738.
12435. 7319.
17688. 10460.
27011. 13627.
20397. 11958.
20074. 11652.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

68

4978.
4978.
3721.
4055.
4354.
4390.

12286. 27581.
12286. 27581.
9372. 20723.
10509. 24177.
11262. 25858.
10906. 24725.

16313.
16313.
12282.
13769.
15136.
14712.

1209. 3159. 7068. 4129.
4089.
4977.
4978.
4623.

10229.
12411.
12286.
11834.

21824.
36697.
27581.
27074.

12963.
18632.
16313.
15881.

Table 37: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
Women

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
3877. 8614. 16890.
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
3877. 8614. 16890.
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
2911. 6552. 12735.
Accelerated Increase In NRA
2892. 6838. 13875.
3514. 7891. 15965.
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
3502. 7683. 15134.
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
3420. 7651. 14958.
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
3758. 8377. 16179.
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
3878. 8652. 18608.
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change 3877. 8614. 16890.
3669. 8261. 16429.
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

8433.
8433.
6352.
7033.
7807.
7427.
7459.
8142.
8708.
8433.
8089.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

3740. 9302. 20156. 9690.
Current Rules
3740. 9302. 20156. 9690.
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2825. 6998. 15159. 7294.
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3017. 7703. 17539. 8360.
Accelerated Increase In NRA
3314. 8491. 19054, 8881.
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
3408. 8216. 17757. 8469.
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
2291. 5724. 12383. 5962.
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
3398. 8327. 17467. 8543.
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
3743. 9399. 28031. 11034.
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change 3740. 9302. 20156. 9690.
3505. 8949. 19808. 9326.
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40
Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

69

4892. 12154. 25461. 12108.
4892. 12154. 25461. 12108.

3673. 9167. 19129. 9107.
3971. 10193. 22383. 10417.
4301. 11102. 23914. 11092.
4406. 10801. 22551. 10638.

1219. 3129. 6606. 3116.
4072.
4896.
4892.
4593.

10008.
12308.
12154.
11667.

20112. 9692.
34217. 13586.
25461. 12108.
24988. 11647.

Table 38: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits

White
Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3820.
3820.
2866.
2871.
3458.
3440.
3381.
3701.
3820.
3820.
3610.

8605.
8605.
6521.
6891.
7882.
7674.
7640.
8358.
8651.
8605.

9651.
17247.
17247.
9651.
12994.
7292.
7642.
13704.
16282. 8973.
15447. 8620.
15288. 8566.
16540. 9306.
18807. 10006.
17247. 9651.
16785. 9312.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

Current Rules
1 38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
2 25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
3 Accelerated Increase In NRA
4 CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
5 Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
6 Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
7 Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
8 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
9 Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
10 Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3750.
3750.
2816.
3031.
3273.
3347.
2271.
3400.
3753.
3750.
3508.

9338.
9338.
7070.
7795.
8532.
8245.
5761.
8371.
9427.
9338.

20323.
20323.
15286.
17227.
19126.
18012.
12415.
17604.
27263.
20323.
19988.

10820.
10820.
8154.
9058.
9995.
9593.
6635.
9496.
12315.
10820.
10484.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

70

4958.
4958.
3718.
4020.
4378.
4432.

12227.
12227.
9280.
10375.
11195.
10876.

27119.
27119.
20384.
23792.
25425.
24256.

14507.
14507.
10917.
12388.
13396.
12933.

1225. 3139. 6972. 3689.
4098.
4964.
4958.
4648.

10117.
12380.
12227.
11751.

21427.
36285.
27119.
26626.

11558.
16579.
14507.
14050.

Table 39: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
Non-White

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Cohort 1945-49

Current Rules
3755. 8662. 16692.
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
3755. 8662. 16692.
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
2836. 6499. 12650.
Accelerated Increase In NRA
2869. 6811. 13589.
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
3368. 7893. 15786.
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
3423. 7727. 14890.
3303. 7674. 14707.
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
3631. 8411. 15962.
3755. 8651. 17863.
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change 3755. 8662. 16692.
3498. 8343. 16230.
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

9294.
9294.
7047.
7424.
8565.
8314.
8237.
8969.
9456.
9294.
8947.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3793.
3793.
2907.
3141.
3347.
3444.
2374.
3465.
3782.
3793.
3527.

9192.
9192.
6975.
7717.
8376.
8210.
5756.
8273.
9329.
9192.
8852.

20196. 10429.
20196. 10429.
15141. 7866.
17056. 8739.
19026. 9576.
18019. 9242.
12414. 6420.
17590. 9180.
28409. 11935.
20196. 10429.
19885. 10090.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

71

4790. 12156. 25467. 12710.
4790. 12156. 25467. 12710.

3588. 9174. 19099. 9564.
3928. 10188. 22016. 10670.
4110. 11083. 23970. 11684.
4298. 10736. 22795. 11338.

1188. 3159. 6547. 3277.
4013.
4781.
4790.
4445.

10073.
12261.
12156.
11708.

20217.
32911.
25467.
25019.

10164.
13862.
12710.
12305.

Table 40: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
College

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Cohort 1945-49

3913.
3913.
2934.
2977.
3564.
3509.
3463.

8656. 17234. 10821.
8656. 17234. 10821.
6515. 13009. 8170.
6977. 13757. 8515.
7878. 16227. 10086.
7723. 15439. 9637.
7674. 15253. 9596.
3783. 8413. 16536. 10410.
3913. 8699. 19135. 11391.
3913. 8656. 17234. 10821.
3738. 8300. 16774. 10456.
Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3780.
3780.
2841.
3062.
3313.
3379.
2304.
3441.
3781.
3780.
3580.

9240. 20453. 11688.
9240. 20453. 11688.
7007. 15368. 8818.
7808. 17320. 9817.
8483. 19215. 10824.
8225. 18108. 10349.
5747. 12475. 7170.
8324. 17716. 10257.
9362. 28813. 13908.
9240. 20453. 11688.
8939. 20108. 11329.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

72

4990.
4990.
3751.
4075.
4408.
4472.

12284. 27035.
12284. 27035.
9320. 20311.
10370. 23770.
11202. 25354.
10907. 24178.

15569.
15569.
11708.
13294.
14387.
13864.

1234. 3146. 6942. 3970.
4124.
4984.
4990.
4658.

10153.
12463.
12284.
11823.

21383.
37746.
27035.
26533.

12387.
18462.
15569.
15091.

Table 41: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
Non-College

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3782.
3782.
2841.
2837.
3414.
3416.
3346.
3667.
3783.
3782.
3555.

8597.
8597.
6520.
6846.
7885.
7664.
7634.
8347.
8634.
8597.
8271.

17179.
17179.
12937.
13653.
16255.
15373.
15231.
16461.
18428.
17179.
16716.

9071.
9071.
6861.
7217.
8411.
8117.
8053.
8759.
9300.
9071.
8742.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling wlo Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3744.
3744.
2824.
3039.
3268.
3353.
2278.
3392.
3744.
3744.

9369.
9369.
7090.
7761.
8522.
8250.
5770.
8377.
9446.
9369.

20128.
20128.
15140.
17059.
18986.
17896.
12342.
17464.
25704.
20128.

10022.
10022.
7547.
8369.
9221.
8897.
6151.
8805.
10948.
10022.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

73

4881.
4881.
3653.
3957.
4267.
4362.
1207.
4053.
4888.
4881.
4572.

12146.
12146.
9200.
10306.
11145.
10793.
3140.
10067.
12259.
12146.
11668.

26627.
26627.
20011.
23189.
24987.
23826.
6848.
21049.
32896.
26627.
26153.

12898.
12898.
9714.
10946.
11881.
11516
3288.
10305.
13904.
12898.
12478.

fable 42: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
White, College-Educated Men

Lowest Middle Highest All

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3685.
3685.
2779.
2943.
3298.

3323.
3214.
3532.
3685.
3685.
3491.

Cohort 1945-49

8692. 17465. 12417.
8692. 17465. 12417.
6493. 13134. 9413.
7087. 13526. 9357.
7897. 16420. 11629.
7746. 15588. 11204.
7706. 15462. 11037.
8440. 16756. 11931.
8710. 19499. 13198.
8692. 17465. 12417.
8368. 16966. 12049.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3643.
3643.
2676.
2964.
3077.
3218.
2182.
3308.
3643.
3643.
3454.

9222. 20622. 13224.
9222. 20622. 13224.
7078. 15519. 9986.
7895. 17136. 10756.
8470. 19325. 12350.
8223. 18284. 11866.
5762. 12566. 8089.
8352. 17839. 11550.
9341. 28588. 15806.
9222. 20622. 13224.
8950. 20293. 12908.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations.

74

4878.
4878.
3662.
3975.
4383.
4296.

12320. 27902.
12320. 27902.
9420. 20968.
10583. 24608.
11282. 26118.
10891. 24927.

18885.
18885.
14190.
16102.
17557.
16983.

1161. 3153. 7133. 4763.
3981.
4863.
4878.
4527.

10244.
12455.
12320.
11908.

22070.
39076.
27902.
27345.

14960.
22923.
18885.
18397.

Table 43: The Impact of Potential OASI Reforms on Average Benefits
Non-White, Non-college-Educated Women

Lowest Middle Highest Al].

Quintile of Average Benefits:

Birth Cohort 1945-49

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3843.
3843.
2879.
2900.
3411.
3465.
3310.
3731.
3843.
3843.
3556.

8771.
8771.
6581.
6856.
8012.
7851.
7758.
8563.
8723.
8771.
8598.

17136.
17136.
12873.
13539.
15799.
14795.
14790.
15987.
19544.
17136.
16565.

8187.
8187.
6227.
6783.
7544.
7298.
7253.
7927.
8356.
8187.
7889.

Birth Cohort 1970-74

1
.2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit Change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

3548.
3548.
2775.
3028.
3157.
3395.
2281.
3266.
3548.
3548.
3325.

9121.
9121.
7006.
7704.
8371.
8084.
5778.
8170.
9308.
9121.
8813.

9278.
20753.
9278.
20753.
7031.
15705.
7974.
17431.
8525.
19706.
18474. 8095.
12917. 5824.
18064. 8232.
29288. 10313.
20753. 9278.
20369. 8986.

Birth Cohort 1995-00

1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10

Current Rules
38% Tax Hike Beginning in Year 2000
25% Benefit Cut Beginning in Year 2000
Accelerated Increase In NRA
CPI Indexing of Covered Earnings
Indexing Benefits by CPI Minus 1%
Stabilize Real Per Capita Benefits
Freeze Bend Points in Real Terms
Eliminate Earnings ceiling
Eliminate Earnings Ceiling w/o Benefit change
Increase Computation Years from 35 to 40

Source: Author's calculations

75

4419.
4419.
3326.
3668.
3830.
4037.
1119.
3831.
4401.
4419.
4136.

12007.
12007.
9023.
10165.
10948.
10537.
3214.
9929.
12054.
12007.
11590.

25030.
25030.
18775.
22116.
23509.
22233.
6533.
19897.
32478.
25030.
24527.

11076.
11076.
8335.
9452.
10148.
9760.
2905.
8942.
12009.
11076.
10711.

