                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE FUTURE OF EMU: WHAT DOES
                                 THE HISTORY OF MONETARY
                                      UNIONS TELL US?

                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                             Lars Jonung

                                          Working Paper 7365
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7365


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Michael D. Bordo and Lars Jonung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Future of EMU: What Does the History
of Monetary Unions Tell Us?
Michael D. Bordo and Lars Jonung
NBER Working Paper No. 7365
September 1999
JEL No. E42, N20
                                               ABSTRACT

        The creation of EMU and the ECB has triggered a discussion of the future of EMU. Independent
observers have pointed to a number of shortcomings or "hazard areas" in the construction of EMU, such
as the absence of a central lender of last resort function for EMU, the lack of a central authority supervising
the financial systems of EMU, unclear and inconsistent policy guidelines for the ECB, the absence of central
co-ordination of fiscal policies within EMU, unduly strict criteria for domestic debt and deficits, as set out
in the Maastricht rules, in the face of asymmetric shocks, and Euroland as not an "optimal" currency area.
        Do these "flaws" represent major threats to the future of EMU? Or will they be successfully
resolved by the European policy authorities, leading to a lasting and prosperous EMU?
        We provide answers to these questions by examining the historical record of monetary unions. We
try to extract the key conditions for establishing and for maintaining monetary unions intact. Our main lesson
from the history of monetary unions is that political factors will be the central determinants of the future of
EMU. The "economic" shortcomings of EMU will likely be overcome as long as political unity prevails
within EMU.


Michael D. Bordo                                           Lars Jonung
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
Rutgers University                                         Stockholm School of Economics
New Brunswick, NJ 08903                                    Box 6501
and NBER                                                   113 83 Stockholm, Sweden
Bordo@economics.rutgers.edu                                Nels@hhs.se
THE FUTURE OF EMU. WHAT DOES THE HISTORY OF MONETARY UNIONS TELL
US?



1. Introduction.1


On January 1st 1999 the exchange rates of eleven members of the European Union
were locked to each other at irrevocably fixed rates. This was a major step towards the
establishment of the European Monetary Union (EMU) and the European Central Bank
(ECB). Eventually, the eleven domestic currencies will be replaced by one single
currency, the euro. It will be circulating in an economic region probably larger than that
of any other currency area. January 1st 1999 marks an important transition not only in
the history of Europe but in the history of the global monetary system.


The creation of EMU and the ECB has triggered a discussion of the future of EMU.
Independent observers have pointed to a number of shortcomings, "flaws" or "hazard
areas" in the construction and workings of EMU. These include (1) the absence of a
central lender of last resort function for EMU, (2) the lack of a central authority
supervising the financial systems of EMU, (3) weak democratic control (accountability) of
the ECB, (4) unclear and inconsistent policy directives for the ECB, (5) the absence of
central co-ordination of fiscal policies within EMU combined with unduly strict criteria for
domestic debt and deficits as set out in the Maastricht rules and the Stability Pact in the
face of asymmetric shocks, and (6) Euroland is not an "optimal" currency area. The list
can be lengthened.


Do these shortcomings represent major threats to the future of EMU? Will they
eventually spell the demise and break-up of EMU? Or will they be handled by the
European policy authorities in a successful way, leading to a lasting and prosperous
EMU?


1
  This report builds upon and extends our previous work on the history of monetary unions. See Bordo and Jonung
(1997). Anna Schwartz has generously helped us improve our arguments. We are greatly indebted to Pontus Hansson
for research support and to Anders Bornefalk, Benjamin Cohen and Kurt Schuler for helpful suggestions.




                                                      1
We answer these questions by examining the historical record of a number of unions
that have turned out to be lasting as well as some unions that have been dissolved. Our
aim is to extract the key conditions for the establishment and survival of monetary
unions. Our interpretation of the historical record serves as the basis for our forecast for
the future of EMU, although we are well aware that there is no clear precedent to EMU.
While by now the literature on monetary unions and European monetary co-operation is
voluminous, there are few systematic studies dealing with the stability or sustainability of
monetary unions and monetary integration. 2


The paper is organized as follows. First, the most commonly asserted shortcomings of
EMU and of the ECB in the present debate are listed to serve as a guide for the
examination of the historical record. Next, we investigate why monetary unions were
created, focusing upon five major monetary unions established in the 19th century. Then
we examine the break-up of monetary unions in the 20th century. Finally, we confront
our account of monetary union performance with forecasts for the future of EMU and
evaluate the destabilizing effects of several shortcomings in the construction of EMU.


Much of recent analysis of monetary unions by economists is based on the framework
suggested by the literature on optimal currency areas. This approach is not well suited
for the analysis of the history of monetary unions. It is too static and ahistorical. Instead,
our approach is an evolutionary one, since we examine a long stretch of time and the
character of the processes causing the appearance and dissolution of monetary co-
operation and unification.



2. The shortcomings of EMU.


The economics profession has in general been sceptical of a European monetary union.
Economists have pointed to a large number of pitfalls on the road to a common
European currency. Indeed, the road so far has been a rocky one.


The ERM crisis in the early 1990s severely threatened the EMU-project. The last minute
effort in May 1998 to put a Frenchman in charge of the ECB as well as various attempts
in the early spring of 1999 by the German minister of finance to press for a lowering of

2
    Exceptions are Cohen (1993, 1998), Goodhart (1995) and Graboyes (1990).




                                                         2
the euro-rate damaged credibility. The transition from stage two to stage three, when the
exchange rates of the first set of countries to join EMU were permanently fixed, was
once regarded as highly risky, potentially provoking speculative attacks. No such attacks
materialised, however. The transition went smoothly at the turn of the new year of 1999.
Now after January 1st, 1999, the creation of EMU and the ECB has triggered a
discussion of the future of EMU since it seems to have passed the major hurdles of the
long transition stage that started in the 1970s. 3


Economists have pointed to a number of shortcomings, also termed "deficiencies",
"flaws" or "potential fault lines" in the construction of EMU. There are by now about half
a dozen such "hazard areas".4 We list the most common ones below, focusing on those
pertaining to the euro-area once it was established but ignore "deficiencies" pertaining to
the transition stages before the common currency is introduced into circulation within
Euroland. We thus concentrate our discussion on the long run "steady-state" of EMU,
assuming that it will successfully pass through the remaining transition.5


1. EMU lacks a central lender of last resort. The ECB has not been granted power by the
Maastricht treaty to serve this function. This stands in sharp contrast with modern central
banks, which exercise lender of last resort responsibilities to guarantee the liquidity and
functioning of the payments system. 6 In the face of a liquidity crisis, the absence of a
lender of last resort may undermine the existence of EMU.


2. EMU lacks a central authority to supervise the financial systems, including the
commercial banks, of Euroland. The Maastricht treaty gives the ECB some supervisory
functions but they are primarily the task of the union members. This state of affairs
portends that a future pan-European financial crisis may not be efficiently resolved,
consequently threatening the stability of the Eurosystem. 7


3
    For the history of the EMU-project see Gros and Thygesen (1997).
4
 The shortcomings of the EMU have given rise to a flowering field of synonyms: "sources of concern" (Eichengreen
(1990)), "hazard area", "weakness", "potential fault lines" (Obstfeld (1998).
5
  From a historical point of view, the sequencing of EMU, that is the lengthy step-by-step process involving ERM and
the fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria etc, is without precedence. As we discuss below, monetary unions in the past
have as a rule been introduced in a fairly rapid way without prior monetary and fiscal coordination.
6
    This argument is set forth by i.a. Prati and Shinasi (1999).
7
    See i.a. Prati and Shinasi (1999), Eichengreen (1993) and Obstfeld (1998).




                                                               3
3. The ECB lacks democratic control and accountability. The ECB will be subject to
political attacks and controversies that damage the legitimacy of EMU and erode popular
support for the Euro. The role of the European parliament in monitoring the ECB is
unclear at this point as well. Should major economic problems arise within a single
member of EMU, populist political movements may use them to attack EMU and the
ECB.8


4. The policy directives for the ECB are inconsistent, unclear, and badly designed.
Although the ECB is to carry out "domestic" monetary policy within Euroland, according
to the Maastricht Treaty, exchange rate policy for EMU is set by the Council of the
European Union, that is by the Council of finance ministers of EMU.9 This will result in
political discussion, tensions and political pressure on the monetary policy of the ECB.


5. The absence of central co-ordination of fiscal policies within EMU in combination with
unduly strict criteria for domestic debt and deficits, as set out in the Maastricht rules and
the Stability Pact implies that EMU will not be able to respond to asymmetric shocks and
disturbances in a satisfactory way. 10 For example, presently (summer 1999) the
booming Irish economy is in need of a tighter monetary policy yet the ECB has lowered
interest rates in Euroland making monetary policy in Ireland more expansionary. 11


6. Europe is too large a geographical area to form a well-functioning monetary union. In
other words, Euroland with its present eleven member states is not an optimal currency
area (OCA). This point, which dates from the analysis of optimal currency areas initiated
by Mundell (1961), has been debated continuously since the announcement of the plans
for a monetary union in Europe. Most empirical work on this issue reaches the
conclusion that EMU is not an optimal monetary union, at least it is less optimal than the



8
    See for example Feldstein (1997).
9
 Monetary policy issues of the EMU-the Eurosystem are critically assessed by i.a. Begg, et al (1998), Buiter (1999)
and Svensson (1999).
10
  On the effects of the stability pact, see i. a. Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1998) and Flandreau, Cacheux and Zumer
(1998). The counter-argument states that once EMU is created private agents will adjust to the new rules of the game
and smooth shocks through other channels than through fiscal and monetary policies. See e.g. Mélitz and Zumer
(1998). See i. a. Alesina and Wacziarg (1998) on the weakness of the institutions of the EU.
11
  The case of Ireland illustrates how monetary policy within a monetary union is determined by the center, not the
periphery.




                                                          4
US monetary union. 12 The efficiency gains from increased trade do not outweigh the
costs of surrendering control over national monetary policies.


The costs of that surrender will depend on the incidence of asymmetric or idiosyncratic
macroeconomic disturbances across Euroland, the degree of flexibility of wages and
prices, the mobility of factors of production within Euroland, and the extent to which
fiscal policies, either on a national or on a pan-European level, can serve as a substitute
for changes in the exchange rate and the interest rate of the domestic currency.


European labour markets are commonly described as rigid and labour mobility within the
EMU members as limited. Under these circumstances an asymmetric shock will set off
an adjustment process that will be more slowly and costly within EMU than otherwise.
Rising unemployment, requests for fiscal transfers, and for protection will undermine the
credibility of EMU and the political cohesion required for a well functioning monetary
union.13


This point is probably the major objection to EMU. The abolition of domestic currencies
and thus of the ability to adjust nominal exchange rates and domestic interest rates
when faced with asymmetric or country-specific shocks, in the opinion of most
economists, threatens the stability of EMU. 14


This list of shortcomings or objections is substantial, 15 but will they turn out to be
important in the future. How have monetary unions in the past dealt with the issues we
have listed? Below we study the historical record, first to examine the process of
creation and maintenance of monetary unions, then the process of their dissolution.



3. The creation of monetary unions


12
     See for example Eichengreen (1997).
13
 See for example Obstfeld and Peri (1998) for a critical view of the effects of relatively low labor mobility within
Europe.
14
     See for example the discussion in Feldstein (1997). A more optimistic view is given by Wyplosz (1997).
15
  The above list can be made longer. It could include the threat that election or political cycles within Europe may
pose. When a majority of the EMU members face elections the same year, this will increase the risk of domestic
expansive policies, threatening the EMU.




                                                             5
There is a historical record of monetary unions within which the same currency served
as a unit of account, medium of exchange and store of value. Thus, a monetary union
had one exchange rate towards the rest of the world. In our view, the history of monetary
unions is best understood by distinguishing between national monetary unions and
multinational monetary unions. 16


In a national monetary union political and monetary sovereignty go hand in hand.
Roughly speaking, the borders of the nation-state are the borders of the monetary area.
For example, within the British monetary union comprising England, Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland, Scottish commercial banks still issue bank notes. These notes are
perfectly interchangeable for Bank of England notes. In the United States each of the
Federal Reserve Banks issues dollar bills perfectly acceptable in every reserve district -
a five dollar bill issued by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is always perfectly
interchangeable with a five dollar bill issued by any other Federal Reserve Bank. A
national monetary union has as a rule one single monetary authority, commonly a
central bank.


In a multinational monetary union international monetary co-operation between a
number of independent countries is based on permanently fixed exchange rates
between their currencies. Multinational monetary unions emerge when independent
nation states link their monies together through a fixed exchange rate so that one
country's money is perfectly exchangeable for that of another member country's at a
fixed price. An extreme example is such that all member states use the same currency.


There is as a rule no common monetary authority in a multinational monetary union. An
example of such a union is the Scandinavian monetary union, which had one common
unit of account, the Scandinavian krona , and three members: Sweden, Norway and
Denmark. Each member maintained its own central bank, issued its own krona currency
which circulated freely within the other countries as long as the union existed. The
exchange rate of the Swedish, Danish and Norwegian currency units remained one to
one to one during the existence of the Scandinavian currency union.


We emphasise the distinction between a national and a multinational monetary union
because we believe that the survival prospects of a monetary union depend crucially on

16
     This argument is developed in Bordo and Jonung (1997).




                                                          6
whether it is organized as a national or multinational union. The future of the EMU thus
depends on whether EMU will more closely resemble a national or a multinational
monetary union.


We first examine the establishment of three national monetary unions, those of the US,
Italy and Germany, and next two multinational unions, the Latin and the Scandinavian
unions, and finally the emergence of other forms of monetary unification. Here we deal
primarily with the monetary experience of the late 18th century and the 19th century.
See Table 1.



3.1. National monetary unions


3.1.1. The United States monetary union17


The American revolutionary war was largely financed by the issue of fiat money both by
the Congress (the continentals) and by the States (bills of credit). During the War of
Independence (1776-1783) paper money issues at the rate of 50 percent per year in the
first five years of the war generated a very rapid inflation rate of over 65 percent per year
and rapid depreciation of the exchange rate. The inflation ended after a currency reform
in 1780 under which the federal government stopped issuing continentals, and the states
agreed to accept outstanding issues in payment of taxes at 40 dollars to 1 in specie (a
value much lower than the exchange rate of 1780) until 1783. After that date the
continentals were to become worthless.


After the war the States continued to issue bills of credit during the Confederation period
(1783 to 1789), only some of which were credibly backed by future taxes. Consequently,
problems emerged of excessive volatility of exchange rates that lead to exchange rate
risk, high transactions costs, and competitive seigniorage.


The US monetary union was created with the signing of the Constitution in 1789. The
constitution gave the Congress the sole power to "coin money" and "regulate the value
thereof". Moreover, the Coinage Act of 1792 defined the US dollar in terms of fixed
weights of gold and silver coins, placing the country on a bimetallic standard. Finally,

17
 The account of US monetary unification rests on i a the following contributions: McCallum (1992), Perkins (1995)
Rolnick, Weber and Smith (1994) and Fraas (1974).


                                                         7
establishment of a national mint in Philadelphia in 1792 secured the foundations for an
effective currency area.


While the Congress was given the exclusive power to coin money, the States were
allowed to charter commercial banks and to regulate their note issue. All bank notes had
to be convertible into specie. In the early decades of the 19th century, the quality of bank
notes varied considerably and various bank notes circulated at a discount.


The movement to a complete monetary union with a more uniform nation-wide price
level was aided by the practices of the First Bank of the United States (1791-1811) and
the Second Bank of the United States (1816-1836). Neither Bank was designed as a
modern central bank but as a public bank. Both banks were sufficiently well capitalized
to be able to provide the government with medium-term bridge loans to finance shortfalls
in government tax receipts. Both were also authorised to provide loans to the private
sector to spur economic development. Finally, it was deemed imperative that they hold
sufficient specie reserves to maintain convertibility of their notes. One of the practices of
both Banks was to enforce the convertibility of state bank note issues and to transfer
specie between regions.


After the demise of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836, the United States had
no formal central bank until the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1914.
However, the US Treasury served as a monetary authority and maintained specie
convertibility.


Although banking instability characterized the 19th century, the monetary union
remained intact with the exception of the Civil war period 1861-65 when the Confederate
States issued their own fiduciary inconvertible currency denominated in dollars. In the
face of great difficulties in raising tax revenues and in selling debt both at home and
abroad, the Confederate government also expanded its money issues at an ever-
increasing rate. By the end of the Civil War a hyperinflation vastly reduced the value of
Confederate notes. Upon Union victory in April 1865, Confederate notes were declared
illegal in the United States.18




18
     Lerner (1956).


                                              8
Monetary unification of the US was thus not completed until long after its political
unification. The US did not establish a central bank with a lender of last resort function
until this century. However, State bank regulation was undertaken by State banking
inspectors well before the Civil War and national bank regulations by the Comptroller of
the Currency beginning in 1863. These institutions evolved at a considerably later stage
than the monetary unification. 19


3.1.2. The Italian monetary union20


The main reason for the establishment of a currency union on the Apennine peninsula in
the 1860s was political unification of the area now known as Italy. 21 The unification
process, led by the Kingdom of Sardinia, was completed in 1861. Prior to 1861,
disparate kinds of money circulated among the various small Italian states. In 1859, as
many as 90 different metallic currencies were legal tender. In addition, major banks in
the small states issued bank notes that served as legal tender in their respective
regions. The existence of a plethora of different currencies was commonly regarded as a
barrier to trade. In order to achieve more than a de jure politically unified Italy, measures
were taken to turn the country into a monetary union as well.


The issue of coins was quickly resolved. During a brief transition period, only four
currencies were acceptable and the others were exchanged for these four. Finally, in
1862, a new, unified coinage system was introduced based on the lira of Sardinia. All
pre-unification coins and paper monies were abolished and exchanged for coins
denominated in the new lira, equal in value to the French franc. A bimetallic currency
standard was chosen, primarily to conform to the monetary system of Italy's major
trading partners and to accommodate the dominance of silver coins in southern Italy. 22
The currency ratio between silver and gold was set at the European standard of 15.5.




19
  The legal tender status of a number of foreign currencies was abolished by the US Congress as late as in the
1850´s. Cohen (1998, p 34).
20
     The account of the monetary unification of Italy is based on i. a. Fratianni and Spinelli (1985) and Sannucci (1989).

21 Venetia was incorporated in 1866 after Italy had participated on the Prussian side in her war against Austria. The
Papal States were incorporated in 1870 when France, that until then had acted as a protector of the sovereignty of the
Papal States, was engaged in war with Prussia.

22 See also the section on the Latin Monetary Union.


                                                              9
When Italy introduced the lira, the price of gold was falling, creating a shortage of silver
coins. The legislators acted by lowering the silver content of coins to 83.5 percent
instead of the customary 90 percent. This led to an export of silver coins, a phenomenon
that the suspension of convertibility a few years later encouraged.23


The monetary unification of Italy was not accompanied by immediate action to establish
a single monetary authority. Several regional banks were issuing notes as well as
performing central bank functions. The Banca Nazionale nel Regno d'Italia (BNR), which
was formed by the previous national bank of Sardinia and absorbed some other state
banks in the process, held a dominant position in part because it was the largest bank in
operation, in part because it was the bank of the state that led the political unification
process.


Italian monetary research does not clearly explain why a single monetary authority was
not created after unification. Apparently opposition to monetary unification was not the
reason. Given that Sardinia imposed her system on the rest of the country in a wide
range of matters, neglecting the preferences of other states, had she wanted why did
she not establish the BNR as the central bank of Italy?


Several explanations have been offered. One is the general belief at the time that Italy
would gain from competition between issuing banks, since banking was like any other
industry, just as competition in other industries was considered beneficial. Also, prior to
unification, the general concept of Italian banking was to combine the two functions of
regional commercial banks that were credit institutions as well as note issuers. Money
was created in the form of bank notes in response to demands for credit. The creation of
one central bank, the central government might have concluded, would destroy, or
severely impair, the functioning of commercial banks at the local level and the costs
would exceed the benefits of control of the supply of paper money by a central bank.


When Italian monetary unification took place in 1862, almost the entire money stock
consisted of coins. Since the supply of coinage was regulated by the supply of gold and
silver, fluctuations in the Italian money stock followed the international pattern. The
share of coins in the money supply remained stable until the mid-1860s, an indication



23 For an account of the fineness of coins, see the section on the Latin Monetary Union.


                                                         10
that as long as bank notes were convertible into specie, the multiplicity of issuing banks
did not create a problem.


When the central government's fiscal deficit rose sharply in the first half of the 1860s, it
worsened the strain already put on public finances by its assuming the debt of the
member states. Italian bond prices fell abroad, driving specie out of Italy and leaving the
reserves of the commercial banks dangerously low. Their ability to lend to the
government declined. To come to terms with the new situation, the government declared
bank notes inconvertible into specie in 1866, corso forzoso in the language of the day. 24
After this step, the government received a large loan in notes from the BNR. In return,
the position of the BNR was strengthened. The notes of other banks were made legal
tender and at the same time convertible into BNR notes. BNR notes, however, were not
convertible into other banks' notes. Consequently, BNR notes served as reserves for
other banks.


The corso forzoso ended in 1884. Convertibility was resumed and the lira returned to
gold parity. The notes of the six remaining note-issuing banks exchanged for each other
at a one-to-one basis, although the parity was not stipulated by law. As a consequence
of the de facto fixed exchange rate between the notes, each bank had an incentive to
increase its stock of notes. The risk of the government discovering an over-issue was
small. Furthermore, deteriorating government finances increased the likelihood that any
illegal over-issue of notes would be legalized.


In 1891, a liquidity crisis due to the low levels of reserves relative to outstanding notes
was pending. The government, as expected, responded by legalizing the total volume of
notes in circulation by lowering reserve requirements. An ensuing enquiry into the state
of the banking system completed in 1893 led to a major restructuring of the banking
system. The Banca d'Italia was formed as an amalgamation between the BNR and the
two remaining note-issuing Tuscan banks. The three other note-issuing banks were put
under direct state supervision.25 Despite these measures, specie continued to flow out of
Italy. The lira depreciated, mainly as a result of the failure to reduce the excess issue of



24 Corso Forzoso translates broadly as "forced circulation".

25 The newly created Banca d'Italia, the Banca di Napoli and the Banca di Sicilia. The Banca Romana went into
liquidation in 1893. Its business was taken over by the BNR.




                                                          11
notes. The outflow triggered another liquidity crisis, and in 1894, bank notes once again
were declared inconvertible into specie.


As part of the 1893 reshaping of the banking system, the government and the banks
agreed to restrict the note issue to three times the volume of specie. In the long run this
proved successful, in no small part due to the fact that the Banca d'Italia was established
as the leading note-issuer with 75 percent of total circulation. Fiscal discipline
contributed to making the period up until World War I one of monetary stability with an
appreciating lira.


The formation of the Italian monetary union, as in the case of the US monetary union,
took place after political unification. Similar to the US case, the creation of Italian
monetary unity was a time-consuming process.


3.1.3. The German monetary union


The German monetary - as well as political - unification process proceeded stepwise.
Thus, scholars do not agree when the most important step towards monetary unification
occurred. Holtfrerich (1993) suggests that the unification of coinage in 1857 represents
the major, though not the final, achievement towards a monetary union. Others like
Kindleberger (1981) are of the opinion that the creation of the Reichsbank in 1875 was
the most important step. The disagreement has important implications: in the former
case monetary unification preceded political unification and in the latter case vice versa.
We believe that the most important step towards monetary unification was taken after
the establishment of the Reich, so that Germany followed the same pattern as the US
and Italy.


Prior to German monetary unification, each principality and free town issued its own
coins and, in some cases, paper money. Since many of the principalities were quite
small, it was inevitable that their coins spread across their borders as an accompaniment
of the free flow of migration within the Deutscher Bund . In addition, many foreign coins,
not least of French origin, circulated within Germany. Money exchanges were common
and profitable.


The diversity of coins was a great nuisance. Merchants and industrialists, often with a
liberal orientation, became the main proponents of unified economic and monetary


                                            12
conditions to reduce transaction costs emanating from the monetary disarray. The
governments of the principalities resisted, safeguarding their seigniorage gains.


In 1834, all internal customs barriers were removed. This agreement, known as the
Zollverein, also proposed that the various coinage systems should be integrated into a
common standard as was done in 1857. In the 1860s voices were raised to continue the
process of monetary unification. In 1870, the North German Federation, founded in
1867, prohibited new issues of state paper money and fixed the volume of note issues
for most banks. These measures left the control of the future growth of paper money in
the hands of the Prussian Bank.


The establishment in 1871 of the new unified German Reich following the Franco-
Prussian war led to further steps. The coinage acts of 1871 and 1873 unified coinage
throughout the Reich and introduced the Mark as the unit of account, based on the
decimal system. In order to link the German currency to the British pound, at the time the
leading international currency, the gold standard was adopted with silver being reduced
to use in coins of small denominations with less metal content than their face value.26 In
1875, a new banking act transformed the Prussian Bank into the Reichsbank and forced
most other banks to opt for ordinary banking business. 27 The Reichsbank was
designated the central bank for the new Germany. From the 1870s till the outbreak of
World War I, Germany was part of the international gold standard.


Political unification epitomized by the creation of the German Reich was followed by
three major changes in the German monetary system: the conversion of the currency
standard from silver to gold, the replacement of the Thaler with the Mark as the unit of
account, and the formation of a single central bank that, in practice, monopolized the
issue of paper money. With political unification Germany also established a central bank
that could function as a lender of last resort. Political unification was also a prerequisite
for a common fiscal policy - as it emerged during World War I.


These changes meant that Germany after a long process became a full-fledged national
monetary union. Again, in our opinion, monetary unification followed political unification.
26 There was an exception to the rule, however, as outstanding silver Thalers remained legal tender.

27 The termination of other banks' right to issue notes was not as straightforward as simply enacting a law forbidding
it. Instead, the government allowed other state banks to continue to issue notes but to stipulate stringent rules
concerning the denominations of the notes and the total amount issued. Private banks were forced to choose between
issuing notes valid only in the region of the bank or performing their business nationwide.


                                                         13
3.2. Multinational monetary unions


The Latin and the Scandinavian monetary unions were created in the 19th century as
multinational monetary unions. They were based on a standardized coinage across the
union while each member country retained its central bank.


3.2.1 The Latin monetary union28


Prior to the establishment of the Latin Monetary Union in 1865, France, Belgium,
Switzerland and, to some extent, Italy had a history of recognizing each other's
currencies as means of payment. The basis of this arrangement was the French
bimetallic system, in operation since 1803, which stipulated the fineness of each coin,
regardless of whether it was a gold or a silver coin, at 90 percent and fixed the relative
value between gold and silver to 15.5.


In the 1850s, a fall in the market price of gold relative to the price of silver made gold
coins overvalued at the mint. Consequently, it became profitable to melt silver coins and
sell silver for gold at the market rate. As the price of gold continued to fall, even worn
coins with low silver content started to disappear. The process left bimetallic countries
virtually with a gold standard currency since gold was the only medium of exchange that
remained in circulation. However, with no silver coins there was a lack of small-
denomination monies to use in minor transactions.


Upon monetary unification, as noted above, Italy decided to lower the silver content of
every coin smaller than 1 franc to 83.5 percent. The result of the actions of Italy and
similar ones by Switzerland was that debased silver coins from the neighbouring
countries flooded mainly France but also Belgium, creating seigniorage gains for the
issuers. France reacted in 1864 by reducing the silver content of every silver coin,
except the 5-franc coin, to Italy's 83.5 percent and by suspending the acceptance of
Swiss coins by her customs offices.




28 This section is based on Griffiths (1991) and Redish (1993).




                                                         14
The acute shortage of small denomination coins constituted a hindrance to trade both
within and between countries and forced the countries into action to remedy the
problem. The unilateral response by individual countries created an additional problem
in the form of one country reaping seigniorage benefits at the expense of the others. To
deal with this situation Belgium proposed a joint monetary conference, held at the end of
1865, that created the Latin Monetary Union.


The main issues at the conference in 1865 were to secure and standardize the supply of
subsidiary coinage for smaller transactions and the formal adoption of gold as the
currency standard. The first issue was unanimously resolved by deciding that all silver
coins lesser in value than the 5-franc coin were to be token coins of 83.5 percent silver
fineness. State treasuries had to accept token coins, regardless of the country of origin,
as payment up to 100 francs. Each state treasury was obliged to exchange the other
state treasuries' existing holdings of its token coins into gold or silver 5-franc coins at
par. The figure 83.5 percent was chosen because of the dominant share of French and
Italian token coins of that fineness already in circulation. The total value of token coins
that each country was permitted to mint was restricted to 6 francs per capita. Due to
strong French opposition and despite the fact that the other countries favoured such a
move, the adoption of a gold standard was rejected in favour of retaining the bimetallic
standard.29


The existing currencies continued to be in use virtually unchanged as parallel
currencies. Each state treasury remained ultimately responsible for the redemption of its
own coins. Apart from solving the problem of the scarcity of small-denomination coins,
the purpose of the standardization of the dimension and metal content of the coins was
to eliminate the possibility of seigniorage gains through the minting of debased coins.
While aiming to restrict the amount of money in circulation, the conference failed to
consider restrictions to prevent the member countries from issuing other forms of money
- a failure that the issue of paper notes exploited. Consequently, the members still had
considerable monetary independence.



29 Of two possible explanations for the French resistance, one, mainly political, suggests that Napoleon III was
planning a world monetary conference in 1867 where he hoped to be able to exchange French willingness to adopt
the gold standard for universal adoption of the French monetary standard. He was thus unwilling to convert to a gold
standard at this stage. According to the other explanation, the Bank of France was concerned with the cost of
redeeming outstanding silver coins in gold. This would stretch the Bank's reserves to the limit and Napoleon III,
dependent on the Bank for loans, had to follow the Bank on this account.




                                                         15
Initially, the Latin monetary union achieved its objectives. However, two problems soon
emerged. After the inauguration of the union, the price of gold started to rise. Silver 5-
franc coins returned to circulation while gold coins were melted or exported. At the same
time, France and Italy began to issue inconvertible paper money. In the case of France,
it was a temporary measure due to the 1870-71 war with Germany. Italy's chronic
government deficit maintained inconvertibility of the lira until 1881 and restored it again
in 1894. The increased money supply in Italy led to a depreciation of the lira.
Consequently, Italian silver coins were exported to the other member countries where
they were legal tender. Obviously, this enabled the Italian government to finance part of
her deficits with seigniorage, the cost of which was shared by all four countries, that is,
Italy, France, Belgium and Switzerland.


In response to the problems facing the union, a conference by the members in 1874
decided to maintain the bimetallic standard but restrict the minting of silver 5 franc coins.
In 1878 the members agreed to cease issuing 5-franc silver coins although those
already in circulation were to remain legal tender. This arrangement established the
"limping gold standard". In the discussions preceding the decision of 1874, both Belgium
and Switzerland were originally in favour of terminating the union and the Belgian
delegates argued for adoption of a gold standard. France and Italy, however, were
against both proposals, probably because the Bank of France as well as the Italian
government feared huge costs of redeeming in gold all the 5-franc silver coins in
circulation. The other three nations feared as well that a termination of the union might
lead to Italy refusing to redeem the other countries' large holdings of Italian token coins.
Instead, Italy had to agree to withdraw her token coins from international circulation for
as long as she retained inconvertible paper money.


The union remained intact until the outbreak of World War I, each member country with
its own central bank. The main task of the union was to maintain a system of
standardized coinage.


3.2.2. The Scandinavian Monetary Union30


Prior to the formation of the Scandinavian monetary union in 1873, the three
Scandinavian countries were all on a silver standard. 31 Indeed, in the years leading up

30 This section is based on Jonung (1984) and Bergman, Gerlach and Jonung (1993).




                                                      16
to the 1870s, all of them used the riksdaler as the unit of account. One Norwegian
specierigsdaler was roughly equal to two Danish rigsdaler which in turn was roughly
equal to four Swedish riksdaler. A considerable share of the coin circulation in each of
the three countries consisted of coins minted in the other two. The difference in value
separating these simple exchange rates from the exchange rates based on the
currencies' values in silver was small for the Danish and Norwegian currencies. Any
profits that could have arisen from arbitrage was negligible.


This was not the case for the Swedish currency, however. Its value exceeded 0.5
Danish or 0.25 Norwegian rigsdaler. The amount was sufficiently large to produce an
inflow of Danish and Norwegian coins into Sweden, for which it was a nuisance.32


This currency flow was by no means the only reason, not even an important one, for
aiming at a unified coinage. In all the Scandinavian countries, a lively debate regarding
the most suitable specie standard - gold or silver - and regarding the merits of the
decimal system for dividing the unit of account, created an intellectual climate in favour
of adopting a common gold standard based on the decimal system for the Nordic
currencies. 33 The decimal system was favoured on grounds of rationality. A currency
based on the gold standard was deemed appropriate since Scandinavia's leading
trading partners, the United Kingdom and Germany, were on gold. In addition,
nationalistic sentiments running through Europe in the latter half of the 19th century took
the form of Scandinavism in Scandinavia, a social and political willingness to bring the
Nordic countries closer together.


All of these factors - the disequilibrium in currency flows, the perceived superiority of the
gold standard and the decimal system and the political climate of the day - contributed to
the creation by Sweden, Denmark and Norway of a common currency union in 1873.
Although Norway did not formally sign the agreement until 1875, in practice her
monetary standard was altered in 1873.34

31 Finland was at the time a grand-duchy of Russia. Iceland was governed by Denmark. Norway was formally part of
a political union with Sweden but enjoyed far-reaching political independence.

32 The law proposed in the Swedish parliament in 1873 specifically mentioned the permanent costs emanating from
the inflow of Danish and Norwegian silver coins.

33 The issue was debated at three meetings of Scandinavian economists: in 1863 in Gothenburg, in 1865 in
Stockholm and in 1872 in Copenhagen.

34 The reasons for Norway's initial refusal to join the monetary union are not entirely clear. In any case, Norway joined
the union two years later and, in doing so, accepted all the terms of the agreement. This was not particularly surprising


                                                           17
The formation of the Scandinavian monetary union replaced the old unit of account, the
riksdaler, with a new one, the Scandinavian krona . The value of a Scandinavian krona
was specified in terms of gold and to be equal in all three countries where the new gold
coin was minted. Subsidiary coins were to be minted in silver and copper with a fineness
of 80 percent and no restrictions were placed on the amount of such coins each country
was allowed to mint. All coins were given legal tender status throughout the three
Scandinavian countries. The state treasuries accepted unlimited amounts of coins
irrespective of their country of origin. The only restrictions were a maximum amount
stipulated for the settlement of private debts.


Because of the larger denominations of the gold coins compared to that of bank notes,
notes remained in wide use in Sweden. Inter-country circulation consisted of notes and
subsidiary coins. This caused some dissatisfaction since notes were not covered by the
union agreement and thus did not always circulate at par. However, this shortcoming
was eventually to be remedied.


The first enlargement of the Scandinavian monetary union occurred in 1885. The three
central banks decided to establish inter-country drawing rights. Transactions between
the central banks were made free of interest and other charges. It is unlikely that the
central banks would have entered such an agreement if they felt that intra-Scandinavian
currency flows would create permanent disadvantages. Consequently, the 1885
agreement indicates that no country sought to gain seigniorage benefits at the expense
of the others. The smooth functioning of the union led Sweden and Norway to further
extend the scope of the union in 1894 by accepting each other's notes at par without
restrictions. The Danish central bank did not join the new agreement until 1901.35


No particular economic and political strains to the union appeared before World War I -
except for the political separation of Norway and Sweden in 1905 which caused some
uncertainty for a brief period. The gold standard, by requiring convertibility into gold,
ensured stability in the money supply. All three countries avoided issuing excessive

since she had already introduced in 1873 all measures except the grant of legal tender status to Swedish and Danish
coins.

35 The comparatively less widespread note circulation in Denmark may have induced the Danish central bank to treat
the issue as less urgent. Notes represented 26 percent of the circulation in Denmark, 41 percent in Norway and 57
percent in Sweden according to Henriksen, Kærgård and Sörensen (1994).




                                                        18
amounts of subsidiary coins. 36 The money supply in the member countries expanded in
line with economic growth. Inflation rates and interest rates exhibited identical patterns in
Scandinavia during the union.


3.2.3. Other monetary unions 37


In the 19th century, currency boards developed as a common monetary arrangement in
many colonies, in particular in British colonies. A typical currency board issued notes
and coins at least fully backed by reserves denominated in the currency of the colonial
power. Currency boards were a method of economizing on the use of notes and coins of
the colonial power. 38 A currency board represented a form of monetary union, more
precisely an exchange rate union, between the colony and the home country.


Most colonies abolished their currency boards and established central banks of their
own when they gained independence in the 1950s and 1960s. In a few cases the
currency board system was maintained and managed, such as HongKong, Singapore,
the East African Currency Area, emanating from British colonial rule but dissolved in
1977, and the East Caribbean Currency Area consisting of seven small island nations.39


The currency board institution has experienced a renaissance in the 1990s as Argentina,
Estonia, Lithuania, Bulgaria and Bosnia have recently adopted currency boards. So far
these experiments appear to have worked well in terms of establishing monetary stability
and credibility relative to alternative monetary arrangements. However, it remains to be
seen how well they will function in the long run.


A number of monetary unions have been established in the 20th century. One example
is the CFA Franc Zone, formed in 1959 by former French colonies in west and central
Africa, which actually has much in common with a currency board arrangement. 40 The
36 One event, however, suggests underlying political strains. In 1905, the Swedish central bank cancelled its
participation in the 1885 agreement. However, a new renegotiated agreement quickly followed which allowed each
central bank to charge the other banks when selling drawing rights. This option was not used for five years, and then
by Norway and Denmark. The action of the Swedish central bank in 1905 may have been motivated by a desire to
show its resentment that Norway had secured independence from Sweden that year.

37 This section is based on Cohen (1993) and Graboyes (1990).

38 For a description of the workings and history of currency boards, see Hanke, Jonung and Schuler (1993) and
Schwartz (1992).

39 Cohen (1993) and appendix C in Hanke, Jonung and Schuler (1993).




                                                          19
zone is in practice two monetary unions covered by the same arrangement, with each
union having its own monetary authority. Each union uses a unit of account called the
CFA franc which in 1948 was set equal to 1/50 of a French franc. 41 The CFA francs are
legal tender within their respective monetary unions and are convertible into French
francs. France's influence over monetary policy in the region is substantial. The CFA
Franc Zone has provided lower inflation rates than in neighbouring African countries,
primarily by limiting credit to national governments. The union is still in operation.


The East Caribbean Currency Area is an example of a multinational monetary union with
a single monetary authority. The East Caribbean Currency Area comprises seven small
countries in the Caribbean Ocean that were previously British colonies. 42 Under British
rule, monetary matters were controlled by the British Caribbean Currency Board, which
has since evolved into the East Caribbean Central Bank. It is the sole issuer of a single
currency for the union, the Caribbean dollar, which is legal tender in the seven member
states. The seven member countries also co-operate in other matters, for instance
through the East Caribbean Common Market. The union is still in operation.


Some unions deal with the case of a very small country adopting the monetary system of
a large country, most commonly a close neighbour, for example Luxembourg-Belgium,
Andorra-France, Monaco-France, the Vatican City-Italy, San Marino-Italy and
Liechtenstein-Switzerland. In each of these cases, monetary authority is exercised
entirely by the larger country.


There are a few cases of a small country that unilaterally adopts the monetary system of
a country far away. Examples include Liberia where the Liberian dollar was fixed to the
US dollar at a one-to-one rate and US bank notes were made legal tender in 1944 and
Panama which, one year after the country was formed, in 1904 fixed the exchange rate
of the domestic currency, the balboa, to the US dollar and made the US dollar legal
tender.




40 More specifically, the members are Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo.

41 In 1994, though, the CFA Franc was devalued by 50 percent.

42 The members are Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis, St. Lucia and St. Vincent
and the Grenadines.


                                                        20
The monetary union between Ireland and Britain formed after Irish Home Rule in 1922
represented a currency board institution.43 When Ireland was part of Britain, sterling was
used in Ireland. This arrangement was temporarily prolonged in 1922. With Britain as the
largest trading partner of Ireland, the Irish government by taking no action to change the
monetary system clearly indicated that the advantages of maintaining close monetary
links to Britain outweighed the advantages of monetary sovereignty. In 1925, a new unit
of account, the Irish pound, was introduced. The Irish pound was explicitly linked to
sterling. It had to be backed by gold or sterling assets one-to-one and sterling remained
legal tender. The union was not ended until 1979 when, due to the strong inflationary
tendencies of the British economy, Ireland decided to join the newly formed EMS
instead.



4. The dissolution of monetary unions


Several monetary unions have been dissolved in the 20th century. We first discuss the
break-up of the two multinational unions considered above, and next the collapse of
some national monetary unions.



4.1. Multinational monetary unions


The outbreak of World War I signalled the end of the Latin and the Scandinavian
monetary unions. The main cause of the break-up of the Latin Monetary Union was
World War I. The sharp increase in military expenditures left its members with no choice
but to issue paper money. 44 Large quantities of paper money issued during the war
remained in circulation after the end of hostilities. As paper money was not recognized
as legal means of payment in any country other than the issuing one, the union was in
effect terminated. During the war, silver coins were melted or exported. Remaining coins
constituted a small share of the total money supply.




43 The section on the monetary union between Ireland and Britain is based on Bradley and Whelan (1992).

44 See Bordo and Jonung (1998) for an account of the international experience of the interaction of monetary and
fiscal policies since the 1880s.




                                                        21
Belgium was the first member to act formally, declaring in 1925 that she would leave the
union at the start of 1927. The other countries followed and the Latin monetary union
was dissolved. The process was easy to carry out as each member had a central bank
and a domestic currency of its own. The monetary separation did not create any major
problems. It had de facto dissolved during World War I.


Like the Latin monetary union, the Scandinavian monetary union's collapse was a result
of World War I. At the outbreak of war, Scandinavian notes were declared inconvertible
into gold. At the same time, in order to prevent an outflow of gold, the export of gold was
prohibited. The growth of the money supply thereby ceased to be tied to the supply of
gold and the basis for the exchange of Scandinavian notes at par was eliminated.


Monetary policy was more expansive in Denmark and Norway than in Sweden. In 1915,
the official exchange rates changed accordingly with one Swedish krona buying more
than one Danish or Norwegian krona. The dissolution of the Scandinavian monetary
union was a gradual one. It occurred in several steps, first, Scandinavian notes were not
traded at par, Scandinavian gold coins were prevented from circulating freely within
Scandinavia, and finally coins were not traded at the one-to-one rate.45 The union was
officially terminated in the early 1920s although the political desire to maintain the union
accounted for proposals to resurrect the Scandinavian monetary union later on.46 Each
member of the two multinational unions examined, the Latin and the Scandinavian one,
continued to maintain a domestic monetary authority which facilitated the break-up of the
union once it was subject to large disturbances. 47


Other multinational unions have also been dissolved in the 20th century in Europe. The
British-Irish currency board arrangement - which was a form of multinational monetary
union - was terminated in the 1970's. Luxembourg established a central bank when it
joined the European Central Bank system, ending the monetary union with Belgium that
had lasted since the 1920's. These break-ups occurred with no major political tensions
or repercussions.


45 See the account of Bergman, Gerlach and Jonung (1993) and of Bergman (1999).

46 Recently, as a response to the creation of EMU, a Finnish-Swedish monetary union has been proposed as an
alternative to Finnish and Swedish membership in the EMU. See Jonung and Sjöholm (1999).

47 The existence of a domestic central bank was an important prerequisite for the expansionary fiscal policies carried
out during World War I. Central banks in belligerent countries monetized the huge budget deficits emerging as a result
of the financing of the war effort. See Bordo and Jonung (1998).


                                                         22
To sum up, the dissolution of multinational monetary unions has been easy to carry out
when each member country maintained a central bank of its own during the monetary
union. The central banks of the nation states could rapidly re-establish the domestic
"national" monetary union.



4.2. National monetary unions


Several national monetary unions have been terminated in the 20th century and divided
into smaller monetary areas. The two world wars contributed to the demise of some
monetary unions; the Austro-Hungarian empire 48 and the Russian empire after World
War I; and the creation of new ones; the German monetary union after World War II
splitting into two parts, one covered by Western and the other by Eastern Germany.


In the 1990s the national monetary unions of Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and
Czechoslovakia broke up. The Ruble zone disintegrated in a lengthy process during the
first half of the 1990s ending in a large number of new currency areas.49 The Yugoslav
monetary union in the face of a civil war collapsed into several new monetary unions -
each associated with a new nation state and a new currency. 50


The Czechs and Slovaks decided to form two nation states out of Czechoslovakia due to
differences on politics and economics, but to remain in a monetary union until a later
stage. The political break-up occurred on January 1st 1993 when the Czech republic
and Slovakia separated. Political separation initiated expectations of a monetary
separation, creating a divergence between the exchange rates of the new currencies.
These expectations brought about monetary separation by February 1993, although so
early a step had not been contemplated by the authorities. 51




48 See Garber and Spencer (1994) and Dornbusch (1992).

49 This account is based on Bornefalk (1998).

50 This account is based on Kraft (1995) and Wyzan (1993).

51 See Fidrmuc and Horváth (1998) and Garber and Spencer (1994).




                                                       23
The common cause of these break-ups is found in the political process, not in the
monetary union by itself, nor in "economic" forces. War and/or political disunity have
brought about the dissolution of nation states. As a consequence of political separation
monetary divorce followed. See Table 2 for a list of national monetary unions dissolved
in the 20th century.


The typical collapse has followed two paths. The first path was accompanied by fiscal
and monetary turmoil and high inflation in some or all of the new monetary areas. This
was the case of the dissolution of three European empires in the 20th century, Austria-
Hungary, Russia and the Soviet Union, as well as the dissolution of Yugoslavia. The
second path was a more peaceful and orderly one. The dissolution of the monetary
union of Czechoslovakia was an orderly affair, not accompanied by huge fiscal deficits
and high inflation.


To sum up, when far-reaching political events cause the break-up of existing nation
states into smaller nation states, monetary separation and divorce follows in almost all
the cases we have studied.52



5. Summary: Why are monetary unions created and dissolved?

According to our account of the establishment of monetary unions, the most important
reason is that a national monetary union generally follows as part of the process of
political unification. There are few exceptions in history of nation states, which are not a
unified monetary area with a national currency unit of their own - and these have
generally been very small states like Monaco, Andorra, and Luxembourg.


Second are economic reasons, including a reduction in transaction costs by
standardizing the coinage, gains from trade, access to wider markets, and
harmonization of policies. Third and finally, non-economic reasons besides political
unification includes a common history, a common language, culture, and religion have
contributed to monetary unification. This is in particular the case with multinational
monetary unions.

52 The independence of Norway from Sweden in 1905 and Ireland from the United Kingdom in the 1920s are
exceptions in the sense that the monetary cooperation between the various countries continued after political
separation.




                                                         24
The causes of the break-up of national monetary unions are foremost found in political
developments. Political unity is the glue that holds a monetary union together. Once it
dissolves, it is most likely that the monetary union will dissolve.


Although we have argued that national monetary unity follows from political unity, we do
not want to make a watertight separation between political and economic factors. They
are closely interlinked. Political unity is based partially on economic conditions. As long
as the economic gains from political unification outweigh the benefits from separation,
the nation state will be a viable alternative, not running the risk of falling apart.


Within the nation state political tensions created by economic differences between
various regions and ethnic groups, can result in the demise of the unity necessary for
keeping the nation state together. The US civil war and the recent break-up of
Czechoslovakia are examples of economic tensions that undermined political unity and
hence monetary unity.


Most nation states have created - or create when deemed necessary - institutions and
mechanisms to resolve domestic economic and political conflicts. Differences in
economic outcomes are commonly alleviated by transfer payments. Tensions due to
language, religion, and culture can be reduced within the nation state through
constitutional designs that allow a high degree of sovereignty for minority groups.
Switzerland is an example of a nation state, as well as a monetary union, with
widespread local political power to allow diversity in religion, language and culture. Most
modern nation states, even federal ones, require substantial redistribution of income.
Such redistribution may not be enough: fundamental differences between members, for
example, due to religion and ethnicity, combined with political and/or economic shocks
may produce break-ups of nation states and consequently of national monetary unions.
Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union are examples in the 1990s.


Our reading of the historical record, giving prominence to the "political will" to explain the
rise and fall of monetary unions, is consistent with the conclusions of other researchers.
Cohen (1993, p. 190) argues from six case studies of monetary cooperation "that
political conditions are most instrumental in determining the sustainability of monetary
cooperation among sovereign governments." The term "political conditions" covers the
presence of a strong local hegemon or a dense network of institutional linkages. Cohen


                                              25
(1993, p. 188) concludes that "Economic and organizational factors matter, but interstate
politics appears to matter most of all." 53




6. The future of the EMU. The lessons from history.

Our history of monetary unions is based on a crucial distinction between national and
multinational unions. When considering the future of EMU, we first should ask whether
EMU will emerge as a national or a multinational monetary union? The answer is not
obvious. The EMU-project is unique in the history of monetary unions. We have not
found any clear and unambiguous historical precedent to EMU, where a group of
monetary and politically independent countries surrendered their national currencies to
form a common monetary union based on a new unit of account under the leadership of
a common monetary authority - while still retaining political independence. Monetary
unification has heretofore followed political unification - not the other way around.54


Political unity has a rule also entailed to some extent a centrally coordinated tax and
expenditure system, thus allowing for central fiscal policies.55 EMU is unique in the
sense that monetary coordination within Euroland will be stronger than political and
fiscal coordination.56


We are inclined to view EMU as closer to a national monetary union than to a
multinational union for several reasons. EMU will have one common central bank, the
ECB. It will eventually issue the only circulating money in Euroland. The previous central
banks of the members of EMU will diminish in power and importance according to the
Maastricht treaty. They will most likely resemble the regional reserve banks of the
Federal Reserve System of the US. This analogy suggests that they will not formulate a

53 Cohen (1993) examines the record of six multinational unions. He does not deal with the case of any national
monetary union as defined by us. His conclusions concerning the role of political factors would most likely be
strengthened if had also considered national monetary unions.

54 As stated by Goodhart (1997, p 92); "What is remarkable, and virtually unique, about the proposed move to the
EMU and the euro is that it will be done without an accompanying federalization of governmental and fiscal functions."

55 See also Goodhart (1995, p 465): "The domain of a single currency has generally had the same boundaries as its
central political and fiscal system, and areas with independent currencies have likewise had separate political and
fiscal centers."

56 EMU is often regarded as a method for accomplishing political and fiscal unification. Once Europe has a common
currency, it will rapidly move towards a federal state according to a common interpretation.


                                                         26
common European monetary policy. Monetary policy will be centralized on a pan-
European level under the ECB. Furthermore, membership in EMU and the adoption of
the Euro are regarded as permanent. There are no escape clauses. The Maastricht
treaty gives no country the right to leave EMU. 57


This implies that, when forecasting the future of EMU, our conclusions derived from the
history of national monetary unions are more relevant than those from the experience of
multinational unions. 58 EMU involves considerably stronger monetary integration than
was the case for the multinational unions of the past. We believe the closest historical
parallel to EMU to be the national monetary unions of the United States, Italy and
Germany. 59 These cases demonstrate how a complete monetary union, that is, the use
of the same money as well as a common monetary policy across all jurisdictions,
evolved over time. Initially all the institutions required for successful monetary policy,
according to the conventional monetary policy wisdom of today, did not exist.


Starting from our critical assumption that EMU will be close to a national monetary union,
we distil the following from the historical record.


(1) EMU will be a flexible monetary union. First of all, the history of monetary unification
suggests that national monetary unions are permanent and flexible. They evolve over
time in response to political and economic events. Their durability and flexibility is a
consequence of the political process that once established monetary unity. EMU has
been created by a strong will for political unity, despite a number of primarily "economic"
objections to the project. This political determination will likely design mechanisms and
institutions to overcome the shortcomings of EMU that the initial set of rules and treaties
embodied in the Eurosystem impose.


We initially listed several shortcomings, such as the absence of a lender of last resort
and of a central authority supervising the financial system, lack of democratic control


57 The Scandinavian monetary union had an explicit right for any member to leave the union. See Jonung (1999).

58 However, we are aware that to some extent EMU will resemble a multinational monetary union. There is not
complete central coordination of the political and fiscal systems of the member states. Monetary centralization goes
before political and fiscal centralization. However, in our opinion EMU still is closer to the workings of a national
monetary union than to a multinational union.

59 The US currency union is commonly used as a benchmark by economists when examining various issues of the
process of European monetary unification.




                                                          27
and accountability for the ECB, inconsistent policy directives for the ECB, lack of a
central fiscal policy-making authority, and Euroland as not an optimal currency area.


Seen from an evolutionary perspective, these shortcomings will likely be met by various
solutions, emerging over time - just as they have emerged in national monetary unions.
Thus, we do not regard this list per se as a major threat to the future of EMU. Indeed,
current criticism by economists concerning the shortcomings of the Eurosystem lays the
groundwork for future improvement. Policy-makers will eventually respond where the
critique is found deserving - a pattern that holds for general policy-making in an open
society.


Let us briefly illustrate our interpretation by considering how shortcomings in the U.S.
monetary union were dealt with. A unified economy was created in the Constitutional
Convention of 1789, which gave the Congress the power to coin and regulate the
currency. It took another seven decades to create a complete uniform currency with the
National Currency Act of 1863. The process involved two failed attempts to establish a
central bank and the instability associated with state regulation of bank notes.


Establishment of a unified currency did not resolve the endemic problem in the
nineteenth century U.S. financial system of periodic banking panics. Private
mechanisms to provide emergency currency through the clearinghouses and occasional
interventions by the U.S. Treasury were only successful in allaying several minor panics.


Major crises in 1893 and 1907 in which many banks failed and monetary contraction led
to depression, were instrumental in the successful campaign to create a national lender
of last resort and central bank in the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. Although the Federal
Reserve System was empowered to act as a lender of last resort, it failed miserably in
meeting banking panics in the early 1930s, thereby converting a not unusual contraction
into the Great Depression. As a consequence of that experience the U.S. developed an
extensive financial regulatory network including deposit insurance, and the Fed finally
evolved into an effective lender of last resort.


Moreover, the mechanisms to transfer fiscal resources from the federal government to
the states in the face of shocks, were developed only many years after the monetary




                                           28
union was created. It took the shock of the Great Depression to devise an effective
means for the Federal Government to transfer resources to the states. 60


Our argument that institutions evolve in response to changing circumstances and
requirements can be supported by the fact that European policy authorities have already
displayed substantial flexibility in interpreting and adjusting to economic and political
realities. The Maastricht criteria are tough on paper. In reality they have already been
stretched incredibly in various ways, for example by allowing Belgium, Italy and others
into the EMU in spite of their debt to GDP and deficit to GDP ratios being "too" high. 61
Political desiderata have already overruled the rules of the Eurosystem.


The appointment of the first head of the ECB was something of a political farce but it
was eventually solved by political will and flexibility. Regularly the financial press reports
various proposals to adjust the statutes and structure of the EMU-system in response to
different challenges. The system thus appears open to changes and revisions that will
likely reduce its initial weakness and shortcomings. 62


Of course, there is no guarantee that the Eurosystem will survive all future shocks, only
that the system allows for mechanisms of self-correction and adjustment that increase its
prospects for survival. Besides, we are not aware of any case in history in which a
monetary union commenced with all the institutions required to function as prescribed by
the modern view on monetary policy. Such institutions develop over time.


(2) EMU will be hit by major shocks. Second, history shows that exceptional shocks and
crises will eventually hit any monetary area. Countries like the US, Canada and Italy
have been the subjects of asymmetric or region-specific shocks and structural shifts that
have left permanent scars. The maritime provinces of Canada and Southern Italy have
been struggling for long with comparative stagnation. In spite of transfers to these poor
regions, their problems have not been solved. However, they have not led to the
breakdown of political unity, splitting up the nation state, and thus the monetary union.



60 See Wallis and Oates (1998)

61 See Obstfeld (1998, p 24) and others.

62 On this point see for example the analysis of von Hagen and Fratianni (1993, p 184) who conclude that "The
Maastricht agreement leaves many options to design the monetary and financial market institutions of the EMU."
Tietmeyer (1999) stressed the options that will be available for the Eurosystem in case of future disturbances.


                                                         29
Major idiosyncratic disturbances and crises will hit EMU sooner or later. Judging from
the record, national monetary unions survive such events except in the case of a
collapse of the political unity underlying monetary unity. If EMU were to break-up, we
conjecture that the initial cause would be a major exogenous shock that hits the
members of the EMU asymmetrically. In addition political will be lacking on the part of
one or a group of EMU-countries to adjust to the common policy of the EMU. Here only
fantasy limits the list of possible events or processes that could start a collapse of the
EMU. 63


(3) EMU will be based on political unity. Third, monetary unions of the past were in two
important respects different from the present process leading to the common European
currency. First, the national monetary unification of the 18th and 19th century followed
after political unification and, second, they were based on specie. Consequently,
monetary unification was a much simpler process than in the case of Euroland, thus also
politically easier to carry through.


Countries that have joined the EMU today are on a fiat - not a specie - standard. Present
European monetary unification is based on a commonly accepted politically decided
commitment mechanism as opposed to the metallic standard of yesterday that had gold
convertibility as a common focal point and commitment mechanism. The statues of the
ECB set out price stability as its "principal objective". A precondition for the EMU to
succeed and be stable in the future is that the individual members of the EMU must
display forever a similar commitment to this common goal, as did the advanced nations
to the gold standard rule more than a century ago. This is most likely the major
challenge facing EMU.


It is unclear how well EMU will succeed in maintaining such a convergence in policy
preferences in the future. The process so far suggests that the political effort spent on
creating EMU is probably greater compared to the political resources required to create
the national monetary unions of the past. This demonstrates that EMU is basically a
political project, reflecting a strong will to create eventually political unity within Europe.




63
  For one account for potential causes of dissolution of the EMU, stressing the interplay between politics and
economics, see Feldstein (1997).


                                                          30
The sequencing of events is reversed compared to the national unions of the past.
Monetary unification has been used as a means of accomplishing the final aim of
political unification. Political backing and support for EMU may be substantial at present
but has to remain so in the future as well. The political imperative may remain strong as
a result of the huge investment already made in the monetary unification process.
However, we are reluctant to present any forecast on this matter. Political forces may
turn and twist rapidly in the future.


The political economy of past national monetary unions also suggests that such
arrangements are dominated by one or a few major economic powers in the center, not
by countries or members in the periphery. In the United States, within the Federal
Reserve system established in 1914, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plays by
tradition the most important role, in Italy the Banca Nazionale nel Regno d'Italia emerged
eventually into the central bank, and in Germany the state Bank of Prussia was the
major element in the new Reichsbank, set up in 1875.64


This center-periphery pattern has implications for the future working of the EMU, more
specifically for the relationship between the major and minor member countries in the
EMU. An obvious compensation for the loss of monetary sovereignty for a small or minor
country from joining EMU is that it will take part in policy formation within the ECB.
Judging from monetary history we should not, however, expect a peripheral country and
thus a minor voice, to have a major influence on the decision-making process.


The political economy of the EMU will primarily be determined by the major powers
among the members of the monetary union. If there will be tension between for example
Germany and France, the risk for the EMU to become unstable will increase. The EMU
requires one dominating player or a strong coalition to function well.



(4). EMU will not be an "optimal" currency area. A major objection of the economics
profession to EMU is that it is not now and will not be an optimal currency area. History


64
  The history of international exchange rate regimes suggests a similar pattern with the center having a strong
influence on monetary policies: the United Kingdom was the hegemon of the classical gold standard, sometimes
working in co-operation with France and Germany. The short-lived interwar gold standard was dominated by the
actions of the United Kingdom, the US and France. The United States played the key role in the Bretton Woods
system. The ERM-arrangement that failed in 1992-1993 was based on the policies of the Bundesbank.




                                                         31
shows that the creation, reign and dissolution of national monetary unions have hardly
any connection with the criteria spelled out in the literature on optimal currency area
(OCA) inspired by the work of Mundell, McKinnon and Kenen. Instead, they have
developed in a historical context as a result of the political process. The historical record
suggests that the OCA-theory is not well suited to analyze the evolution of monetary
unions as it lacks important political and historical dimensions. Thus it is not a promising
concept for considering the future of EMU either. 65


On this point see the succinct summary by Goodhart (1995, p 452):

"The evidence therefore suggests that the theory of optimum currency areas has
relatively little predictive power. Virtually all independent sovereign states have separate
currencies, and changes in sovereign status lead rapidly to accompanying adjustments
in monetary autonomy. The boundaries of states rarely coincide exactly with optimum
currency areas, and changes in boundaries causing changes in currency domains rarely
reflects shifts in optimum currency areas."

To sum up, our emphasis on the political process as the major determinant of the future
of the EMU is consistent with the views put forth by many researchers. See for example
Cohen (1993, 1998), Corden (1972), Goodhart (1998) and Obstfeld (1998).



7. Conclusions


EMU is a unique construction without any clear precedent in monetary history. This
suggests great caution when forecasting the future of EMU. However, we know that
EMU will function as a national monetary union with one central bank and one common
currency circulating within the union. We are therefore able to apply some forecasts
based on the record of national monetary unions.


The major driving forces behind the establishment of national monetary unions as well
as behind their dissolution are political ones. The “economic” shortcomings noted by
economists concerning the workings of the EMU need not spell disaster. They can be
overcome by political forces as well as by market-based adjustment mechanisms.

65
  Similar conclusions concerning the OCA-approach are found in Cohen (1993, p 200). Goodhart (1998) examines
two alternative concepts of money, concluding that the “cartalist” approach has a firmer empirical foundation than the
monetary theory underlying OCA-theory.




                                                          32
The EMU and the ECB will be subject to major shocks in the future - just as the case is
with any monetary area and its central bank. Monetary deficiencies or monetary
problems that can be solved within the nation state should be solvable in a monetary
union covering many nation states, given that the union is organized as a national
monetary union with one type of money circulating within the whole union and with one
central bank.


A major lesson from history is that monetary unification is an evolutionary process. EMU
will evolve in the future in a way different from the existing plans for the EMU. This
process, allowing the EMU to adapt and adjust to future disturbances, should properly
be regarded as a policy learning process, where policy makers learn to cope with the
shortcomings that emerge.66 This process will continue as long as the political will to
maintain the union is present. Once it disappears, the EMU may break apart. Judging
from the history of national monetary unions such an outcome appears likely only under
extreme circumstances.




66
  The learning process of US policy makers was recently analysed by Sargent (1998) and of Swedish policy makers
by Jonung (1999).


                                                       33
Table 1. The creation of some monetary unions in the 19th century.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary area                                                          Time of creation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
National monetary unions:
The United States                                                            1789-92
Italy                                                                            1861
Germany                                                                           1875


Multinational monetary unions:
The Latin monetary union                                                         1865
The Scandinavian monetary union                                             1873-75
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Bordo and Jonung (1997) and Vanthoor (1996).




                                                         34
Table 2. The dissolution of some monetary unions in the 20th century.


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary union                   Time of dissolution                         Causes of dissolution
       (1)                                 (2)                                          (3)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
National monetary unions:
Austria                                 1919-27                         Defeat at war, creation of
                                                                        several new nation states
Russia                                  1918-20                         Creation of several new
                                                                        nation states
Soviet Union                            1992-94                         Political unrest, creation of
                                                                         several new nation states
Yugoslavia                              1991-94                          Political unrest, civil
                                                                         war, rise of new states
Czechoslovakia                           1993                            Political divergences,
                                                                         rise of new nation states.


Multinational monetary unions:


Latin Monetary union                      1914-27                      Divergent monetary policies


Scandinavian monetary union 1914-24                                    Divergent monetary policies
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Bordo and Jonung (1997), Garber and Spencer (1994, p. 36-37) and Goodhart
(1995).




                                                         35
References:

Alesina, A., and R. Wacziarg, (1998), “Is Europe Going to Far?”, paper prepared for the
Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, November.

Begg, D., et al. (1998) "The ECB: Safe at any speed?", Monitoring the European Central
Bank 1, No 1. CEPR.

Bergman, M., (1999), "Do Monetary Unions Make Economic Sense? Evidence from the
Scandinavian Currency Unions 1873-1913", mimeo University of Lund, forthcoming
Scandinavian Journal of Economics.

Bergman, M., S. Gerlach and L. Jonung (1993), “The Rise and Fall of the Scandinavian
                           European Economic Review 37, 507-517.

Bordo, M.D. and Jonung, L., (1997), "The history of monetary regimes - some lessons
for Sweden and the EMU", pp 285-358, vol 4, Swedish Economic Policy Review.

Bordo, M.D. and L. Jonung, (1998), "A return to the convertibility principle? Monetary
and fiscal regimes in historical perspective. The international evidence," forthcoming in
A. Leijonhufvud, ed., Monetary Theory as a Basis for Monetary Policy, MacMillan.

Bornefalk, A., (1998), "The Break-up of the Ruble Zone. The Political Economy of a
Collapsing Monetary Union", working paper, Stockholm School of Economics,
Stockholm.

Bradley, J. and K. Whelan (1992), “Irish Experience of Monetary Linkages with the
United Kingdom and Developments since joining the EMS”, in: R. Barrell, ed., Economic
Convergence and Monetary Union in Europe (SAGE publications, London) 121-143.

Buiter, W.B., (1999), "Alice in Euroland", forthcoming in Journal of Common Market
Studies, working paper, Faculty of Economics and Politics, Cambridge.

Cangiano, M. and E. Mottu, (1998), "Will Fiscal Policy Be Effective Under EMU?", IMF
working paper 98/176, IMF, Washington.

Cohen, B. J. (1993), "Beyond EMU: The Problem of Sustainability", Economics and
Politics, 5, 187-203.

Cohen, B. J. (1998), The Geography of Money, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and
London.

Corden, W.M., (1972), "Monetary Integration", Essays in International Finance, No 93,
April. Princeton.

Dabrowski, M., (1995), "The Reasons of the Collapse of the Ruble Zone", Center for
Social and Economic Research, Warsaw, November.


                                            36
Dornbusch, R., (1994), "Monetary Problems of Post-Communism: Lessons from the End
of the Austro-Hungarian Empire", Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, p.391-424.

Eichengreen, B., (1990), "One Money for Europe? Lessons from the U.S. Currency
Union", Economic Policy, pp 85-104, vol. 5.

Eichengreen, B. (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1919-1939 (Oxford University Press, Oxford).

Eichengreen, B., (1996), "Déjà vu all over again: lessons from the gold standard for
European monetary unification", chapter 13 in T. Bayoumi, B. Eichengreen and M.
Taylor, eds, Modern perspectives on the gold standard, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Eichengreen, B., (1997), "Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area?" chapter 3 in B.
Eichengreen, European Monetary Unification: Theory, Practice, and Analysis, MIT
Press, Cambridge.

Eichengreen, B. and J. Frieden, (1993), "The Political Economy of European Monetary
Unification: An Analytical Introduction", Economics and Politics, pp 85-104, vol. 5.

Eichengreen, B. and C. Wyplosz, (1998), "The stability pact: more than a minor
nuisance?", pp. 65-114 in Begg, D., et al., eds., EMU: Prospects and Challenges for the
Euro, special issue of Economic Policy, Blackwell Publishers.

Eltis, W., (1997), "The Creation and Destruction of the Euro", Policy Study No 155,
Centre for Policy Studies, London.

Flandreau, M, J. Le Cacheux and F. Zumer, (1998), "Stability without a pact? Lessons
from the European gold standard, 1880-1914", p 117-62 in Begg, D., et al., eds., EMU:
Prospects and Challenges for the Euro, special issue of Economic Policy, Blackwell
Publishers.

Fatás, A., (1998), "Does EMU need a fiscal federation?", Economic Policy, p. 165-203.

Fidrmuc, J. and Horváth, J., (1998), "Stability of Monetary Unions: Lessons from the
Break-up of Czechoslovakia", Working paper from Center for Economic Research,
Tilburg University.

Flandreau, M. (1994), “Was the Latin Monetary Union a Franc Zone?” in J. Reis, ed.,
International Monetary Systems in Historical Perspective (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge) 71-89.

Fraas, A. (1974), “The Second Bank of the United States: An Instrument for Interregional
                  Journal of Economic History 34, 427-46



                                           37
Fratianni, M. and F. Spinelli (1985), "Currency Competition, Fiscal Policy and the Money
Supply Process in Italy from Unification to World War I", Journal of European Economic
History 14, No. 3, 471-499.

Garber, P. and Spencer, M., (1994), "The Dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire:
Lessons for Currency Reform", Essays in International Finance, No 191, February.

Goodhart, C. A. E., (1995), "The Political Economy of Monetary Union", chapter 12 in P.
Kenen, ed., Understanding Interdependence. The Macroeconomics of the Open
Economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Goodhart, C.A.E., (1998), “The two concepts of money: implications for the analysis of
optimal currency areas”, 14, pp 407-432, European Journal of Political Economy.

Graboyes, R. F. (1990), “The EMU: Forerunners and Durability”, Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond Economic Review 16, July/August 1990, 8-17.

Griffiths, M. L. (1991), Monetary Union in Europe: Lessons from the Nineteenth Century,
Workshop paper, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.

Gros, D., and N. Thygesen, (1997), European Monetary Integration. From the European
Monetary System to European Monetary Union, Longman, London.

Feldstein, M., (1997), "The Political Economy of the European Economic and Monetary
Union: Political Sources of an Economic Liability", Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol
11, pp 23-42.

von Hagen, J. and M. Fratianni, (1993), "The Transition to European Monetary Union,"
vol. 5, pp 167-86, Economics and Politics.

Hanke, S., L. Jonung and K. Schuler (1993), Russian Currency and Finance. A Currency
Board Approach to Reform (Routledge, London).

Henriksen, I., N. Kærgård and C. Sörensen (1994), “Den skandinaviske möntunion”,
Den jyske historiker, No. 69-70, 88-97.

Holtfrerich, C-L. (1989), "The monetary unification process in nineteenth-century
Germany: relevance and lessons for Europe today", in: M. De Cecco and A. Giovannini,
eds., A European Central Bank (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), chapter 8.

Holtfrerich, C.-L. (1993), Did monetary unification precede or follow political unification of
Germany in the 19th century, European Economic Review 37, 518-524.

Jonung, L. (1984), “Swedish Experience under the Classical Gold Standard 1873-1913”,
in: M. D. Bordo and A. Schwartz, eds., The Classical Gold Standard in Retrospective
(University of Chicago Press/National Bureau of Economic Research), 361-399.



                                              38
Jonung, L., (1999a), "Den skandinaviska myntunionen 1875-1920. Vad säger den om
EMU idag?", mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics.

Jonung, L., (1999b), Looking ahead through the Rear-View Mirror. Swedish Stabilization
Policy as a Learning Process, 1970-1995. A Summary. Ministry of Finance, Stockholm.

Jonung, L. and F. Sjöholm, (1999), "Should Finland and Sweden Form a Monetary
Union?" vol 22, no 5, The World Economy.

Kraft, E., (1995), "Stabilising Inflation in Slovenia, Croatia and Macedonia: How
Independence has Affected Macroeconomic Policy Outcomes", Europe-Asia Studies, vol
47, pp 469-92.

McCallum, B. T. (1992), “Money and Prices in Colonial America: A New Test of
                     Journal of Political Economy 100, 143-161.

Melitz, J. and F. Zumer, (1998), "Interregional and International Risk Sharing and
Lessons for EMU", paper prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference, November.

Obstfeld, M., (1998), "EMU: Ready, or not?", NBER Working papers series, no 6682,
August.

Obstfeld, M. and G. Peri, (1998), "Regional non-adjustment and fiscal policy", pp. 205-
260 in Begg, D., et al., eds., EMU: Prospects and Challenges for the Euro, special issue
of Economic Policy, Blackwell Publishers.

Perkins, E. J. (1994), American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815 (Ohio
State University Press, Columbus, Ohio).

Prati, A. and G. Schinasi, (1999), "Financial Stability in European Economic and
Monetary Union", IMF working paper, december 1998.

Redish, A. (1993), “The Latin Monetary Union and the emergence of the international
gold standard”, in: M. D. Bordo and F. Capie, eds., Monetary Regimes in Transition
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), chapter 3.

Rolnick, A. J., B. D. Smith, and W. E. Weber (1994), “The Origins of the Monetary Union
                            Siklos, ed., Varieties of Monetary Experiences (Kluwer,
Boston) 323-349.

Sannucci, V. (1989), “The establishment of a central bank: Italy in the nineteenth
century, in M. De Cecco and A. Giovannini, eds., A European Central Bank, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 244-280.

Sargent, T., (1998), The Conquest of American Inflation, manuscript, Stanford university.




                                           39
Schwartz, A. (1992), Do Currency Boards Have a Future?, Institute of Economic Affairs
Occasional paper 88, London.

Svensson, L., (1999), "Monetary Policy Issues for the Eurosystem", working paper, IIES,
Stockholm.

Theurl, T., (1992), Eine gemeinsame Währung für Europa. 12 Lehren aus der
Geschichte , Österreichischer Studien Verlag, Innsbruck.

Tietmeyer, H., (1999), "The Eurosystem's Approach to Monetary Stability", Lecture
delivered to the Swedish Economic Association in Stockholm, April 12.

Wallis, J.J. and W.E. Oates (1998), "The Impact of the New Deal on American
Federalism" pp. 155-180 in M.D. Bordo, C. Goldin and E. White, eds., The Defining
Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Vanthoor, W., (1996), European Monetary Union Since 1848. A Political and Historical
Analysis, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.

Wyplosz, C., (1997), "EMU: Why and How It Might Happen", Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol 11, pp 3-22.

Wyzan, M., (1993), "Monetary Independence and Macroeconomic Stabilization in
Macedonia: An Initial Assessment", 5, Communist Economies and Economic
Transformation.


</ref_section>




                                          40
