NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MARGINAL
TAX RATES ON INCOME:
A PANEL STUDY OF ‘BRACKET CREEP’
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 7367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7367

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1999

I thank Josh Angrist, Esther Duflo, Jon Gruber, Michael Kremer and James Poterba for helpful comments
and discussions. Financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is thankfully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income:
A Panel Study of 'Bracket Creep'
Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 7367
September 1999
JEL No. H31, J22
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a panel of individual tax returns and the `bracket creep' as source of tax rate
variation to construct instrumental variables estimates of the sensitivity of income to changes in tax rates.
From 1979 to 1981, the US income tax schedule was fixed in nominal terms while inflation was high
(around 10%). This produced a real change in tax rate schedules. Taxpayers near the top-end of a tax
bracket were more likely to creep to a higher bracket and thus experience a rise in marginal rates the
following year than the other taxpayers. Compensated elasticities can be estimated by comparing the
differences in changes in income between taxpayers close to the top-end of a tax bracket to the other
taxpayers. These estimates, based on comparisons between very similar groups, are robust to underlying
changes in the income distribution, such as a rise in inequality. The elasticities found are higher than those
derived in labor supply studies but smaller than those found previously with the same kind of tax returns
data.
Emmanuel Saez
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
saez@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
The response of taxpayers to changes in marginal rates has long been of interest to
economists. The magnitude of this response is of critical importance in the formulation
of tax policy and the determination of the size of the government and welfare programs.
However the empirical literature has failed to generate any consensus on the magnitude
of the elasticities of income with respect to marginal tax rates: estimates range from no
e ect to extremely large e ects.
The labor supply literature focuses mostly on the elasticity of hours of work with
respect to marginal tax rates and nds in general small responses to taxation. This
literature su ers from two major drawbacks. First, hours of work might not be the only
dimension of the total behavioral response to taxation, which is the relevant variable for
tax policy purposes. Second, the identi cation of elasticities in the labor supply literature
rests in general on strong functional form assumptions. Estimates are therefore sensitive
to these functional form assumptions.
Recent studies have looked directly at the sensitivity of overall income with respect to
marginal rates using tax reforms to identify the parameters of interest. These studies have
used the US tax reforms of 1981 and 1986 to estimate taxpayers' responses. They nd very
large responses to taxation. This recent literature also su ers from major problems. First,
the tax reforms introduced many changes in the de nition of taxable income besides tax
rate changes and thus it is often problematic to compare reported income before and after
the tax reform. Second, these studies compare high income taxpayers (who experienced
large tax rate cuts) to low and middle income taxpayers (who experienced almost no
tax rate changes). Therefore, this methodology amounts to attributing the widening in
inequalities to the tax reform. Third, this literature is not able, as opposed to most labor
supply studies, to tell apart income and substitution e ects. The knowledge of the size
of each of these e ects is important for tax policy.
These objections suggest that a research design to estimate behavioral responses to
marginal tax rates should meet two conditions. First, the tax change should a ect only
marginal tax rates without introducing many changes in tax rules. Second, the tax change
2

should a ect di erently groups of taxpayers that are comparable (i.e., whose incomes and
other economic characteristics are close). The `bracket creep' in the US income tax of the
early eighties is a tax change meeting these two conditions.
From 1979 to 1981, in ation was high (around 10%) but the tax schedule was xed in
nominal terms. Because the income tax was highly progressive-there were about 15 tax
brackets with rates increasing from 0 to 70%-in ation had a strong real impact.1 The kink
points of the tax schedule, xed in nominal terms, shifted down in real terms. Therefore,
a taxpayer near the top-end of a bracket was likely to creep to the next bracket even if
his income did not change in real terms. The other taxpayers (far from the top-end of
a bracket), however, were not as likely to experience an increase in marginal rates the
following year. This characteristic of `bracket creep' is exploited in this study to estimate
the elasticities of income with respect to marginal rates. The spirit of the empirical
strategy is to compare changes in income of taxpayers near the top-end of a bracket to
changes in income of other taxpayers.
This identi cation strategy has three advantages relative to the tax reform experiments of the eighties. First, I compare groups of taxpayers whose incomes are very close.
Therefore, the estimates are likely to be robust to changes in the underlying distribution
of income and in particular to underlying increases in inequality. Second, the `bracket
creep' phenomenon did not modify the de nitions of reported income and thus incomes
can be easily compared across years. Third, as a theoretical matter, I will show that
the estimates obtained using `bracket creep' are not a mix of income and substitution
e ects but rather pure compensated elasticities of income with respect to marginal tax
rates. Three other important characteristics of the `bracket creep' tax change should be
mentioned. First, because I compare year to year changes, my study will capture only
short term responses to tax changes which might be di erent from medium or long term
responses. Second, changes in tax rates due to `Bracket Creep' were relatively small comThe e ect of bracket creep on the US income tax was so strong that it increased substantially the
average marginal rates and was the main cause of the `tax revolt' of the late 1970s and early 1980s (see
Steuerle (1991), Chapters 2 and 3, for a more detailed discussion). By comparison, the income tax cuts
of 1981-84 were in fact just enough to bring total federal income tax receipts over GNP back to their
1977 level.
1

3

pared to the changes induced by the large tax reforms of the eighties and thus it is harder
to obtain precise estimates. Last, because `bracket creep' was not a legislated change, it
might have been harder for taxpayers to understand the e ect of this change on marginal
tax rates. I come back to these important points in more detail in the concluding Section.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 brie y reviews the empirical literature on
behavioral responses to taxation. Section 3 presents in detail the e ects of `bracket creep'
on the tax schedule. This study requires the precise location of taxpayers on the tax
schedule and also requires following taxpayers over several years. Therefore I use a publicly
available panel dataset of tax returns constructed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
The dataset, summary statistics and raw di erences-in-di erences results are presented.
Section 4 introduces the regression framework and speci cation and Section 5 displays the
regression results. Section 6 presents caveats, discusses policy implications and concludes.

2 Literature
The basic approach of the traditional labor supply literature was to posit a linear budget constraint and regress hours of work on (after-tax) wage rates and non-wage income.
This literature has in general found very small elasticities (both compensated and uncompensated) of labor supply with respect to wages rates (or equivalently to marginal
tax rates) for prime age males. Pencavel (1986) is an extensive survey of these studies.
Estimates for the uncompensated elasticity are usually slightly negative (around -0.1).
The compensated elasticity estimates are in general slightly higher but usually below 0.2.
Hausman (1981) applied a new methodology taking full account of the non-linearity
of the budget set due to the progressive structure of the US income tax and challenged
the prevailing wisdom that taxes had almost no incentive e ect on labor supply. This
non-linear budget set methodology has been used in many papers to estimate labor supply
elasticities (these studies are surveyed in Hausman (1985)). These studies tend to nd
small uncompensated elasticities but high income e ects leading to substantial compensated elasticities (often around 0.5). Non-linear budget set estimates have been shown
to be sensitive to small changes in speci cation (see MaCurdy et al. (1990) and Triest
4

(1990)).
Both the traditional labor supply literature and non-linear budget set studies suggest
consistently that the elasticity is larger for secondary earners (married women): the elasticities found are often between 0.5 and 1 (e.g. Hausman (1985), Mroz (1987), Heckman
(1993)).
The labor supply literature has been criticized along various lines. First, the estimates
are dependent on the functional form chosen for the statistical inference. In other words,
the identi cation of the key parameters comes from strong structural form assumptions.
Note however that, because of these strong structural assumptions, labor supply studies
can in general estimate both income and substitution e ects. Second, hours of work may
not be the only dimension of \e ort": individuals can vary their labor supply in the short
run not only by changing hours but also by changing the intensity of work. In the long
run taxpayers can also change the types of job they choose (see Feldstein (1995) for a
more detailed discussion of this point). What matters for tax policy is the total response
of reported income with respect to tax rates. Therefore, labor supply estimates may be
substantially lower than the relevant total income elasticity.
Looking directly at the income response of taxpayers to tax reforms seems to be a more
promising approach to solve these two problems. First, tax reforms provide an exogenous
time variation in marginal tax rates so that weaker functional forms assumptions can be
used to identify the parameters of interest. Second, it is possible to study directly the
total income response without need to focus only on hours of works. Previous research
connecting the changes in reported income to changes in marginal tax rates include Lindsey (1987), Navratil (1995), Feldstein (1995) and Auten and Carroll (1997). The rst two
studies used the tax cuts of the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) of 1981 and the last
two used the Tax Reform Act (TRA) of 1986 to identify the elasticities. All four studies
used Internal Revenue Service (IRS) datasets of tax returns. The last three studies used
a panel of tax returns whereas Lindsey (1987) had to use a repeated cross section because
the panel was not yet available at the time he made his study.
Lindsey (1987) ranked the individual taxpayers by adjusted gross income before the
ERTA and after the ERTA. His key assumption was that the successive fractiles corre5

sponded to the same individuals in both years. He then related the change in average
income for successive fractiles to predicted changes in their marginal net-of-tax rates (i.e.,
one minus the marginal rate). Lindsey's analysis implied very large elasticities: between
1 and 3, his preferred estimate being equal to 1.6.
Navratil (1995) used instead a panel of tax returns and compared years before the
ERTA and year 1983 after the ERTA. He derived his elasticity estimates by regressing
the log change in income on the predicted log change in net-of-tax rates.2 It is important
to note that this methodology does not lead to real elasticity estimates because this is
a reduced form regression. To get estimates of the elasticity of income with respect to
marginal tax rates, Navratil should have regressed the log change in income on the real
log change in rates using the predicted log change in rates as an instrument (I discuss
this point again in Section 4). Navratil nds overall elasticities of about 0.8 for taxable
income and about 1 for wages and salaries. These estimates are smaller than Lindsey's
but still very high compared to the labor supply literature.
Feldstein (1995) uses a similar methodology with the TRA of 1986 and the same panel
of tax returns.3 Feldstein divided his sample into three income groups: medium, high and
highest. These groups experienced di erent marginal rates cuts. The tax cuts were smaller
for medium income earners than for high income earners. The cuts for highest income
earners were even larger than for high income earners. Feldstein then computes the change
in taxable income between year 1985 and 1988 for each group and derives a di erencesin-di erences elasticity estimate by comparing changes across the di erent groups. As
high income earners experienced a larger increase in revenue than low income earners,
Feldstein obtains high elasticity estimates (ranging from 1 to 3). Some of Feldstein's
results are based on very small samples and therefore the estimates are probably not
precise (see Slemrod (1996) for a discussion of this point). These estimates are again
reduced form estimates. The analysis is also complicated by the fact that the TRA of
2 The predicted log change in net-of-tax rates is equal to log(1 ; t =1 ; t ) where t is the marginal
1
0
0
rate before tax reform and t1 is the post-reform marginal rate at the before tax reform taxable income
level, adjusted for in ation.
3 In fact, Feldstein's study preceded Navratil's study and thus was the rst one to use the panel data
of the IRS to estimate elasticities of taxable income with respect to marginal rates.

6

1986 introduced many changes in tax rules and therefore the de nitions of adjusted gross
income and taxable income were substantially modi ed. The large decrease in upper
marginal rates may also have induced many wealthy taxpayers to shift corporate income
which was taxed as corporate pro ts to S corporations and partnerships which are taxed
as personal income tax (see Feldstein (1995) and Slemrod (1996) for a discussion of this
point).
As pointed out by Navratil (1995) (Chapter 2), Feldstein's results depend critically on
the assumption that the elasticities are the same for the three groups. Navratil computes
elasticity estimates based on a simple pre-post reform comparison for each of the three
groups. The three estimates are very di erent (though not statistically di erent because
of the small size of the sample) but the three of them are substantially smaller than
Feldstein's di erence-in-di erences estimate.
Auten and Carroll (1997) repeated the study of Feldstein but with a much larger panel
dataset of tax returns available only to researchers at the US Treasury. They compute
structural estimates using an instrumental variable method. They are also able to control
for some non-tax factors such as age, state of residence and type of job. They obtain
smaller estimates than Feldstein: their preferred estimate is equal to 0.66. It is however
dicult to compare directly their results with Feldstein's because they present neither
their rst stage estimates nor the reduced form estimates that Feldstein reported.
The most important problem with the studies reviewed above is that the marginal rate
cuts of the two Tax Reforms (ERTA and TRA) increased with income: wealthy taxpayers
experienced larger marginal rates cuts than poorer taxpayers. Therefore, imputing the
faster increase of high incomes compared to low incomes only to the tax reforms leads to
upward biased estimates if increases in inequality are partly due to other factors than tax
cuts. Economists have proposed many other explanations for increased income inequality:
Murphy and Welch (1992) and Katz and Murphy (1992) found that the returns to human
capital or education increased as a result of increased demand for skilled labor. Declining
union membership (Freeman (1993)), increasing import competition (Bound and Johnson (1992)), increasing immigration (Topel (1994)) have also been proposed as potential
explanations of the widening inequalities over the last 25 years in the US.
7

We have seen that the recent tax response studies have a decisive advantage compared
to old structural labor supply studies because the identi cation problem is not solved
arti cially through strong functional form assumptions. However, this advantage has a
cost: the tax reform studies are no longer able to tell apart substitution and income e ects.
These studies present a single elasticity estimate which is neither a pure compensated
elasticity nor a pure uncompensated elasticity but a mix of both elasticities. In general,
the studies using legislated tax reforms do not discuss this issue at all. It is important,
though, to be able to tell apart each elasticity because optimal tax rates levels depend on
the size of both elasticities (see Saez (1998)).
My paper will try to address these issues. After describing in details the tax changes
due to `bracket creep' , I argue in Section 3.1 why my estimates are free from the problems
a ecting the existing literature about the behavioral responses to taxation.

3 `Bracket Creep', Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1 The `Bracket Creep' phenomenon
The analysis presented here uses the same panel of tax returns as Feldstein's and Navratil's
studies but does not use a tax reform to carry out the estimation. The paper focuses
instead on a very di erent kind of tax change. From 1979 to 1981, the tax schedule
was not indexed even though in ation was on the order of 10% per year. Non-indexation
changed the tax schedule because the income tax was highly progressive; this phenomenon
was called `bracket creep'.
Figures 1 and 2 show the e ect of in ation on the tax schedule and on marginal rates.
After tax real income as a function of before tax real income is represented on Figure 1 for
two consecutive years: the straight line represents the year 1 schedule and the dashed line
the year 2 schedule. The kink points (i.e., the points where the marginal rate jumps) shift
to the left because of in ation, but the slopes of the segments linking the kink points do
not change. The marginal rates schedules are represented on Figure 2. If taxable income
remains the same in real terms in year 2, then some taxpayers will face a higher rate: this
8

is the \treatment" group. The other taxpayers will still face the same rate: this is the
\control" group. These di erent groups are displayed on the gures. Formally, if the tax
schedule is given by T in year 1, then in real terms, the tax schedule in year 2 is T^ de ned
by:

T^(x) = T [x(1 + )]=(1 + )
where  is the in ation rate, and x is real income. Therefore,

T^ (x) = T [x(1 + )]
0

0

The tax changes induced by `Bracket creep' have several advantages compared to the
studies of Lindsey, Navratil and Feldstein reviewed above. First, there were almost no
changes in the income tax code during the three years I focus on, therefore the only change
is due to in ation. Comparisons across years are thus straightforward compared to the
tax reforms studies.
Second, and more importantly, kinks are regularly spaced along the whole income
distribution. Therefore, control and treatment groups can be constructed over a large
portion of the income distribution. Also noteworthy is the fact that controls and treatments alternate and thus for a given kink the treatment group and the two surrounding
control groups are very similar in terms of income and very likely to share the same economic characteristics. Therefore the di erence in changes in income between these groups
can be con dently attributed to marginal rates e ects. The estimates are thus likely to
be robust to changes in the distribution of income and especially to changes in inequality.
Last, I will show in Section 4 that the elasticity estimates obtained using `bracket
creep' are in fact compensated elasticities of income with respect to marginal tax rates.
Therefore, the usual deadweight burden approximations (which involve only the compensated elasticity) measuring the welfare costs of taxation could be easily computed. More
generally, it is important for optimal income tax purposes to know the size of both compensated elasticity and income e ects.4 The analysis of `bracket creep' provides estimates
Saez (1998) shows that optimal income tax formulas can be expressed in terms of these two parameters
and the shape of the income distribution.
4

9

of the rst of these two key parameters.
However, the changes in marginal rates are not very large because there were many
kink points at that time and the jumps in marginal rates were in general of 4-7% (see
below). This is small compared to a decrease from 50% to 28% in marginal rates for the
very high income earners following the TRA of 1986. However, Steuerle (1991) provides
evidence that the `bracket creep' of late 1970s and early 1980s was perceived as a major
tax event. `Bracket creep' triggered the strongest increase in marginal tax rates since
World War II in just a few years. Federal income tax receipts over GNP increased very
quickly from 1978 to 1981. According to Steuerle, this was the main cause of the `tax
revolt' and the tax cuts which took place in the 1980s. As 1980 was not the rst experience
of `bracket creep' in the US (in ation was also high in the 1973-1975 period), it is very
likely that `bracket creep' was noticed and understood by most taxpayers.

3.2 Data
The IRS panel of tax returns which I use in this study covers the period 1979 to 1990.
However, only the rst three years are used for this project. This panel, known as the
Continuous Work History File, contains most items on Form 1040, as well as numerous
other items from the other forms and schedules. The IRS panel is constructed from
all tax returns led in a given year by selecting certain 4-digit endings of the social
security number of the primary taxpayer listed on the form. Five such 4-digit endings
were selected in 1979-1981, the three years used in this study. For each of these years, the
panel contains about 46,000 observations. Due to budgetary limitations, only one 4-digit
ending was chosen in 1982 and 1984 and two 4-digit endings were chosen in the other
years. Thus Feldstein's and Navratil's studies were based on relatively small samples.
After several deletions, Navratil used about 2,000 observations and Feldstein about 3,500.
Attrition in the panel can occur due to late ling or no ling (which can happen for
example if the taxpayer does not owe any taxes and does not expect a refund from the
IRS). Attrition may also result from a change in marital status if the name of the primary
taxpayer listed on the return changes (see Christian and Frischmann (1989) for a more
complete discussion of attrition in this panel).
10

In the US, there are di erent tax rate schedules for taxpayers ling as Singles, Married5
or Heads of household). As singles and married constitute about 90% of all tax returns,
I will consider only single and married taxpayers. I compare year 1980 to year 1979 and
year 1981 to year 1980. These two di erences are stacked to obtain a dataset of about
80,000 observations. I then exclude taxpayers whose marital status changes from year
1 to year 2. It is unlikely that `bracket creep' a ected speci cally marriage strategies
and therefore discarding those observations should not bias the results. I also exclude
taxpayers who do not use the regular tax schedule in year 1.6
Real growth of GDP was small in 1980 and 1981: -0.5% in 1980 and 1.8% in 1981.
The GDP de ator was 10.5% in 1980 and 9.5% in 1981. These gures are very close to
the nominal growth of adjusted gross income for each year. The results I present are not
sensitive to small changes in these parameters, which I call the \in ation parameters".
Most items reported on tax returns can be considered to grow roughly at the in ation rate.
This is the case for adjusted gross income (AGI), wages and salaries, itemized deductions.
Therefore I can express these items for year 2 in year 1 dollars just by dividing them by
the in ation rate.
Taxable income is the key item to divide the sample into control and treatment groups.
Taxable income is computed in two di erent ways depending on whether the taxpayer
itemizes deductions or chooses the standard deduction. A taxpayer itemizes when the
total of his itemized deductions is larger than the standard deduction. The standard
deduction is xed in nominal terms: 3,400 dollars for married taxpayers and 2,300 dollars
for singles. If the taxpayer does not itemize, taxable income is simply equal to AGI minus
Married taxpayers can choose to ll either jointly or separately. The overwhelming majority of
married taxpayers (more than 98%) chooses to ll jointly. Therefore, married taxpayers ling separately
will be not be considered in my study.
6 Most of these excluded taxpayers used the average income tax schedule which allowed taxpayers to
replace their taxable income by an average of the last few years taxable income. This reduced the tax
liability of taxpayers who had experienced a sharp rise in income. I also exclude taxpayers using the
Maximum Tax Rate on Personal Service Income. The aim of the Maximum Tax Rate was to constrain
the top rate on earned income to 50% (instead of 70%).
5

11

personal exemptions.7 If the taxpayer itemizes, taxable income is equal to AGI minus
personal exemptions minus itemized deductions plus the standard deduction.8
I write taxinc for nominal taxable income in year i. taxinc is simply taxable income
reported on the tax form in year i. To assign a taxpayer to a treatment or control group, I
compute predicted taxable income (taxinc ) which is taxinc1 expressed in year 2 dollars. If
the marginal rate corresponding to taxinc is above the one corresponding to taxinc1 ,9 the
observation is assigned to the treatment group of the corresponding kink. If the marginal
rates for taxinc1 and taxinc are the same, the taxpayer is assigned to the control group.
In order to compute the real change in taxable income, I also express taxinc2 in terms of
year 1 dollars (this is denoted by taxinc2 ). The details of the computations of taxinc
and taxinc2 are given in appendix. From now on, I denote by T = T (taxinc ) the
e ective marginal rate in year i and T = T (taxinc ) the predicted marginal rate in year
2 if real income does not change.
i

i

p

p

p

R

p

0

R

i

0

0

i

0

p

p

3.3 Descriptive Statistics
Figures 3 and 4 display the actual marginal rate schedules of year 1979 and the real e ect
of `bracket creep' on tax rates for married and single taxpayers respectively. These gures
are the empirical counterpart of Figure 2; the nominal location of kink points are reported
(in thousands of 1979 dollars) on the horizontal axis, the marginal tax rates are reported
on the vertical axis. The solid line represents the nominal schedule for year 1 while the
dashed line represents the real schedule in year 2 (assuming a 10% in ation rate). Tables
I and II show the summary statistics for each control and treatment group, for married
and single lers. The groups are ordered by increasing taxable income in year 1. For each
kink, the nominal level of taxable income at which the kink takes place and the jumps
in marginal rates are presented in columns (2) and (3). Therefore, these Tables describe
fully the tax schedule of years 1979 to 1981 for married taxpayers and single taxpayers.
Exemptions were xed in nominal terms: 1,000 dollars for each person in the household.
The de nition of taxable income changed after the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The standard deduction
is no longer included in taxable income and the zero tax bracket has disappeared.
9 That is, by reporting the same real taxable income, the taxpayer would creep to the next bracket.
7
8

12

There were 15 kinks for married taxpayers and 16 kinks for singles.10 I have constructed
two control groups with incomes below the rst treatment group (Control N and Control
0) in order to emphasize the mean reversion phenomenon for very low incomes. I have
discarded the observations below Control N because taxpayers who report very low (or
even negative) taxable income are often middle-high income earners which have faced a
transitory sharp decline in taxable income. Slemrod (1992) discusses this point in detail.
I indicate the number of observations for each group in column (4). The number of
observations decreases quickly for the highest kink points because the panel does not
overweight wealthy taxpayers.
Next, in column (5), the log ratios of predicted net-of-tax rates (log[(1 ; T )=(1 ; T1)])
are reported. The values are equal to zero for the controls because by de nition, the
marginal rate they face remains the same in year 2 if their real taxable income does not
change. For treatments the values are negative: e.g. for the treatment corresponding to
the kink 37/43 the value reported is log[(1 ; 0:43)=(1 ; 0:37)]. This is the log change in
net-of-taxes rates that a taxpayer in the corresponding treatment group would face if his
real taxable income did not change from year 1 to year 2. Column (5) (or equivalently
Figures 3 and 4) summarizes the e ects of `bracket creep' on tax rates. Except for the
rst jump in marginal rate (from 0 to 14%) the jumps in marginal rates are small at
low income levels but become progressively larger as income increases. As displayed on
Figures 3 and 4, treatment and control bands are roughly of the same size.
In column (6), I report the mean log di erence of e ective net-of-tax rates, log(1 ;
T2 =1 ; T1 ) for each group. Because individual real incomes change from year to year,
gures in column (5) and (6) di er. The corresponding values are plotted on gure 5 for
married taxpayers and Figures 6 and 7 for singles. The curve corresponding to column (5)
is plotted in straight line while the curve corresponding to column (6) is plotted in dashed
line. The curve of real changes in marginal rates goes up and down exactly in the same
way as the curve of predicted changes in marginal rates.11 Therefore, predicted change in
0

0

p

0

0

I have not reported statistics for the last jump in marginal rates from 68% to 70% because the size
of this jump is small and there are very few observations around that last kink point. The last control
group is composed of taxpayers below the treatment group for the kink 68/70.
11 The only exception is for the kink 18/19 for singles (see Figures 6 or 7) which is by far the smallest
10

13

marginal rates is highly correlated with the real change in rates and therefore predicted
change is a good instrument for real change. However, because the spikes of real changes
are atter than the spikes of predicted changes, reduced form estimates similar to the
ones previous studies report (see Section 2) would be signi cantly lower than structural
estimates. I come back this point again later on.
In columns (7), (8) and (9), I report the means of log changes of real taxable income
(log(taxinc2 =taxinc1 )), real adjusted gross income (log(AGI2 =AGI1)) and real wages
(log(wages2 =wages1). There is mean reversion at both ends of the income distribution.
The change in incomes are high and positive for low incomes-this change is quickly decreasing as income increases-whereas the change in incomes becomes in general highly
negative for high income earners. This complicates the estimation of the elasticities at
very low and very high incomes.
R

R

R

If marginal rates matter for taxpayers, we should nd that treatment groups experience
larger decreases in incomes than the surrounding control groups. To check whether this
pattern is apparent in the data, I have also plotted the log changes of taxable income and
AGI on Figure 5 for married taxpayers and Figures 6 and 7 for singles.12
Figure 5 gives striking evidence of responsiveness of married taxpayers to tax rates.
From the Treatment5 group (kink 21/24) to Control10 group (kink 43/49), the log change
in taxable income presents exactly the same shape as the predicted changes in marginal
rates: the value for the treatment group is always smaller than for the two surrounding
control values. The same is true for log changes in adjusted gross income though the
di erences between treatments and controls are somewhat smaller. This is not the case
for lower incomes because jumps in marginal rates were very small (less than 3%) except
at the rst kink (large jump of 14%). However, around this rst kink, the mean reversion
phenomenon is very important (this is not represented on Figure 5 but can be easily seen
on Table I). Higher kink points do not reveal the same evidence but this may well be due
jump in the tax schedule. The predicted change does not follow as closely the real change for higher kink
points (these kinks are not represented on the gures) because of the noise due to the small number of
observations for high income earners.
12 The log change in wages is also plotted on Figure 7.

14

to the small number of observations in that range13 and to mean reversion. The pattern of
wage earnings14 is not similar to the pattern of taxable income or adjusted gross income:
even at the middle income kinks, there is no clear evidence that wages of treatments tend
to be systematically smaller than wages of surrounding controls. This already suggests
that the response of taxpayers is probably not the consequence of reduced labor supply.
The pattern for singles on Figure 6 is less clear, even for middle income earners. Until
Treatment8 group, the kinks were small (except the rst one, the jumps were of less than
3%) and thus no systematic response is observed. From Treatment8 to Control12, there
is some evidence of taxpayer behavior for adjusted gross income and taxable income.
Above Control12, the number of observations becomes very small and no clear pattern
would be observed. As for married taxpayers, wages for singles reveal no clear evidence
of behavioral responses.
However, the rst kink point for singles deserves particular attention. Figure 7 focuses
more particularly on low income singles. There is a clear break in the pattern of AGI and
wages around the rst kink point consistent with a behavioral response to marginal rates:
although the general pattern of the curves is declining (due to mean reversion), wages and
AGI go up from Treatment1 to Control1.15 There is no such pattern for taxable income
because mean reversion in taxable income at the bottom is even larger than for AGI or
wages.16 Therefore, Figure 7 suggests that low income singles reacted to marginal rates
by reducing labor supply.
These gures suggest that taxpayers are responsive to changes in tax rates and that
married taxpayers are more responsive to tax rates than singles. However, except for low
income singles, wages do no seem to be responsive to changes in tax rates. I will now try
13

I.

I have not plotted the curves for the highest kink points but this can be gured out looking at Table

The curve for wages is not plotted to avoid packing too many plots on the gure.
Wages and AGI curves are very close for low income singles because most of them report only wage
income.
16 This is explained by the deduction of exemptions and net itemized deductions from AGI to compute
taxable income: this overstates mechanically positive log changes in taxable income compared to AGI for
very low income earners.
14

15

15

to put numbers on these rst qualitative results.

3.4 Wald Estimates
From the Tables described above, it is easy to compute Wald estimates of the elasticity for
each kink. Wald estimates relate the di erence in changes in income between treatments
and controls to the di erence in changes in real marginal rates between treatments and
controls. This gives simple estimates of the elasticity of income with respect to marginal
rates. Treatments are observations in a given treatment group and controls are observations belonging to the two surrounding control groups. The Wald estimate can be written
as:

E^ [log(z2 =z1)jTr] ; E^ [log(z2 =z1)jC ]
^ = ^
E [log(1 ; T2=1 ; T1)jTr] ; E^ [log(1 ; T2=1 ; T1)jC ]
where E^ means empirical mean, Tr is for treatment and C for control. z1 is income in year
1 and z2 is income in year 2 in terms of year 1 dollars. This estimate is equivalent to an IV
regression of log(z2 =z1) on log[(1 ; T2)=(1 ; T1)] (and a constant) using a binary instrument
(1 if in treatment and 0 if in control). This method leads to consistent estimates if the
di erence in changes in income between treatments and controls is entirely due to the
fact that treatments are more likely to experience an increase in rates than controls.
This assumption is likely to be satis ed because incomes of treatments and surrounding
controls are very close and therefore treatments and controls are similar except for their
treatment/control status.17 The IRS panel does not contain covariates (such as age or
educational attainment) which could have been used to test formally whether Treatments
and surrounding Controls are similar. Though not attempted in this paper, it would be
possible to use another dataset with many covariates (such as the CPS or the PSID) and
de ne the income groups corresponding (roughly) to Treatment and Control groups so as
to test formally whether they are the same.
Reduced form estimates can also be derived by simply running an OLS regression
0

0

0

0

0

0

This assumption is much more likely to be satis ed for middle income earners where mean reversion
is not an issue. That is why I give Wald estimates only for middle income kinks.
17

16

of log(z2 =z1) on log(1 ; T =1 ; T1) (and a constant). This corresponds exactly to the
methodology used by Navratil (1995).
I have reported Wald and Reduced form estimates for middle income kinks for taxable
income, Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) and wages for married taxpayers and singles on
Table III. Each Wald estimate was computed using observations of the corresponding
treatment and both surrounding controls.
Columns (1) and (2) display the location of kink points (in current dollars) and the
corresponding jumps in marginal rates. Column (3) presents the di erence in the change
in taxable income between the treatment group and the two surrounding control groups.
This di erence can be derived directly from Tables I and II using column (6) (which gives
the average change in taxable income for each treatment and control group) and column
(7) (which gives the sample weights for each treatment and control group).18 Column (4)
gives the values of the instrument log[(1 ; T )=(1 ; T1 )] for each Treatment group.
Column (5) presents the di erence of the log change in marginal rates (log[1 ; T2=1 ;
T1 ]) between the treatment group and the two surrounding control groups.19 Column
(6) presents the reduced form estimates: this is just column (3) divided by column (4).
Column (7) presents the Wald estimates (this is column (3) divided by column (5)). Wald
estimates for adjusted gross income and wages have been computed in the same way (the
di erent steps are not reported) and are presented in columns (8) and (9). All standard
errors have been computed by running the corresponding OLS (for the reduced form
estimates) and IV (for the Wald estimates) regressions.
I have tried alternative estimates. Removing taxpayers at the frontier between control
and treatment bands did not change much the estimates. Keeping only the controls
close to the treatments (i.e. discarding the controls which are the further away from the
treatments) did not modi ed much my results either.
Looking at Table III, we can note that the elasticities are in general positive; this means
that treatments tend to experience larger decreases in income than controls and thus that
18 For example, the rst number 0.0006 in Column (3) of Table III is obtained as [(;0:0691  2241) ;
(;0:0665  2991 ; 0:0727  3264)]=[2241 + 2991 + 3264].
0

0

p

0

0

p

0

0

19

III.

This di erence can be derived from Tables I and II exactly in the same way as Column (3) of Table

17

taxpayers are responsive to marginal rates. The estimates con rm the patterns of Figures
5 and 6: the estimates are signi cant and large for married middle income earners for
taxable income and AGI. The estimates are in general larger for taxable income than
for AGI. The estimates for wages are usually much more smaller, often very near 0. As
pointed out before, the estimates for singles are lower and not signi cant. The reduced
form estimates are equal to about one-half of the structural estimates.
Therefore, simple Wald estimates con rm our rst qualitative results. The response
is higher for married taxpayers than for singles. The response of taxable income is higher
than AGI and especially than wages. The response of wages is almost never signi cantly
di erent from 0. However, the results are not estimated with great precision and there
is large variability across kink points. The aim of next sections is to compute estimates
based on larger portions of the income distribution in order to obtain more precise results.

4 Model and Identi cation Strategy
This section uses a regression framework to aggregate estimates over several kink points.
A simple model will illustrate the issues at hand and show that the estimated elasticities
are in fact pure compensated elasticities. The budget constraint of a taxpayer on a linear
part of the tax schedule is given by c = z(1 ;  ) + R, where z represents before tax
income,  is the marginal rate and R is virtual income. The virtual income R is the
post-tax income that the taxpayer would get if he reported no income and was allowed to
stay on the same budget set line (with constant marginal rate  ). From individual utility
maximization, we can derive a income supply function which depends on the slope of the
budget line and on virtual income.

z = z(1 ; ; R)
From this income supply function, the uncompensated elasticity of income (denoted by
 ) and income e ects (denoted by ) can be de ned as follows:
u

 = 1 ;z  @ (1@z;  )
u

18

and,

@z
 = @R

Let z = z (1 ; ; u) be the compensated income supply.20 The compensated elasticity of
income ( ) is de ned by:
c

c

c

 = 1 z;  @ (1@z;  )
The two elasticities and income e ects are related by the Slutsky equation:
c

c

c

 =  ; (1 ;  )
c

u

(1)

`Bracket creep' can be seen as a change in both virtual income R and marginal rate  .
Small changes in R and  a ect income supply z as follows,

@z dR
dz = ; @ (1@z;  ) d + @R

Using the de nition of elasticities, we get:

dz = ; z 1 d
;  +  dR
Using the Slutsky equation (1) and rearranging,
u

dz = ; d +  dR ; zd
z
1;
z
To introduce randomness in the model, I suppose that the income supply function
z also shifts randomly (i.e. dz=z = ) from year to year for reasons unrelated with
the tax change. The random variable  can be considered as taste shocks (resulting for
example from a change in the composition of the household) or random changes in work
opportunities (such as unexpected unemployment or job change). Therefore, the equation
giving the total change in income from year 1 to year 2 (dz=z) can nally be written as:
c

z (1 ; ; u) is the income supply which minimizes costs to attain utility level u for a given tax rate  .

20 c

19

dz = ; d +  dR ; zd + 
(2)
z
1;
z
Let us rst neglect the income e ect term (i.e., assume that  = 0). In that case,
by the Slutsky equation (1), compensated and uncompensated elasticities are the same
(I note  =  =  ). Assuming that changes from year to year are small, we have,
dz=z ' log(z2 =z1 ) and ;d=(1 ;  ) ' log[(1 ; T2)=(1 ; T1)] (with the same notation
as in the previous section). The corresponding regression framework would then be the
following:
c

c

u

0

0

log(z2 =z1) =  log[(1 ; T2)=(1 ; T1 )] + 
0

0

Now clearly, log[(1 ; T2)=(1 ; T1 )] is correlated with the error term because if  is
large, income goes up and thus, because marginal tax rates are increasing with income,
1;T2 decreases. Therefore an OLS regression leads to estimates badly biased downward.21
However, it is possible, using the variation in tax rates due to `bracket creep', to construct
instrumental variables. Consider the following dummy variable,
0

0

0

instr = 1(taxinc1 2 Treatment for Kink i; mars = s)
is

These are binary instruments equal to 1 exactly for taxpayers whose taxable income in
year 1 (denoted by taxinc1 ) is in the treatment for Kink i and whose marital status is s.
The marital status mars can take two values: 0 for singles and 1 for married taxpayers.
The instruments instr depend only on the level of income in year 1. Therefore, in
this simple model, the instruments depend only on z1 and are uncorrelated with  if  is
independent of z1 . In this case we would just have to run the following regression:
is

log(z2 =z1) =  log[(1 ; T2)=(1 ; T1 )] + 
0

0

(3)

using instr as instruments for the real variation in marginal rates. The elasticity parameter  would be estimated consistently. Note that this set-up leads exactly to the
is

21

-3).

In fact, running OLS regressions always leads to elasticity estimates well below zero (in general below

20

simple Wald estimates presented above where we restricted ourselves to small portions of
the distribution of income so that only one instrument was used for each regression.
However, if we consider large portions of the income distribution, it is more realistic to
assume that the size of the random change in incomes (i.e ) varies as we move along the
distribution of income. We have seen in the previous section that there is mean reversion
and therefore that if z1 is low in year 1 then z2 is very likely to be above z1 . In this
case, the distribution of the random shock in income  is likely to be skewed toward the
right. This works in the other direction for high income earners in year 1. On the other
hand, if there is an underlying increase in inequalities (i.e., the rich get richer and the
poor get poorer), a component of  will be positively related to income in year 1 because
high income earners will tend to do even better whereas low income earners will tend to
do worse.
So if  depends on z1 = taxinc1 , the instrument (which is also a function of z1) is
likely to be correlated with the error term . However by controlling for any smooth
function of taxinc1 in the regression set-up in both stages, it is possible to get rid of the
correlation between  and the instruments. The parameter of interest remains identi ed
as long as the dependence of  with respect to taxinc1 does not reproduce the shape
of the instruments. This dependence is due to mean reversion, macro-economic shocks
and underlying trends in the income distribution and therefore is probably very smooth
compared to the dummy shape of the instruments. Therefore, the system is very likely
to be well identi ed.22 Note that previous tax reform studies (which were reviewed in
Section 2) cannot control for income because the marginal cuts were increasing in income
(thus their instrument is monotone in income) and therefore controlling for income would
destroy the identi cation.
Let us now analyze the case with income e ects in equation (2). dR ; z d is the
This strategy is conceptually close the Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD), used in Angrist and
Lavy (1999) and Van der Klauw (1996). The idea in both papers is to use the fact that the treatment
(class size for Angrist and Lavy, nancial help decision for Van der Klauw) is assigned on the basis of a
discontinuous function of a continuous variable. The strategy is to use the rule as a source of identi cation,
controlling in the regression for smooth functions of the variables on which the selection is based.
22

21

change in after-tax income due to the tax change for a given before tax income z: this is
the vertical distance between the tax schedule for year 1 and the tax schedule for year 2 on
Figure 1. This quantity is continuously increasing in income23 and thus a ects treatments
and controls in roughly the same way. Therefore, this additional income e ect term can be
incorporated in the error term. The dependence of this term on income will be controlled
for by the functions in taxinc1 included as controls in the regression. Therefore, even
with income e ects, the parameter  that I estimate is in fact the compensated elasticity
 . Intuitively, at a given kink point, the increase in tax liability due to `bracket creep'
is roughly the same for treatments and controls but the change is tax rates is di erent
for the two groups. Therefore, the di erence in behavioral responses between the two
groups is due to pure substitution e ects. Thus, the `bracket creep' experience allows the
estimation of a conceptually well de ned parameter. This point is important because the
tax reform studies reviewed in Section 2 were only able to identify elasticity estimates
which were a mix of substitution and income e ects.
Let me now describe precisely the regression framework and the covariates I will use.
To allow more generality, I run regressions in levels: log(z2) is the dependent variable
instead of log(z2 =z1) and I include log(z1) in the list of controls on the right hand side.
When I run a regression for both married taxpayers and singles, I add a dummy mars for
marital status (mars is equal to one if married and zero if single). I also add a dummy
item for being an itemizer in year 1. Being an itemizer in year 1 is predetermined and
therefore item can be considered as an independent variable.24 Therefore the speci cation
is as follows:
c

log(z2 ) = 0 + 1 log(z1 )+ 2mars+ 3 item+ log[(1;T2 )=(1;T1 )]+ f (taxinc1 )+ (4)
c

0

0

This quantity is not increasing smoothly because, as displayed on Figure 1, it is constant over Control
regions and linearly increasing over Treatment regions. However, the important point here is that the
quantity does not jump discontinuously.
24 I add the dummy item because I show below that the elasticities of taxpayers itemizing in year 1 are
signi cantly higher than the elasticities of non-itemizers.
23

22

The rst stage being:
log[(1 ; T2 )=(1 ; T1 )] =
0

0

X
i;s

is

instr + 0 + 1 log(z1 )+ 2 mars + 3 item + f (taxinc1 )+ 
(5)
is

where:
 z is real income in year i (this can be taxable income, wages or AGI),
 T is the marginal rate in year i (i.e. T'(nominal taxable income)),
  is the parameter of interest: compensated elasticity of income with respect to marginal
rates.
The controls f (taxinc1 ) are smooth functions of taxinc1 (polynomials in taxinc1 ). Polynomials are added until the elasticity estimate is stabilized (3 or 4 polynomials are enough
is most cases).
An alternative would be de ne a single instrument: log(1 ; T =1 ; T1 ) for all the
regressions (Auten and Carroll (1997) used this type of instrument in their study). This
single instrument would impose a relation between the size of the jump in marginal rates
and the value of the instrument. Results with a single instrument are very similar to the
results I present. Increasing the number of instruments, however, increases the power of
the rst stage and therefore reduces a little bit the standard errors, that is why I choose
the multi-instrument set-up. I do not use exactly one instrument for each kink because
some low kinks are very small and I have few observations for the highest kinks. Therefore
I have grouped some kinks together to avoid using too weak instruments. The precise
grouping is described in appendix.
i

0

i

c

0

0

p

5 Regression results
The rst stage always leads to very signi cant coecients for all the binary instruments.
The F-statistic for the joint test of all the coecients of the instruments being null is
always higher than 50. This con rms that the instruments are good in the sense that
they are signi cantly correlated with the endogenous regressor.
I estimated equation (5) for three types of incomes: wages, adjusted gross income
23

(AGI) and taxable income and di erent portions of the income distribution.25 I divided
my sample according to marital status - Single taxpayers and Married taxpayers ling
jointly - and into year 1 itemizers and year 1 non-itemizers and estimated elasticities for
those di erent groups. I did not split the sample of singles into itemizers versus non
intemizers because very few singles choose to itemize and thus estimates would have been
fairly imprecise for that sub-group. The elasticity results are presented in Tables IV and
V.26 Table IV presents estimates for a wide range of incomes (columns (1) to (3)) and
for middle income earners (columns (4) to (6)). Table V focuses on high income earners
(columns (1) to (3)) and on low income earners around the rst kink point (columns (4)
and (5)).
Column (1) of Table IV suggests that elasticities of taxable income are smaller than
those found in previous studies using tax reforms: around 0.3 for married taxpayers
and singles together, around 0.4 for married taxpayers and around 0.2 for singles. The
elasticities of adjusted gross income are slightly lower: around 0.2 (see column (2)). The
elasticities of wages are even smaller (around 0.1). The elasticities are in general higher for
married taxpayers than for singles. Note however that the elasticities are not estimated
with very high precision and therefore most of the estimates are not signi cantly di erent
from 0. The estimated elasticities suggest that the labor supply response to marginal
rates is small. This is consistent with the estimates of traditional labor supply literature.
The most striking fact in Table IV is that the elasticity for non-itemizers is always
much smaller (and often slightly negative) than the elasticity of itemizers. Elasticity for
married itemizers are high and signi cant: 0.65 for taxable income and 0.4 for adjusted
gross income. The di erence between the elasticity estimates of itemizers and those of
non-itemizers persists for adjusted gross income and wages, though it is in general smaller
than the di erence for taxable income. This means that itemizers react more than nonitemizers not only through an increase in their itemized deductions but also through a
larger reduction in reported income. This suggests that the population of itemizers is
All income levels are expressed in 1979 dollars; a dollar of 1979 corresponds to 2.3 dollars of 1997.
In both Tables, the list of polynomial controls in taxinc1 is reported in the note. log(z1 ) is always
included as a covariate in the regressions.
25
26

24

di erent from the population of non-itemizers. The possibility of itemizing plays the role
of a screening device where elastic taxpayers choose to itemize and non-elastic taxpayers
choose the standard deduction.
Columns (4), (5) and (6) of Table IV report the same kind of estimates but restricted
to middle income earners. The general pattern is the same as in columns (1) to (3).
However, the elasticities for this group are, in general, signi cantly higher than for the
wider range of income: 0.4 for taxable income, 0.3 for adjusted gross income for married
taxpayers and singles together, 0.7 for taxable income of married itemizers. Note that
this high value is close to the results of Navratil (1995) and Auten and Carroll (1997).
The wage elasticity of married taxpayers, which is around 0.3, is also somewhat higher
than before.
Table V focuses more speci cally on high income earners (columns (1), (2) and (3)) and
on low income earners around the rst kink point (columns (4) and (5)). The elasticities
of high income earners are smaller than those of middle income earners: around 0.3 for
taxable income, around 0 for adjusted gross income and negative (though never signi cant)
for wages. The elasticities, however, are not estimated with very high precision. This
seems to indicate that high income earners did not react as much as middle income
earners to `bracket creep'. The discrepancy between the results for adjusted gross income
and taxable income probably means that most of the response of high income earners was
through increased itemized deductions and not through a reduction in real earnings.
Columns (4) and (5) in Table V report estimates around the rst kink point. The
estimates con rm our previous qualitative results in Section 3. The elasticity of adjusted
gross income and wages is large and signi cant for singles: 1.1 for adjusted gross income
and 1.3 for wages. These are the largest elasticities found in this study. This suggests that
the elasticity of labor supply is potentially high for singles with low incomes. Low income
earners have few possibilities of altering their tax liabilities through a change in reporting
behavior and therefore the decrease in reported wages is likely to be the consequence of
reduced labor supply. Note however that elasticities of low income earners can be high
even if the response to taxation is small in absolute levels. This is due to the fact that
the elasticity measures the response relative to the size of income (which is small for low
25

income earners).
The elasticity is about 0 (even slightly negative) for married taxpayers. Wald estimates
would not have shown accurate results because mean reversion is important in the low
end of the income distribution and therefore it is important to control for income.27 The
mode of the income distribution is slightly on the left of the rst kink point for singles
and many singles have their permanent income around this point and are likely to react to
taxes at this level. Note also that tax liabilities begin at the rst kink point and therefore
taxpayers may perceive more accurately this jump in marginal rates than those of other
kink points. This may partly explain the high response of singles around this point. Mean
reversion is stronger for married taxpayers because many low income married taxpayers
are only transitorily around that point and are less likely to react to `bracket creep' than
singles.
The estimates shown in Tables IV and V broadly con rm the results of Section 3
where we noticed that married middle income earners are the most responsive but that
the response of low income singles was also signi cant. Except for this last group, the
response of wages is small, therefore income response to marginal rates may be due to
changes in reporting behavior rather than reduced labor supply. Most of the response
comes from the population of itemizers who is more elastic and can partly decrease its
tax liability through increased itemized deductions.

6 Conclusion
This paper has made an attempt at identifying the impact of marginal rates on various
types of reported income using `bracket creep' as a source of variation in tax rates. The
particular nature of this tax change allowed me to divide the sample between treatments
and controls over the whole range of income distribution. Therefore, the estimates presented are not biased by possible underlying trends in income distribution such as mean
Plugging too many covariates is not possible either, because there is only one instrument in these
regressions and too many covariates would destroy the identi cation. I have therefore included only two
covariates: log(z1 ) and taxinc1 .
27

26

reversion or a rise in income inequality. Most results point to the general conclusion that
there is a response of taxpayers to tax rates: incomes of taxpayers in the treatment groups
tend to decrease more than incomes of taxpayers in the control groups. Moreover, the
estimates are somewhat higher than traditional labor supply estimates but smaller than
those found in previous studies using tax reforms. The estimates are in general higher
for married taxpayers than for singles and higher for itemizers than for non-itemizers.
Moreover, the estimates are in general higher for taxable income than for adjusted gross
income and higher for adjusted gross income than for wages. This suggests that most of
the response is due to changes in reporting behavior rather than reduced labor supply.
Except for singles at the bottom of the income distribution,28 wage elasticity estimates
found in this study are very small and comparable to the estimates found in most labor
supply studies. Part of the higher elasticities of married taxpayers compared to singles
may be due to the higher responsiveness of secondary earners to tax rates, which is well
documented in the literature. Indeed, wage elasticity estimates for married taxpayers are
almost always higher than the estimates for singles.
Three caveats should be mentioned. First, my study captures only short term e ects of
marginal rates because it compares outcomes only across consecutive years. If responses
to marginal rates are slow, my estimates may be smaller than medium or long term
elasticities. However, several studies about behavioral responses to taxation suggest that
short term responses are likely to be higher than long-term responses. Slemrod (1995)
argues that the timing of economic transactions is the most responsive to tax incentives
(the response of real economic activities seems to be much lower). Goolsbee (1997), using
a panel data on corporate executive compensation, showed that the income tax increase
of 1993 led to large short term inter-temporal income shifting but that the long term
response was small. In the `bracket creep' experience, as in ation was expected, there
may also be an inter-temporal substitution e ect. People know that taxes will be higher
in the following year and therefore try to increase their income now at the expense of next
year's income. Moreover, after Reagan's election in 1980 people knew that taxes would be
In any case, this result must be considered with caution because it is based on behavior around a
single kink point.
28

27

cut by 1982. This gave another incentive to shift income away from years 1980 and 1981.
However, this expected reduction in taxes probably a ected treatments and controls in
the same way and therefore my estimates are not a ected by this expectation component.
Second, as `bracket creep' was not a tax reform, taxpayers may not have been fully
aware of the marginal tax increases and thus did not respond to the change. This seems
unlikely because `bracket creep' was perceived as a major income tax event which triggered
what has been called the `tax revolt' of the late 1970s and early 1980s. If we assume that
only a part of all taxpayers were aware of the e ects of `bracket creep', then the responses
I measure are due only to these `aware' taxpayers. The elasticity estimates for these
taxpayers would therefore be equal to my estimates divided by the proportion of `aware'
taxpayers. However, to get elasticity estimates as high as those found in previous tax
reform studies, the proportion of `aware' taxpayers should have been unrealistically low.
Last, my study measured the response of relatively small changes in tax rates and
found smaller elasticity estimates than previous studies. It may be the case that the
response for larger tax rates cuts (such as ERTA or TRA) cannot be directly predicted
from the results presented here. In other words, responses of taxpayers may be non-linear:
a small change can lead to almost no e ect while a big change can have a dramatic impact
on reported income.29
Despite these caveats, the present study using `bracket creep' has important advantages over studies exploiting tax reforms and has taught us interesting facts about the
behavioral responses to marginal tax rates. In future work, I plan to develop the model
presented in Section 4 in order to derive a general method to estimate both income and
substitution e ects using panel data on tax returns and several tax reforms at the same
time. The method would be less dependent on structural form assumptions than most
labor supply studies because the identi cation would come directly from tax reforms. The
methodology would however impose more structure than previous tax reform studies to
This is probably what happened after the TRA of 1986 for very rich taxpayers who have the possibility
to change the way and the timing in which they report income. See Feenberg and Poterba (1993) and
Slemrod (1996). This non-linear behavior is probably much less relevant for low and middle income
earners.
29

28

allow the estimation of both income and substitution e ects.

29

Appendix

Computations of De ated Taxable Income and Predicted Taxable income:
I denote by exempt the level of exemptions, by stdded the level of the standard deduction and by itemz the nominal level of itemized deductions in year 2. From taxable
income in year 1 (taxinc1 ), I compute predicted taxable income (taxinc ) which is taxinc1
expressed in year 2 dollars. I assume that nominal ajusted gross income and nominal
itemized deductions grow at the in ation rate denoted by . Nominal exemptions and
standard deductions stay constant, therefore for non-itemizers, we have,30
p

taxinc = AGI ; exempt = (1 + )AGI1 ; exempt = (1 + )taxinc1 +  exempt
p

p

For itemizers, we have,

taxinc = (1+)AGI1;exempt;(1+)item+stdded = (1+)taxinc1 +(exempt;stdded)
p

We now have to express the value of taxinc2 in year 1 dollars. Again, we have to take
into account the fact that exempt and stdded are not indexed, therefore we compute real
taxable income in year 2 (denoted by taxinc2 ) as follows:
R

2
taxinc2 = AGI
;
exempt
= taxinc2 ;  exempt
1+
1+
1+
for non-itemizers in year 2.
R

itemz2 + stdded = taxinc2 ; (exempt ; stdded)
2
taxinc2 = AGI
;
exempt
;
1+
1+
1+
1+
for itemizers in year 2 such that31 itemz2 =(1 + )  stdded.
R

Note that because of in ation, a non-itemizer may become an itemizer if his potential itemized deductions are just below the standard deduction. This would change taxincp by a small amount (stdded)
and we thus neglect this possibility.
31 That is, taxpayers whose itemized deductions are large enough so that even with de ated itemized
deductions, it is still advantageous to itemize in year 1.
30

30

 exempt + itemz2 ; stdded
2
;
taxinc2 = taxinc
1+
1+
1+
32
for itemizers in year 2 such that itemz2 =(1 + ) < stdded.
R

Description of the grouping of instruments:
To avoid using too weak instruments, I have grouped the instruments for each kink as
follows:
 (14/16 and 16/18), (18/19 and 19/21), (21/24 and 24/26), (34/39 and 39/44), (44/49
and 49/55), (55/63 and 63/68 and 68/70) for singles
 (14/16 and 16/18), (18/21 and 21/24), (43/49 and 49/54), (54/59 and 59/64 and
64/68 and 68/70) for married taxpayers.
Therefore I have 9 instruments for each marital status instead of 15 for married taxpayers and 16 for singles. When I have grouped several kinks, I have given values proportional
to log(1 ; T =1 ; T1 ) for each kink and thus some instruments are no longer binary but can
take 3 to 5 di erent values. This grouping device does not noticeably a ect the results
and avoids using too weak instruments.
0

0

p

References
[1] Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy. \Using Maimonides Rule to Estimate the E ect of
Class Size on Scholastic Achievement." forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1999.
[2] Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll. \The E ect of Income Taxes on Household Behavior." Oce of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, mimeo 1997, forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistics.
That is, taxpayers whose itemized deductions are just above the standard deduction so that de ating
the itemized deductions makes itemizing unattractive in year 1.
32

31

[3] Bound, John and George Johnson. \Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s:
An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations." American Economic Review, 82, 1992,
pp. 371-392.
[4] Christian, Charles and Peter Frischmann. \Attrition in the Statistics of Income Panel
of Individual Returns." National Tax Journal, 1989, 62(4), pp. 495-501.
[5] Feenberg, Daniel and James Poterba. \Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very
High-Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns." in Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 7, ed. J. Poterba. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993.
[6] Feldstein, Martin. \The E ect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act." Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103(3), pp.
551-572.
[7] Freeman, Richard. \How Much has De-Unionization Contributed to the Rise in
Male Earnings Inequality." in Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America, ed. P.
Gottschalk and S. Danziger. New-York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1993.
[8] Goolsbee, Austan. \What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive Compensation.", NBER Working Paper, No. 6333, 1997.
[9] Hausman, Jerry. \Labor Supply." in How Taxes A ect Economic Behavior, ed. H.
Aaron and J. Pechman. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.
[10] Hausman, Jerry, \Taxes and Labor Supply." in A.J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein
(eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.
[11] Heckman, James. \What has been learned about Labor Supply in the Past Twenty
Years?", American Economic Review, 1993, 83(2), pp. 116-121.
[12] Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. \Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107, pp. 35-78.

32

[13] Lindsey, Lawrence. \Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts: 1982-1984, with
Implications for the Revenue Maximizing Tax Rate." Journal of Public Economics,
1987, (33), pp. 173-206.
[14] MaCurdy, Thomas, David Green and Harry Paarsch. \Assessing Empirical Approaches for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply." The Journal of Human Resources,
Fall 1990, pp. 415-490.
[15] Mroz, Thomas. \The Sensitivity of an Empirical Model of Married Women's Hours
of Work to Economic and Statistical Assumptions." Econometrica, 55, 1987 pp. 765799.
[16] Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch. \The Structure of Wages." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1992, 107(1), pp. 285-326.
[17] Navratil, John. \The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981: Evidence on Individual
Taxpayer Behavior from Panel Tax Return Data." Unpublished Harvard Thesis 1995.
[18] Pencavel, John. \Labor Supply of Men." in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-102.
[19] Saez, Emmanuel, \The E ect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of
`Bracket Creep'.", Unpublished MIT mimeograph, 1997.
[20] Saez, Emmanuel. \Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates." Unpublished MIT mimeograph, 1998.
[21] Slemrod, Joel. \Taxation and Inequality: A Time-exposure Perspective." Tax Policy
and the Economy, 1992, pp. 105-127.
[22] Slemrod, Joel. \Income Creation or Income Shifting? Behavioral Responses to the
Tax Reform Act of 1986." American Economic Review, 1995, 85(2), pp. 175-80.
[23] Slemrod, Joel. \High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: the
Anatomy of Behavioral Response.", in Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, eds. M. Feldstein and J. Poterba, University of Chicago, 1996.
33

[24] Steuerle, C. Eugene. The Tax Decade: How Taxes Came to Dominate the Public
Agenda. The Urban Institute Press, Washington, D.C., 1991.
[25] Topel, Robert. \Regional Labor Markets and the Determinants of Wages Inequality."
American Economic Review, 1994, 84, pp. 17-22.
[26] Triest, R. \The E ect of Income Taxation on Labor Supply in the United-States."
Journal of Human Resources, 1990, 25, (Summer), pp. 491-516.
[27] Van der Klaauw, W. \A Regression-Discontinuity Evaluation of the E ect of Financial Aid O ers on College Enrollment." unpublished mimeograph, New York University, 1996.

34

</ref_section>

Figure 1: Bracket Creep Experiment, Tax Schedules

After tax real income

Tax Schedule year 1

Tax Schedule year 2

Treatment

Treatment

Control

0

0

Control

z1/(1+π)

z

1

Control

z2/(1+π)

Before tax real income

z2

Figure 2: Bracket Creep Experiment, Marginal Rates

marginal rate year 2

Marginal Rates

marginal rate year 1

Treatment

Treatment

Control

Control

Control

0

0

z1/(1+π)

z1

z2/(1+π)

Before tax real income

z2

Figure 3: Shift in Marginal Rates for Married Taxpayers
59
54
49

marginal rate year 2

43

marginal rate year 1

Marginal Rates

37
32
28
24
21
18
16
14

0

0

3.4 5.5 7.6

11.9 16.6

20.2

24.6

29.9

35.2

45.8

60.0

Location of Kink points: thousands of 1979 dollars

85.6

Figure 4: Shift in Marginal Rates for Single Taxpayers
55

49

44

marginal rate year 2

39

marginal rate year 1

Marginal Rates

34
30
26
24
21
19
18
16
14

0

0

2.3 3.4 4.4

6.5

8.5

10.8

12.9

15.0

18.2

23.5

28.8

Location of Kink points: thousands of 1979 dollars

34.1

41.5

Figure 5: Married Taxpayers
0.1

0.05

0
log(1-T’p/1-T’1)
log(1-T’2/1-T’1)
dlog taxinc
dlog AGI

-0.05

-0.1

C11

49/54: T11

C10

43/49: T10

C9

37/43: T9

C8

32/37: T8

C7

28/32: T7

C6

24/28: T6

C5

21/24: T5

C4

18/21: T4

C3

16/18: T3

C2

14/16: T2

C1

-0.15

Notes: This Figure displays the log-changes in predicted net-of-tax rates (diamonds), effective net-of-tax rates (squares),
taxable
income (triangles) and Ajusted Gross Income (squares) for each Control and Treatment group for Married Taxpayers.

Figure 6: Single Taxpayers
0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
log(1-T’p/1-T’1)
log(1-T’2/1-T’1)
dlog taxinc
dlog AGI

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

C12

44/49: T12

C11

39/44: T11

C10

34/39: T10

C9

30/34: T9

C8

26/30: T8

C7

24/26: T7

C6

21/24: T6

C5

19/21: T5

C4

18/19: T4

C3

16/18: T3

C2

14/16: T2

C1

-0.20

Notes: This Figure displays the log-changes in predicted net-of-tax rates (diamonds), effective net-of-tax rates (squares), taxable
income (triangles) and Ajusted Gross Income (squares) for each Control and Treatment group for Single Taxpayers.

Figure 7: Singles, low income earners
0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30
log(1-T’p/1-T’1)
log(1-T’2/1-T’1)
dlog taxinc
dlog AGI
dlog Wages

0.20

0.10

0.00

-0.10

C4

18/19: T4

C3

16/18: T3

C2

14/16: T2

C1

0/14: T1

C0

CN

-0.20

Notes: This Figure displays the log-changes in predicted net-of-tax rates (diamonds), effective net-of-tax rates (squares), taxable
income (triangles), AGI (squares) and wages (stars) for each Control and Treatment group for Low income Single Taxpayers.

Table I: Summary statistics for Married Taxpayers

Groups
(1)
Control N
Control 0
Treatment 1
Control 1

Kinks
Location
(2)

Number of

dlog of taxable

dlog of adjusted

dlog of

Jump

observations

log(1-T’p/1-T’1)

log(1-T’2/1-T’1)

income

gross income

wages

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

392
852
605
1,383

0
0
-0.1508
0

-0.0723
-0.0861
-0.1134
0.0143

0.684
0.340
0.141
0.0865

0.131
0.0859
0.0700
0.0262

0.103
0.069
0.0537
0.0180

$3,400

0/14

Treatment 2
Control 2

$5,500

14/16

783
1,222

-0.0233
0

-0.0049
0.0072

0.022
-0.0258

0.0111
-0.00797

-0.0185
-0.0265

Treatment 3
Control 3

$7,600

16/18

1,084
3,550

-0.0243
0

-0.0066
-0.0043

-0.0506
-0.0533

-0.0109
-0.0275

-0.0307
-0.0536

Treatment 4
Control 4
Treatment 5
Control 5

$11,900

18/21

$16,000

21/24

1,615
3,264
2,241
2,991

-0.0377
0
-0.0387
0

-0.0247
-0.0065
-0.0284
-0.0104

-0.0716
-0.0727
-0.0691
-0.0665

-0.0420
-0.0458
-0.0414
-0.0448

-0.0542
-0.0531
-0.0545
-0.0553

Treatment 6
Control 6

$20,200

24/28

2,580
2,294

-0.0545
0

-0.0354
-0.0093

-0.0737
-0.0578

-0.0513
-0.0364

-0.0613
-0.0560

Treatment 7
Control 7
Treatment 8
Control 8
Treatment 9
Control 9
Treatment 10
Control 10
Treatment 11
Control 11
Treatment 12
Control 12
Treatment 13
Control 13
Treatment 14
Control 14

$24,600

28/32

$29,900

32/37

$35,200

37/43

$45,800

43/49

$60,000

49/54

$85,600

54/59

$109,400

59/64

$162,400

64/68

2,230
1,908
1,634
883
971
1,057
418
339
151
195
67
73
31
102
22
26

-0.0576
0
-0.0769
0
-0.0998
0
-0.1109
0
-0.1031
0
-0.1154
0
-0.1301
0
-0.1177
0

-0.0338
-0.0116
-0.0444
-0.0109
-0.0440
0.0045
-0.0390
0.0264
-0.0400
0.0179
-0.0794
0.0554
-0.0374
0.0388
-0.0037
0.1480

-0.0782
-0.0605
-0.0816
-0.0644
-0.0681
-0.0439
-0.0968
-0.0703
-0.0659
-0.0809
0.0097
-0.1137
-0.0790
-0.111
-0.181
-0.423

-0.0508
-0.0445
-0.0571
-0.0459
-0.0521
-0.0390
-0.0741
-0.0712
-0.0560
-0.0742
0.0413
-0.0812
-0.0430
-0.0891
-0.0448
-0.2588

-0.0470
-0.0535
-0.0797
-0.0487
-0.0669
-0.0723
-0.0754
-0.0797
-0.0945
-0.0685
0.142
0.0167
0.591
-0.104
0.181
-0.169

Notes: Control N contains taxpayers whose taxable income in year 1 is between $900 and $1,600. Control 0 contains all taxpayers below Treatment 1 with taxable income in year 1 abov

Table II: Summary statistics for Single Taxpayers

Kinks
Groups
(1)
Control N
Control 0
Treatment 1
Control 1
Treatment 2
Control 2
Treatment 3
Control 3
Treatment 4
Control 4
Treatment 5
Control 5
Treatment 6
Control 6
Treatment 7
Control 7
Treatment 8
Control 8
Treatment 9
Control 9
Treatment 10
Control 10
Treatment 11
Control 11
Treatment 12
Control 12

Location
(2)

Jump
(3)

Number of
observations
(4)

log(1-T’p/1-T’1)
(5)

log(1-T’2/1-T’1)
(6)

dlog of taxable

dlog of adjusted

dlog of

income

gross income

wages

(7)

(8)

(9)

1,633
1,341
741
1,764
879
1,045
975
2,678
1,155
1,770
1,273
1,619
1,161
868
1,085
522
972
810
687
900
384
234
177
91
67
47

0
0
-0.1508
0
-0.0233
0
-0.0243
0
-0.0121
0
-0.0253
0
-0.0387
0
-0.0263
0
-0.0555
0
-0.0587
0
-0.0790
0
-0.0856
0
-0.0932
0

-0.0911
-0.113
-0.120
0.0057
-0.00335
0.0056
-0.0042
0.0096
-0.00396
-0.0102
-0.0189
-0.0082
-0.0276
-0.0031
-0.0235
-0.0183
-0.0293
0.0026
-0.0241
-0.0016
-0.0373
0.0041
-0.0515
-0.0170
-0.0203
0.0375

0.535
0.316
0.174
0.0959
0.0264
0.0211
0.0142
-0.0512
-0.066
-0.039
-0.0727
-0.090
-0.0834
-0.0926
-0.0769
-0.0781
-0.0974
-0.0888
-0.0810
-0.0753
-0.1137
-0.093
-0.0946
-0.055
-0.210
-0.171

0.263
0.203
0.0687
0.116
0.0395
0.0478
0.0106
-0.0392
-0.072
-0.0378
-0.0641
-0.0718
-0.0725
-0.0778
-0.0753
-0.0764
-0.0866
-0.067
-0.0864
-0.0560
-0.0856
-0.075
-0.0633
-0.0368
-0.134
-0.119

0.272
0.205
0.0615
0.118
0.0698
0.0376
-0.0048
-0.046
-0.078
-0.0407
-0.0828
-0.0684
-0.0981
-0.0884
-0.0681
-0.091
-0.099
-0.084
-0.0777
-0.0896
-0.087
-0.112
-0.100
-0.0824
-0.081
-0.490

$2,300

0/14

$3,400

14/16

$4,400

16/18

$6,500

18/19

$8,500

19/21

$10,800

21/24

$12,900

24/26

$15,000

26/30

$18,200

30/34

$23,500

34/39

$28,800

39/44

$34,100

44/49

Treatment 13
Control 13

$41,500

49/55

25
48

-0.1256
0

-0.0370
0.0390

-0.094
-0.0975

-0.0615
-0.134

-0.0528
-0.108

Treatment 14
Control 14
Treatment 15
Control 15

$55,300

55/63

$81,800

63/68

11
25
3
4

-0.1960
0
-0.1450
0

-0.169
0.0651
0.0652
0.0565

0.0271
-0.142
-0.304
-0.111

0.0453
-0.099
-0.328
-0.0674

-0.049
-0.0583
-0.254
-0.416

Notes: Control N contains taxpayers whose taxable income in year 1 is between $900 and $1,500. Control 0 contains all taxpayers below Treatment 1 with taxable income in year 1 ab

Table III: Wald estimates

Kink

Taxable income
Difference

Location

(1)

Difference

Reduced form

jump in

treatment/control

log(1-T’p/1-T’1)

treatment/control

estimate

Wald estimate

marginal rates

in dlog(taxinc)

treatment group

in log(1-T’2/1-T’1)

((3) divided by (4))

((3) divided by (5))

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

AGI

Wages

Wald estimate

Wald estimate

(8)

(9)

PANEL A: Married taxpayers
$16,000

21/24

0.0006

-0.0387

-0.0200

$20,200

24/28

-0.0110

-0.0545

-0.0255

$24,600

28/32

-0.0192

-0.0576

-0.0235

$29,900

32/37

-0.0199

-0.0769

-0.0330

$35,200

37/43

-0.0149

-0.0998

-0.0415

$45,800

43/49

-0.0465

-0.1109

-0.0488

$60,000

49/54

0.0083

-0.1031

-0.0633

-0.016
(0.281)
0.202
(0.173)
0.333*
(0.163)
0.258*
(0.130)
0.172
(0.120)
0.419*
(0.162)
-0.081
(0.300)

-0.032
(0.569)
0.431
(0.376)
0.817
(0.483)
0.602
(0.340)
0.398
(0.335)
0.987*
(0.510)
-0.131
(0.503)

-0.188
(0.398)
0.403
(0.298)
0.464
(0.333)
0.363
(0.260)
0.288
(0.281)
0.580
(0.429)
-0.331
(0.455)

0.016
(0.530)
0.229
(0.371)
-0.327
(0.377)
0.838*
(0.364)
0.275
(0.423)
0.027
(0.554)
0.206
(0.841)

-0.194
(0.485)
0.230
(0.317)
-0.012
(0.299)
0.440
(0.306)
0.143
(0.467)

-0.354
(0.782)
0.540
(0.832)
-0.028
(0.669)
0.942
(0.711)
0.246
(0.850)

-0.071
(0.764)
0.671
(0.815)
1.052
(0.861)
0.661
(0.609)
-0.019
(0.627)

1.133
(1.103)
0.489
(0.865)
-0.327
(0.659)
-0.184
(0.598)
-0.056
(0.720)

PANEL B: Singles taxpayers
$10,800

21/24

0.0075

-0.0387

-0.0212

$15,000

26/30

-0.0128

-0.0555

-0.0237

$18,200

30/34

0.0007

-0.0587

-0.0245

$23,500

34/39

-0.0347

-0.0790

-0.0369

$28,800

39/44

-0.0122

-0.0856

-0.0497

Notes: The numbers in column (3) are calculated, using Tables I and II, as the difference between income in treatment group and the average of the income in the two surrounding control groups
(weighted by the number of observations). Similar calculations are perfomed in column (5) for the change in marginal rates. Standard errors in parenthesis. * for estimates significant at 5% level.

Table IV: 2SLS Elasticity Estimates
All income earners and Middle income earners

All income earners: Taxable income (1979 $)
Singles: $3,000-$40,000-Married: $5,000-$70,000

Middle income earners: Taxable income (1979 $)
Singles: $12,000-$28,000. Married: $16,000-$36,000

Taxable income

AGI

Wages

Taxable income

AGI

Wages

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

PANEL A: Married and Single taxpayers
PANEL A1: Itemizers and non itemizers
log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

0.282
(0.199)

0.181
(0.157)

0.080
(0.188)

0.395*
(0.199)

0.334*
(0.165)

0.120
(0.196)

N. obs.

49,816

50,326

44,993

21,018

21,084

19,800

log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

0.393
(0.244)

0.356*
(0.178)

0.105
(0.232)

0.619*
(0.265)

0.374*
(0.197)

0.096
(0.246)

N. obs.

18,764

18,906

17,210

11,546

11,590

11,003

log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

-0.046
(0.296)

-0.089
(0.241)

-0.012
(0.287)

0.017
(0.298)

0.191
(0.271)

0.183
(0.320)

N. obs.

31,052

31,420

27,783

9,472

9,494

8,797

PANEL A2: Itemizers

PANEL A3: Non itemizers

PANEL B: Married taxpayers
PANEL B1: Itemizers and non itemizers
log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

0.389
(0.217)

0.202
(0.154)

0.087
(0.197)

0.437*
(0.240)

0.383*
(0.190)

0.272
(0.242)

N. obs.

30,675

30,929

28,260

15,630

15,675

14,947

log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

0.651*
(0.274)

0.421*
(0.186)

0.231
(0.244)

0.705*
(0.305)

0.521*
(0.234)

0.332
(0.289)

N. obs.
PANEL B3: Non itemizers

15,924

16,033

15,015

9,964

9,998

9,632

log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

-0.091
(0.345)
14,751

-0.193
(0.252)
14,896

-0.167
(0.327)
13,245

-0.148
(0.384)
5,666

0.028
(0.314)
5,677

0.114
(0.436)
5,315

log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

0.170
(0.451)

0.188
(0.376)

-0.077
(0.406)

0.275
(0.442)

0.472
(0.454)

-0.155
(0.439)

N. obs.

19,141

19,397

16,733

5,388

5,409

4,853

PANEL B2: Itemizers

N. obs.
PANEL C: Single taxpayers

Notes: All regressions include log(z1), taxinc1, taxinc1^2, taxinc1^3 and taxinc1^4 as control variables. Regresssions in panel A
control in addition for marital status. Regressions including both itemizers and non itemizers control in addition for itemizer status.
Standard errors in parenthesis. * for estimates significant at 5% level.

Table V: 2SLS Elasticity Estimates
High income earners and Low income earners
High income taxpayers

Low income taxpayers

Taxable income (1979 dollars)

Taxable income (1979 dollars)

Singles:$21,000-$65,000-Married:$31,000-$90,000

Singles:$0-$3,400-Married:$0-$5,000

Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Taxable income

Adjusted gross

Wages

Adjusted gross

income
(1)

(2)

Wages

income
(3)

(4)

(5)

PANEL A: Married and Single taxpayers
log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)
N. obs.

0.277
(0.252)

0.022
(0.197)

-0.441
(0.282)

4,618

4,629

4,174

0.332
(0.268)

0.067
(0.218)

-0.342
(0.335)

-0.289
(0.281)

-0.052
(0.457)

3,466

3,474

3,207

3,895

2,733

0.159
(0.597)

-0.223
(0.409)

-0.587
(0.495)

1.082*
(0.433)

1.310*
(0.480)

1,152

1,155

967

8,713

7,622

PANEL B: Married taxpayers
log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)
N. obs.
PANEL C: Single taxpayers
log(1-T’2)/(1-T’1)

N. obs.

Notes: Regressions for high incomes include log(z1), taxinc1, taxinc1^2, taxinc1^3 and taxinc1^4 as controls.
Regressions for low incomes include log(z1), taxinc1 as control variables. All regressions include itemization
status as control variables. Regresssions in panel A control in addition for marital status.
Standard errors in parenthesis. * for estimates significant at 5% level.

