                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 WHAT PEOPLE DON’T KNOW
                                  ABOUT THEIR PENSIONS
                                   AND SOCIAL SECURITY:
                              AN ANALYSIS USING LINKED DATA
                                  FROM THE HEALTH AND
                                    RETIREMENT STUDY

                                            Alan L. Gustman
                                          Thomas L. Steinmeier

                                           Working Paper 7368
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7368


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1999




This paper is funded by a grant from the National Institute on Aging to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. It is part of the NBER programs in Labor Studies and Aging. We would like to thank Olivia
Mitchell for her helpful comments. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors, and not of the National
Institute on Aging or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions
and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked
Data From The Health and Retirement Study
Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 7368
September 1999
JEL No. D31, E21, H55, J14, J26, J32

                                                ABSTRACT

        Pension plan descriptions from respondents to the 1992 Health and Retirement Study are
compared with descriptions obtained from their employers. Earnings histories reported by respondents are
compared with earnings histories from the Social Security Administration. The probability of linking
employer pension data, which is two thirds for current jobs, and of obtaining permission to link an earnings
history, which is over 70 percent, are not well explained by respondent characteristics.
        Half of respondents with linked pension data correctly identify plan type, and fewer than half
identify, within one year, dates of eligibility for early and normal retirement benefits. Benefit reduction rates
are essentially not reported. Respondents do better in reporting pension values, but the unexplained
variation is still considerable. In contrast, respondent reported values, together with other observables,
account for 80 percent of the variation in pension values and 75 percent of the variation in covered earnings
measured from linked records. Thus prospects are good for imputing plan values, but not for imputing the
location or size of early retirement incentives. Our findings raise questions about how well respondents
understand complex pension and Social Security rules.


Alan L. Gustman                                                      Thomas L. Steinmeier
Department of Economics                                              Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                                    Texas Tech University
Hanover, N.H. 03755                                                  Lubbock, TX 79409
and NBER                                                             wbtls@ttacs1.ttu.edu
alan.l.gustman@dartmouth.edu
                                          I. Introduction

       It is now widely recognized that analyses of retirement and saving behavior must take

account of pensions and Social Security. For those approaching retirement age, on average their

pensions and Social Security are as valuable as the total of all their other assets combined

(Gustman, Mitchell, Samwick and Steinmeier, 1999). Moreover, both pensions and Social

Security significantly affect the rewards for continued work.1

       It is not surprising then that surveys are including more questions about pensions and

Social Security. Some surveys, especially those of people approaching retirement age, not only

ask respondents about their pensions, but also collect pension plan descriptions from the

respondents’ employers.2 To improve the quality of information on these key data, the Health and

Retirement Study links the respondent survey to Social Security earnings histories for the three

fourths of respondents who gave permission allowing the Social Security Administration to

provide the records.

       In this paper we discuss similarities and differences in the information obtained from

respondent surveys and from linked data. First, we compare and contrast pension plan

characteristics and values when they are computed from respondent versus employer reports.

Second, we compare and contrast Social Security benefits estimated from the respondent’s self

reported work history with benefits estimated from the respondent’s actual covered earnings


       1
       For relevant literature reviews, see Gustman and Juster (1996), Lumsdaine (1996) and
Lumsdaine and Mitchell (forthcoming).
       2
        Surveys that link pension plan descriptions obtained from employers to respondent
provided data include the Survey of Consumer Finances for 1983 and 1989, the National
Longitudinal Survey of Mature Women, The Health and Retirement Study, and soon the Panel
Study on Income Dynamics.

                                                  1
history.

           Using the comparison of respondent, firm-provided and administrative information, we

determine how well respondents understand their pensions and how accurately they report their

covered work history. Further, we devise methods to predict pension and Social Security benefits

for respondents when appropriate data are not available. More specifically, we address the

following key questions:

           • How do the covered, employed respondents for whom there is a matched employer-

           provided pension plan description, and the respondents for whom there is a matched

           Social Security record, differ from those with missing pension or Social Security records?

           • What do comparisons between benefit amounts self reported by respondents with and

           without matched records suggest about the biases from confining samples only to those

           for whom matched records are available? For pensions? For Social Security?

           • Earlier studies suggest that respondents frequently misreport pension plan type (Mitchell,

           1988; Gustman and Steinmeier, 1989). What problems are created by such

           misidentification when linked data are missing and the researcher must rely exclusively on

           respondent reports?

           • Among those for whom we have both respondent-reported and linked employer pension

           data, how do the plan features reported by respondents compare with those computed

           from employer provided pension plan descriptions? How do plan values compare? Are

           studies that rely exclusively on respondent reports of these key plan features or plan values

           subject to serious bias?

           • What are the effects on the sample if analysts only include in their studies observations


                                                     2
       for which matching employer provided and Social Security data are available, and omit

       observations for which plan descriptions are only available from respondents?3

       • How do Social Security benefits differ when estimated from respondent reports of

       earnings histories from estimates based on administrative records of covered earnings?4

       • What do the comparisons between benefit amounts computed from respondent-reported

       and matched data suggest is the best way to impute pension and Social Security benefits

       for those respondents without a linked pension or Social Security record?

       • Do respondents do better in describing their plans when they are closer to retirement

       than when they are further away?

       Once these questions have been answered, we turn to another aim of this paper, to

facilitate research with the linked employer provided pension plan descriptions and the Social

Security records. Some researchers may feel they must either use only those observations that

have linked data available, or estimate relations for the full sample using only respondent

reports.5 If only observations with linked data are used, the sample may not be representative.

But if respondent data are used, errors and imprecisions may be introduced, especially in

analyzing retirement and saving behavior. We report equations that relate pension and Social

Security values estimated using linked employer provided pension or Social Security records, to


       3
        For example, in their reduced form retirement study based on the HRS, Gruber and Coile
(1999) eliminate observations when linked pension or Social Security data are not available.
       4
         Bernheim (1988) found, using a different data set, that modal predictions of Social
Security benefits from self reported data were unbiased. The findings clearly suggested, however,
that there were important differences throughout the distributions.
       5
         There is an additional problem because many respondent reports are incomplete, leaving
out details of pensions and earnings history.

                                                 3
the values obtained from respondent reports and other independent variables. If we take the

outcome produced using linked data as a more accurate measure, these equations allow

researchers to project pension outcomes for those observations for which linked data are not

available. In addition, we will produce files for distribution to HRS users that contain the

predicted values of these variables for all observations, including the observations for which linked

data are available. This will make information from the linked data available to a wider group of

researchers, including those who do not apply for or obtain permissions to use the linked data

directly.6

        There also is a broader set of questions about behavior. To the extent that people do not

understand their pensions and Social Security, there may be consequences for measurement of

wealth and retirement incentives, and also for how behavioral models should be specified. If older

workers have a poor understanding of pensions and Social Security incentives, then those who are

misinformed may not respond to measured incentives in the way that models of saving and

retirement behavior would predict. That is, if respondent reports differ from employer-provided

plan descriptions, it is not clear whether the researcher should use linked data in estimating

behavioral models on the assumption that all actors are well informed. In subsequent research we

will determine the extent to which any misinformation influences behavior. That, in turn, requires



        6
         A procedure has been established at HRS, in coordination with the National Institute on
Aging and the Social Security Administration, to protect respondent confidentiality when linked
data are made available. A researcher must apply for access to restricted data. The application
requires a research plan, a data protection plan, a demonstration of grant support from a federal
agency, and a promise not to link the restricted data to any but specified respondent files. The
basic respondent survey without linked data is available on an unrestricted basis. The pension and
social security data file produced from this work will provide information derived from the linked
data, but will be made available on an unrestricted basis.

                                                  4
that we determine which features of these plans cause the most confusion, carefully detailing the

extent of misunderstandings. We intend to determine which features cause the most confusion in

this paper.



                                             II. The Data

        The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a longitudinal, nationally representative study

of older Americans. The survey began with an initial cohort of 12,652 individuals from 7,607

households, with at least one household member born from 1931 to 1941. The first wave was

fielded in 1992.

        In wave 1, 71.6 percent of respondents gave permission to link Social Security earnings

histories to their interview record. Records were actually linked for 95 percent of those who gave

permissions. The share of respondents with linked Social Security records was raised to 74.9

percent as a result of additional permissions obtained in waves 2 and 3.

        Social Security values may be estimated from respondent reports of their earnings and

work history. Specifically, respondents were asked about the starting date on their current job,

starting and ending dates for their last jobs, (i.e., the job last held by those not working in 1992),

and starting and ending dates for the previous 5 year job held before the current or last job.

Respondents were also asked about earnings at these dates. In addition, the survey asked

respondents in Wave 3 about the date of entry into the labor force, how many years were worked

before the date the previous job was secured, and how many years of work were in jobs covered




                                                   5
by Social Security. From this information, we construct a covered earnings history7 and we use it

as the basis for calculating the respondent’s Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME), and the

Social Security benefit the respondent is entitled to (Primary Insurance Amount, or PIA).

       If a respondent was covered by a pension, the HRS also requested from the employer a

detailed description of the pension plan. Employer-provided pension plan descriptions proved to

be more readily available for a respondent’s current job than for jobs held in the past. The match

rate was 65% for the 4456 jobs that respondents held at the time of the survey, where they

reported they were offered pensions. The match rate was 66% for the 1387 cases for the last job

held by respondents with no current job in 1992, who reported a pension on their last job. For the

previous job of 5 years duration held before the current or last job, the match rate was 35% of

2839 pensions. In addition, the survey identified another 750 jobs with pensions. Since the

survey did not ask for the employer name and address for those jobs, none of the jobs had

matched pensions.8

       Averaging over all these jobs yields an exact match percentage for employer-provided plan

descriptions of 51%. This combines a figure of almost two-thirds from current and last job

pensions, with a much lower figure for pensions on previous jobs.



       7
        Wage profiles are forced through all observations, and values for missing years are
projected off the profiles on the basis of experience and education. The wage profile coefficients
are taken from Anderson, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) and are based on data from the Survey
of Consumer Finances. Coefficients are: experience .0138221, experience squared -.0002827,
and experience * education .000996.
       8
        These counts are for individual jobs, not individual pensions. That is, if an individual had
both a DB and a DC pension in a job, it would be counted once in these tallies. However, an
individual may have more than one entry if he or she had pensions in both the current job and a
previous job, or in the last job and a previous job.

                                                  6
           Respondents were also asked a series of detailed questions about their pensions. First

the respondent was asked about pension coverage, and if covered, about plan type. If the

respondent indicated his plan is of the defined benefit variety, the question sequence asked about

the dates of early and normal retirement, the year of expected retirement, and the associated

yearly benefits. If the respondent indicated his plan is of the defined contribution type, the

questions focused on the amounts currently in the account and on rates of contribution.

       In the case of those with defined benefit plans, the Summary Plan Description (SPD)

provided by the respondent’s employer contains a full and accurate representation of the pension.

To be sure, there are some possible sources of error. Most importantly, some plan descriptions

will have been dated, referring to provisions in place some time before 1992, but no longer

relevant in 1992. Also, despite extensive checking, some plan features may have been miscoded.

Moreover, if a firm has experienced complex merger activity, multiple plans may cover different

individuals with similar apparent backgrounds, creating the possibility of a mismatch.9

       In the case of defined contribution plans, the respondent report as to the balance in the

account may be more accurate for estimating plan value. Because the HRS must preserve

respondent privacy, when collecting pension plan descriptions, the name of the covered individual

was not identified to the firm. Therefore, the amount accumulated in the pension account held by

a particular respondent must be estimated from the firm’s contribution rate as reported in the plan


       9
         The pension plans were coded from the Summary Plan Descriptions provided by
employers at the University of Michigan, and software written for that purpose was used to
evaluate the coded plan descriptions. The software generates pension values by applying the
coded rules from the pension plan to respondent reports of earnings and tenure. The user specifies
assumptions as to interest rate, wage growth, and which respondent reports of retirement dates
are to be used. Details about the procedures employed are available in Gustman, Mitchell,
Samwick and Steinmeier (forthcoming).

                                                  7
description, and the respondent’s self reported work history and contribution rate. In addition,

although the HRS collects the plan description at a moment in time, both the contribution rates

and the returns may have changed over time. Nevertheless, the respondent’s answer may be

subject to reporting error, perhaps to substantial error in some cases.

                                      III. Empirical Analysis

A. Matching Rates for Pension and Social Security Records.

       Table 1 reports the results of a probit, where the dependent variable is a qualitative

indicator equal to 1 if permission was given by the respondent in wave 1 allowing HRS to match

the Social Security record. Because the Social Security Administration was able to match 95

percent of the records of those who gave permission, to understand what determines the match

rate, one needs to understand what determines the permission rate. The independent variables are

various characteristics of the respondent and the respondent’s job.10 The partial effects of the

probit are reported together with the z statistics. The independent variables account for only a

small part of the variation in the Social Security permission rate.11 Among the individual variables

that are significant, black and Hispanic respondents, respondents with higher assets and highest

education, respondents who expect never to retire, or who do not report a specific retirement

date, were less likely to grant permission.12



       10
        Appendix Table 1, column 1, reports the Social Security permission rates in wave 1 for
respondents according to individual and job characteristics.
       11
            Haider and Solon (1999) and Olson (forthcoming) reach similar conclusions.
       12
         Despite the relatively poor fit in the Social Security permission equations, we will include
these covariates in later regressions to adjust predictions for whatever selection is systematically
associated with these observables.

                                                  8
        Table 2 reports probits where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether there is an

employer-provided pension plan description for the respondent.13 The first column indicates the

correlates of pension matches for all respondents who indicated they were covered by a pension

on some job. Separate equations are shown for pension matches on the current job held in 1992,

the last job for those with no current job, and the last five year job held previous to the last or

current job. For the purpose of examining retirement incentives, it is the pension on the job just

preceding retirement that is most important; though the survey has a lower pension match for

previous jobs, this is less crucial for retirement modeling.

        The likelihood of finding an employer plan description is not closely related to the

independent variables included in Table 2. However, the fit is somewhat better than it was for a

Social Security permission rate in Table 1. Across all pension plans, blacks, those with more

schooling, homeowners, those with the shortest planning horizons, those with the longest tenure,

and those with jobs in nonmanufacturing, are more likely to have a pension match. Those with

the highest assets and earnings, those from firms employing fewer than 100, those in management

jobs, and those who report they are covered by DC plans, are less likely to have a matched plan

description.

        In addition, the more valuable the plan, the higher the probability of a match. This last

finding suggests that if one confined the sample only to those with matched pension plan

descriptions, the value of the pension will be overstated. Similarly, because the probability of a

Social Security earnings record match is lower the higher an individual’s earnings, if a researcher



        13
        Appendix Table 1, column 3, reports the pension matching rates in wave 1 for
respondents according to individual and job characteristics.

                                                   9
confines the sample to those with a Social Security match, he is omitting from the sample a

disproportionate share of those who will receive the highest Social Security benefits.

B. Pension Comparisons

       Table 3 contains four tables describing the joint distribution of plan types reported by

respondents and their firms on jobs held by respondents in 1992. These data are only for

respondents with a matched employer-provided pension plan description.

       Table 3A contains the frequencies of plan type reported by covered respondents and by

their employers. If the firm reports two plans, one a DB and one a DC, the firm is classified as

offering both, and there is one entry in the “Both” row. In Table 3A, we find 1881 cases where

both the individual and the firm reported having a DB pension, with or without a DC pension:

(777+380+409+315). For DC plans the comparable number is 916, where both the respondent

and employer reported that the individual is covered by a DC plan (327+111+163+315).

       The share of the total of 2907 observations falling in each cell is reported in Table 3B.

The observations along the diagonal in Table 3B represent only about half the joint distribution of

firm and individual reported plan types, suggesting that respondents do a poor job of reporting the

type of pension plan they are covered by. Some of the misreporting may be due to

nonparticipation; even when the firm reports it offers both plan types, some 14 percent of

respondents report they are covered only by a DB plan. This difference may reflect a failure of

the respondent to report coverage by a DC plan when they don’t participate in the DC plan. Even

allowing for this misreporting, the discrepancy in plan types is substantial, amounting to over one

third of the plans. Because the sequence of questions asked about the pension is conditioned on

the plan type reported by the respondent, this is a crucial problem for surveys that wish to


                                                 10
determine pension values solely from respondent reports.14

       Table 3C reports the distribution of respondent reports of plan type, conditional on the

plan type reported by the firm. As seen in the first column of Table 3C, among respondents

whose employers report they are covered by a defined benefit plan, only 56 percent report that

their plan is DB. An additional 27 percent of those whose employers report their plan is DB

report that their plan is both DB and DC. Thus among those whose employers indicate they are

covered by a DB plan only, 83 percent of the respondents report coverage by a DB plan. Fifteen

percent of those whose employers report they are covered by a DB plan report they are covered

by a DC plan only. From the second row of Table 3C, among those whose employers indicate

they are only covered by a DC plan, slightly more than half, 54 percent, get the plan type right.

Altogether, among the observations where the employer reports a DC plan only, the respondent

reports a DC plan, either held exclusively or (mistakenly) together with a DB plan, in 72 percent

of the cases. Twenty six percent of those whose employer reports their plan is DC, representing

14 percent of the sample with a matched pension plan, report their plan is DB only. For those

whose employers report they are covered by both a DB and a DC plan, slightly more than a third,

35 percent, report coverage by both a DB and a DC plan. Among the remainder, 45 percent


       14
          Means from the separate distributions suggest more agreement between respondent and
firm reports of plan type than is found in the micro data. At the micro level respondents and firms
agree on plan type in 49 percent of the respondent-employer matches. In contrast, compare the
fractions with only DB, only DC, or both types of plans computed separately from the reports of
individuals and firms. From the bottom row in Table 3B, we see that 46 percent of respondents
report that they are covered by DB plans only, 24 percent report they are covered by DC plans
only, and 28 percent report they are covered by both types of plans. Similarly, from the last
column of Table 3B, 48 percent of firm provider reports indicate that the plan is DB only, 21
percent indicate that the plans are DC only, and 31 percent indicate that the firm offers both types
of plans. Thus when the descriptive statistics from firm and individual reports are compared, they
suggest a much higher level of agreement than is found at the level of the individual observation.

                                                 11
report they are covered by a DB plan only, and 18 percent report they are covered by a DC plan

only.

        By way of comparison, we report the percentages from Gustman and Steinmeier (1989,

Table 6), which provided results analogous to Table 3C using the 1983 Survey of Consumer

Finances (SCF). In the SCF, 63 percent of respondents whose firms reported a DB plan only also

reported coverage by a DB plan only, compared to 56 percent from the HRS in Table 3C. In the

SCF, of respondents whose employers reported a DC plan only, 37 percent reported they had a

DC plan only. This compares to 54 percent in Table 3C. Although the HRS respondents do a bit

worse in identifying DB plans only, they do much better in identifying DC plans only than

respondents in the SCF sample did, perhaps due to the increasing popularity of DC plans over the

decade.

        Suppose for those without a matched pension we wish to determine plan type. The

simplest idea would be to use the respondent report. But the respondent report will not be

reliable for two reasons. First, there is a problem of selection bias; that is, the sample without a

matched pension is different from the sample with a matched pension. Second, the respondent’s

report will be wrong for roughly half the cases. Consider the distribution of firm reports

conditional on respondent reports as shown in Table 3D. For those respondents who report they

have a DB plan only, 58 percent of the firms indicate they offer only a DB plan. Counting those

whose firms report DB and DC coverage, DB plan descriptions will be available for 88 percent of

those respondents reporting DB coverage, but DC plans will be missed for the additional 42

percent of those whose firms report they have only DC plans or both types of plans. Among

respondents who report they have only a DC plan, 47 percent will have an exact match provided


                                                  12
by an employer who reports offering a DC plan only. But we will have DB plan descriptions from

employers for 53 percent of respondents who report coverage by a DC plan only. Among

respondents reporting coverage by both types of plans, descriptions of both plans are available

from only 39 percent of their employers, suggesting about 60 percent of respondents are

misinformed.

Ages of Eligibility for Early and Normal Retirement Derived From Self Reports and Firm

Reports

       Ages of early retirement are reported in Table 4 for respondents in jobs held in 1992,

where both the respondent and the firm report the plan is defined benefit. The median age of

early retirement reported by the respondent is 57. When applying the formula reported by the

firm to respondents’ self-reported work histories, the median age of early retirement across plans

is 55. The average early retirement age is 57.6 when reported by the respondent, and 55.4 when

calculated from the firm-provided plan description. That is, when based on the firm-provided

plan description, the early retirement date is about two years earlier than the early retirement date

reported by the respondent. According to the firm provided data, two thirds of respondents will

be able to retire early by the time they reach age 55; but less than half of respondents think they

will be able to retire early by age 55. Thus respondents to the HRS appear to be more pessimistic

about their eligibility for early retirement than is warranted by the provisions of their plans. We

will see below that some respondents may simply be ignorant of the opportunity to retire early, or

perhaps otherwise consider it to be irrelevant. SCF respondents ten years earlier did not overstate

the age of early retirement. In the data from the 1983 SCF, we found that the median early dates

expected by respondents and the median early retirement dates computed from plan provisions


                                                 13
and earnings histories were both age 55. Moreover, the SCF included workers from age 40 on,

so that those sampled in the SCF were further from retiring than the HRS sample. Yet the median

expectations of early retirement date in the SCF sample were more accurate than in the HRS

sample. One possible reason is that early retirement was somewhat less common in the SCF than

in the HRS, and the age of early retirement was not as far below the age of normal retirement as it

is in 1992. Thus even if a number of respondents were ignorant of the opportunity to obtain early

retirement benefits in the SCF, it made less difference.

       Another piece of evidence suggests that people are less optimistic today about when they

can retire than they were in the past. In previous work using SCF data, we found that in the self-

reported data, mean early retirement dates were lower than the median dates by about 3 years.

Because the medians were equal between the self reported and firm reported data, this suggested

that there were a few people who were highly optimistic about when they would be eligible for

their early retirement benefits. In the HRS, evidence of this optimism has disappeared: mean and

median dates of expected eligibility for early retirement benefits are the same. This result

corresponds with the findings from the direct comparisons of early retirement dates based on the

respondent and firm-provided data. People are more pessimistic about the ages of eligibility for

early retirement benefits in the HRS than they were in the past.

       It is also useful to examine the distribution of differences between the early retirement

dates expected by respondents and the dates they will attain early retirement eligibility according

to their firm reports. Of the observations with firm-reported retirement ages in the range from

age 50 to 65, only 28 percent (435/1569) lie along the diagonal in Table 4, indicating that the

respondent and firm based early retirement dates are identical. Moreover, only 43 percent of


                                                 14
respondents (671/1569) report an early retirement date within one year of the firm-based early

retirement date. The simple correlation between the provider reported and self reported

retirement dates is 0.353.

       This wide variation in dates of eligibility for early retirement benefits is a particularly

important problem for analysts wishing to model retirement. For many pension plans, benefit

rules give covered workers a substantial benefit increment from working up to the point of early

retirement age. By working the year a respondent becomes eligible for early retirement, the HRS

respondent typically increases the present value of the pension by an amount equal to a year of

pay, or more (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1999a). This provides a powerful incentive for

respondents to remain at the firm. If, in formal models of retirement behavior, individuals appear

to leave their firms before reaching that date, retirement models will indicate that individuals are

not sensitive to economic incentives when making their retirement decisions. As seen in the

responses tabulated in Table 4, many individuals will report an early retirement date that is later

than the date they actually will become eligible for early retirement benefits. As they approach

retirement age, in many cases the firm will make clear to them that they are being too pessimistic.

But that new information may not be reflected in the individual responses to the survey, and the

analyst will not have the correct answer unless the firm provided plan description is available.

Unless an adjustment is made when using respondent reported data for those who seem to leave

just before becoming eligible for early retirement benefits, this form of reporting error will cause

the effects of pension incentives on retirement to be understated, and the parameter estimates will

also lead to an understatement of the influence of Social Security on retirement.

       How accurately are pension rules described by those respondents closest to retirement?


                                                  15
Table 5 compares the respondent-reported early retirement dates with the dates calculated from

the firm plan descriptions and respondent reported records, this time confining the sample to the

371 respondents in the 1992 wave 1 HRS survey who indicated that they wanted to retire by

1995. For this sample, and using the pension formula reported by the firm to the respondent’s self

reported work history, the median age of early retirement eligibility is estimated to be 55, the

same as the median age of early retirement eligibility expected by respondents. For the full

sample, we found the median early retirement date expected by respondents to be two years later

-- at age 57. Thus for those expecting to retire within three years of HRS wave 1, the firm-

reported and respondent-reported median dates of early retirement correspond. However, a

systematic bias persists. When the sample is confined to those who are approaching retirement, in

the mean early retirement date based on respondent data is later than the mean date based on firm

data: the average respondent reported early retirement age is 57.0; while the mean age of

eligibility for early retirement calculated from firm reported data is 54.8. Moreover, the mean

exceeds the median early retirement age in self reported data, suggesting that some of the

respondents are overly pessimistic, but it is not those in the middle of the distribution. Thus

individuals within three years of their expected retirement date also expect to have a later early

retirement date than they in fact are eligible for, but unlike the full sample, the difference is due to

overly pessimistic projections by some in the tail or tails.

        When in Table 5 we confine the sample to those who intend to retire by 1995, we continue

to observe the same wide discrepancy between the early retirement dates computed from provider

formulas and from respondent data that characterized the full sample in Table 4. Thus for the full

sample, 28 percent of the observations were found to project their early retirement dates


                                                   16
accurately, so that observations lie along the diagonal in Table 4. Similarly, for those who expect

to retire by 1995, 27 of the observations lie along the diagonal in Table 5. In addition, in Table 5,

we find that 39 percent of the observations for this group are within one year of the early

retirement date calculated with the firm provided plan provisions, the same proportion found for

all respondents. The correlation coefficient is 0.359 for the data in Table 5, virtually identical to

the correlation coefficient of 0.353 found for Table 4.

        Table 6 examines the joint distribution of normal retirement dates predicted from provider

plan descriptions and from respondent data. The median normal retirement age is 62 in both the

respondent provided data and the firm-provided plan descriptions. The means are 61.3 and 60.7

when normal retirement ages are computed from firm reported plan provisions and respondent

expectations respectively. However, the discrepancies are much wider in the individual data than

they appear from the medians or means. Among those with normal retirement dates between 50

and 65, as computed from employer-provided plan descriptions, 33 percent of the observations lie

along the diagonal in Table 6. Among this same group, 40 percent have an expected normal

retirement age within one year of the date calculated from employer-provided data. The

correlation between the normal retirement dates from provider and self reports is 0.352. This

suggests that while there is no systematic bias in the expectations about the age of qualifying for

normal retirement, the dispersion is no lower for age of normal retirement than it is for the age of

qualification for early retirement benefits.

        A key characteristic of the defined benefit pension is the benefit reduction rate. It is the

rate at which benefits are reduced for each year the covered worker retires before the normal

retirement date. If the reduction rate is relatively low, early retirement is subsidized so that the


                                                  17
benefit accrual peaks at early retirement age.

        The benefit reduction rate is available from both the individual and the firm for relatively

few of the 1881 jobs where both the respondent and the firm report coverage by a defined benefit

plan. As can be seen in Table 7, we can compute early retirement reductions for only about 58

percent of firm observations; most of the remainder are cases where the worker joined the firm

recently enough that he or she is not eligible for early retirement prior to the normal retirement

age. The median benefit reduction rate reported by firms is 4 to 5 percent. Respondents

themselves have almost no idea how much the benefit reduction rate is. Out of 1881 respondents

with a defined benefit pension in their 1992 job, 1512, or 80 percent, either do not think they are

eligible for early retirement or do not know what the benefit reduction rate is for their plans.

Indeed, it appears that half of the respondents do not think they can retire before the normal

retirement age. Of the remaining 369 respondents, the median reported benefit reduction rate is 5

to 6 percent, well above the average observed from provider data. Altogether, there are only 234

observations on benefit reduction rates that are jointly reported by the respondent and by the firm.

Of these, only 26 lie along the diagonal. For this limited number of observations, the correlation

coefficient is 0.524.

        As Table 8 shows, there is agreement in a majority of cases about whether a DC plan

allows voluntary contributions.15 In 392 out of 873 observations, providers and respondents

agree there are voluntary contributions. In another 121 cases, both respondents and the firm

agree that there are no voluntary contributions. Thus, 59 percent of the cases lie along the main


        15
         The self-reported voluntary contribution variable is a dummy variable for whether the
plan has a 401(k) component. As such it would be incorrect to infer that a plan with voluntary
contributions does not also have required contributions.

                                                  18
diagonal. With respondents and firms disagreeing about voluntary contributions in 41 percent of

the cases, the most likely misreport occurs where the firm reports there are voluntary

contributions and the respondent reports there are none. These misreports account for 35 percent

of the observations.

Plan Values Derived From Self Reports and Firm Reports

       Table 9 examines results for pensions from the current job at the time of the survey. The

results for the first two columns are for individuals who said they had defined benefit plans whose

value could be computed from the respondents’ answers and whose firms indicated that the

individual was indeed covered by a defined benefit plan. Combination plans with a defined benefit

component are also included in these numbers. The last two columns pertain to individuals who

said that they had defined contribution plans and whose firms indicated likewise. Individuals who

reported they had both defined benefit and defined contribution parts to their pension, and whose

firms agree that the pension had both components, may be in both columns. Individuals who say

they had only defined benefit plans but whose firms indicate only defined contribution plans, or

vice versa, are not included in this table, although they are included in later tables. Thus, this

table and the next several tables pertain to individuals for whom the respondent and the firm agree

on the type of pension, and for whom the principal ingredients of the pension (earnings, expected

benefits, accumulations, etc.) are available and not imputed.

       Table 9 shows the dollar amounts associated with various points on the univariate

distributions of defined benefit and defined contribution pension amounts, calculated both using




                                                  19
the respondents’ answers and the formulas in the pension documents obtained from the firms.16

For defined benefit plans, the survey asked when the respondent expected to start collecting the

pension, and how much the pension would be. The pension value in column 1 of the table is the

present value (discounted to 1992) of the expected benefits from the date of expected retirement

forward, assuming that the pension remained the same in nominal terms.17 If the respondent failed

to answer either the expected age when the pension would start or the amount of the pension, the

pension value is not imputed. The second estimate of the pension value, which is in column 2 of

the table, comes from applying the respondent’s earnings and tenure at the expected collection

date to the rules found in the pension documents.18 These rules give the value of the annual

benefit, year by year. The value of the pension is again the discounted value of this stream of

benefits.19 If the respondent’s 1992 earnings were imputed, the value of the pension is not


       16
          In Table 3 there were 1923 plans where both the respondent and the firm reported plan
type as defined benefit. Table 9 reports pension values for 1122 defined benefit plans. The
difference is accounted for by missing data, primarily because only two thirds of respondents in
Table 3 reported expected pension amounts (or percentage of pay). For similar reasons, Table 9
reports results for 641 observations, whereas there were 916 observations in Table 3 where both
the respondent and the firm reported there was a defined contribution plan.
       17
           By assuming that benefits stay constant in nominal terms, we ignore the fact that some
pensions have benefits that are reduced when the participant becomes eligible for Social Security.
About 12 percent of participants in defined benefit plans indicated that their pensions would be
subject to such provisions.
       18
         The projected future earnings are calculated using Social Security Administration
projections, increasing the 1992 earnings by 6.3% per year.
       19
          Some difference might arise because the respondent might assume future wage growth
different than the 5% growth (the Social Security Administration’s intermediate projection) we
assumed when evaluating the firm pensions. Therefore, we adjusted the respondent’s projected
benefits to allow for implied differences in wage growth assumptions. To be more specific, the
survey asked about the expected benefits on the date the individual expects to start them and the
wages both in 1992 and at the normal retirement age. To project the wage to the benefit start

                                                20
imputed, since the imputed earnings may not be a very accurate indication of actual earnings for

individual respondents.

       For defined contribution pensions, the value of the pension as determined by the

respondent, which is in column 3 of the table, is simply the answer to the question regarding the

current value of the accumulation. To arrive at the amount calculated from the plan documents,

the required contribution amounts are calculated for each year that the participant has been

employed in the firm. If this is expressed as a percent of the annual earnings, the percent is

multiplied by the earnings in the year. These contributions are accumulated forward using a 6.3

percent nominal interest rate from the long run projections of the Social Security Administration,

and the sum of these contributions is the implied present value. If the plan allows for voluntary

contributions, the percentage of contributions in the survey year is extrapolated backward, and the

individual is assumed to have contributed the same percentage of previous years’ earnings. The

plans themselves indicate if the contributions began after the respondent began to work for the

firm. If an individual’s 1992 earnings are imputed, or if the respondent did not respond to the



date, we interpolate the wage between 1992 and the normal retirement age. We then calculate the
implied ratio of the benefit to the wage that the respondent is expecting at the benefit start date.
Finally, we multiply this ratio by the wage the respondent would have if the 1992 wage grows by
5% per year. This essentially adjusts the reported benefit for differences in wage growth
assumptions. However, there are some observations for which this procedure does not work very
well. These observations have the common feature that the individual is almost at the normal
retirement age but expects to work several more years. For instance, the individual may be 59,
have a normal retirement age at 60, expect to retire at 65, and report earnings of $40,000 at 59
and $80,000 next year. Continuing this rate of growth until 65 yields a value which is clearly
nonsense. Therefore, we compared the computed wage at expected retirement to the wage which
would be obtained by simply growing the 1992 wage by the growth rate assumed in the Social
Security projections. In the relatively few cases where the former exceeded the latter by more
than 50%, we took the expected pension benefits at the expected retirement age at face value and
did not try to make any adjustments.

                                                 21
question about contributions and the plan had voluntary contributions, the present value is not

imputed. The resulting calculated defined contribution pension values are in column 4 of the

table.

         Table 9 indicates that for the defined benefit plans, the mean present value of benefits

based on the employer reports, $168,405, exceeds the mean value based on the respondent report,

$148,015. At the median, there is remarkable agreement between the defined benefit amounts

based on the respondents’ responses and those based on calculations from the pension documents.

In fact, looking at the values in the 25th and 75th percentiles, the middle part of the distribution is

almost identical. Only in the two tails are the pension amounts calculated from the firm

documents noticeably higher than the amounts calculated from the respondents’ expected

pensions.20 For defined contribution plans, however, the situation is considerably different. The

mean pension value based on firm reports of $85,790, greatly exceeds the mean value based on

the respondent report, $59,105. While the upper tail for the distribution of DB plans exhibits

provider values that exceed the values reported by respondents, the same is true for the top 90

percent of DC recipients; that is, for DC pensions the entire distribution of accumulations that the

respondents report is much lower than the amounts calculated from the plan documents. In the

middle and upper parts of the distribution, the respondents’ accumulations are less than half as

much as the amounts from the plan documents at the corresponding percentiles.


         20
           In our earlier analysis of data for the Survey of Consumer Finances, we found that
pensions based on respondent reports were more valuable than pensions based on the plan
formula (1989, Table 5). The findings here are just the opposite. We also found that unlike our
earlier findings, people on average are now more pessimistic about their ages of eligibility that is
warranted by the plan. Perhaps the finding that people are less optimistic about their pensions
than they were ten years ago reflects a shift of attitudes in response to changing firm policies over
the past decade?

                                                   22
        Although the distributions are similar for the defined benefit pension amounts calculated

from the respondents’ expectations and the pension documents, Table 10 indicates that there are

substantial differences between the two amounts at an individual level. To some degree, this

result could have been expected after looking at Tables 4, 5 and 6. If respondents are that

inaccurate in reporting the early and normal retirement ages of their plans, it seems unlikely that

they would be more accurate in reporting their expected pensions, which presumably involve

more complex calculations than do the early and normal retirement ages. The fact that the joint

distribution is more or less symmetrically distributed around the main diagonal reflects the fact

that the two individual distributions are similar, and indeed the fact that the largest entries are

down the main diagonal is encouraging. However, only about 40 percent of the observations fall

along the main diagonal. Moreover, the ranges of the categories in this table are very wide, and

even being one entry off the main diagonal is consistent with the respondents’ estimate of pension

value being half or twice the corresponding amount calculated from the pension documents.21

        Table 11 shows the joint distribution for the defined contribution plans. The scatter of the

plans is about the same as for the defined benefit plans, with 28 percent of the observations falling

on the main diagonal.22 This is probably one of the main messages of both Table 10 and Table 11:

at the individual level, there is a great deal of difference between the pension amounts based on

the respondents’ answers and those based on the plan documents. A second message is specific

to defined contribution plans, namely, that the accumulations reported by respondents are

systematically lower than the amounts calculated by using the pension documents to figure the


        21
             The correlation coefficient, which is heavily influence by the larger values, is 0.615.
        22
             The correlation coefficient for the observations in Table 11 is 0.302.

                                                     23
contributions and cumulating these contributions over time. In this table this comes out in the fact

that the majority of the entries are below the main diagonal. In Table 9 the difference in the mean

value of the defined contributions plans amounted to almost fifty percent of the value reported by

the respondents.

       The systematic difference between the accumulations reported by the participants and the

values calculated from the pension documents could have several potential explanations. Most

obviously, the participants could be systematically under-reporting the plan accumulations.

Alternatively, the rate of return used by the pension program in calculating the pension reports

may be higher than the actual return experienced by the participants. Finally, for the plans with

voluntary contributions, the participants may have contributed substantially less in prior years to

the plan than their current contribution rates would suggest.23 Note that the first of these

explanations implies that the respondents’ answers are systematically incorrect, while the last two

imply that the amounts calculated by the pension program are incorrect.

       To distinguish among these competing explanations, Table 12 presents the results for

those DC plan participants whose plans do not allow for voluntary contributions. In Table 12, the

number of entries above the main diagonal is approximately the same as the number below the

diagonal. Although the number of observations is much lower than in Table 11, Table 12

suggests that among those participating in plans without voluntary contributions, there is no

systematic tendency for the pension values calculated from the plan documents to be more or less

than the accumulations reported by the respondents.



       23
         The pension calculation program assumes a constant contribution rate for participants of
plans with voluntary contributions.

                                                 24
       The fact that values appear close for plans without voluntary contributions, but not for

those with voluntary contributions suggests that the third explanation mentioned above is correct.

The other two explanations should have equal force whether the firm permits voluntary

contributions or not. As for the accuracy of the reports, one would expect that participants in

plans with voluntary contributions should be more accurate in their reports. For these

participants, there is a periodic decision as to how much to contribute, and to the extent that this

decision impels them to look at their pensions, they should have better information. As for the

return assumptions built into the pension calculations, the fact that the calculated plan values and

the reported accumulations agree for participants in plans with no voluntary contributions

suggests that the return assumptions are approximately correct, at least for those participants.

Those assumptions are for a very modest 2.3% real return. It is logically possible that the returns

to those pensions with voluntary contributions are lower, but to produce the results in Table 11

the returns would have to be substantially negative for pensions with voluntary contributions.

       This leaves us with varying contribution rates for plans with voluntary contributions as the

primary suspect. In defined contribution plans without voluntary contributions, the plan itself

specifies how much the firm and the participant contribute. This information is included in the

pension plan calculations. The plan may also specify how these contributions have varied over

time, and this information is also included in the calculations. For voluntary contributions, the

plan may specify minimum and/or maximum contributions, but the actual contributions must come

from the participant.24 Further, if the contribution rate has increased over time for a participant,


       24
           For reasons of confidentiality, the HRS did not tell the firm the name of the respondent
when it collected the pension documents from the firm. It was thus unable to ask anything about
the actual contribution rates for particular individuals and was forced to obtain this information

                                                  25
as might be expected as the participant moves closer to retirement, this information is not

captured in the survey. Thus the calculations based on voluntary contributions for participants

nearing retirement may considerably overestimate the values of the accumulations in the plans.25

Note again that if this explanation is correct, it is likely that the accumulation reported by the

respondent may be better than a plan value calculated from the pension document for these plans.

       This point is expanded in Table 13 and in Figure 1. This table groups defined contribution

pensions according to the value calculated by the pension program on the basis of the pension

documents. The top part of the table deals with defined contribution pensions without a provision

for voluntary contributions. The first row indicates the median accumulation reported by

respondents, and the second row indicates the median value calculated by the pension program.

The solid line in Figure 1 calculates the ratio between the two. The ratio is about 1.5 for small

pensions (below $5,000 in present value), and about 1.0 for pensions between $5,000 and

$50,000. Above $50,000, where the number of pensions is low, the ratio fluctuates more widely,

but there is no evidence of a systematic bias. All in all, the solid line confirms our more casual

finding from Table 11, that the reported accumulations and values calculated from the program do

not differ systematically for pensions without voluntary contributions.

       The lower part of Table 13, which is reflected in the dotted line in Figure 1, indicates the

results for pensions with voluntary contributions. For these pensions, for values above the first

category, there is evidence of a systematic difference between accumulations reported by

respondents and those estimated by the pension program using the pension documents. There is


from the respondents.
       25
            The correlation coefficient for the data in Table 12 is 0.478.

                                                    26
some indication that the degree of underestimation is worse for larger pensions. As discussed

before, the likely explanation for this is that the respondents have contributed less in previous

years than they are currently contributing. This implies that for defined contribution plans with

voluntary contributions, the calculated values from the pension documents probably overestimate

the true value of the accumulations. This brings us to the question: what is the best estimate of

the true value of the pensions? The inaccuracies in respondent reports are obvious. However, it

is also likely that the values calculated from the pension documents are not completely accurate.

Part of the reason is that the these calculations still employ uncertain information from the

respondents, such as earnings, years of service, and the like. Another reason is that the program

is forced to make assumptions about information not collected from respondents, such as the time

path of earnings and the time path of voluntary contributions. Is the best estimate of the true

value of the pension the value calculated from the pension documents or the value calculated from

the information that the respondents give? Or is it better to somehow combine the information in

the two sets of numbers?

          For defined benefit plans, the best estimate is almost certainly the one calculated from the

pension documents. It is subject to errors in earnings and years of service, but it captures the

details of the pension plan that most respondents may be unaware of unless they have already

retired and asked the firm as to how the benefits were calculated. In cases where there are sharp

differences, it seems much more likely that the respondent is making an uninformed guess than

that the provider calculations are substantially wrong. The fact that the two distributions are

similar does not give any cause to think that one or the other of the estimates is systematically

biased.


                                                   27
       Many of the same arguments hold for defined contribution plans with contributions that

are completely specified by the plan. In addition to uncertainties regarding earnings and years of

service, there is an additional uncertainty here having to do with investment returns. This

uncertainty would be an argument in favor of the respondent reports of the accumulations.

However, where there are large discrepancies between the accumulations as reported by the

respondent and the firm provided plan description, again, there do not appear to be systematic

differences between the two sets of values which would indicate that one or the other was biased.

       For defined contribution plans with voluntary contributions, the situation is even murkier.

It appears in this case that the amounts calculated from the plan documents are systematically

higher than the accumulations reported by respondents. It further appears that the probable cause

of this is that the respondents have increased their contribution rates over time, inducing the

calculations from the plan documents to be too high. This would be an argument for giving more

credence to the accumulations reported by respondents. However, there is still a tremendous

amount of scatter in Table 11, which means that for a substantial number of respondents, there is

an order of magnitude of difference between the amounts calculated from the pension document

and the amounts that the respondents report. Although increasing contribution rates could

contribute to some of the scatter, it seems unlikely that this could be the explanation for a scatter

of this magnitude. Moreover, the scatter appears to be approximately as wide as the scatter in

Table 10, for which the arguments that the scatter is due to respondent inaccuracies are more

persuasive. This leads to the conclusion that while the amounts calculated from the pension

documents are too high, much of the scatter in Table 11 is due to respondent misreporting.

       Given this conclusion, it would appear that the amounts calculated from the pension


                                                  28
documents, while too high, are probably better guides to the accumulations than are the

respondent reports. In this situation, the best approach may be to take the values calculated from

the pension documents and apply a correction to reduce the apparent bias. Table 14 presents the

results of a median regression attempting to quantify this overestimation for the sample of plans

with voluntary contributions. The dependent variable is the ratio of the accumulations reported

by respondents to the value calculated from the plan documents, which is the amount plotted on

the vertical axis in Figure 1. The independent variable is the log of the pension value calculated

from the plan documents, and its square. This value is the variable plotted on the horizontal axis

of Figure 1. The estimated function has a value of approximately unity at a pension value of

$1,000 and drops to 0.48 for a pension value of $25,000 and 0.36 for a pension value of

$100,000. To correct for the apparent bias in the values calculated from the pension documents,

we will adjust those values by reducing them according to the results implied by the regression in

Table 14.26

Projecting Pensions from Linked Data for Those Without a Linked Employer Record

       The last task is to predict the value of the pension, adjusted by the procedure described in

the last paragraph, based only on the information in the respondent’s survey. This will allow us to

predict the values of pensions for respondents for whom the survey was not able to obtain pension

documents. At first glance, it would seem that we could take the respondents’ defined benefit and

defined contribution pensions and project them separately, and then combine the results.

However, the problem is complicated by the fact that a substantial number of respondents are


       26
          Regressions with additional variables were tried, but in these regressions only a small
number of variables were significant, and they suffered from the problem that they yielded
negative predicted values for some of the pensions.

                                                 29
misinformed about the type of plan they have, as shown in Table 3. For example, for a

respondent who reported only a defined benefit plan, we could regress the values calculated from

the plan documents on the values calculated from the respondents’ expected benefit amounts, but

this would miss the fact that of respondents who report only a defined benefit plan, almost half in

fact either have an additional defined contribution plan or have only a defined contribution plan.

       There are two ways to deal with this problem. One is to use multinomial logits or probits

to predict the probability of a respondent actually having a defined benefit, defined contribution,

or both types of plans conditional on his answer to the question about plan type on the survey.

Then, conditional on each of these plan types, we could predict the value of the defined benefit

and defined contribution (as appropriate) conditional on the pension values calculated from

information that the individual reports. This would require, for instance, calculating the

probability that an individual who reports a defined benefit plan in fact has a defined contribution

plan, and then inferring the value of the defined contribution plan from the reported defined

benefit plan plus additional variables. In the end, we would take the expected value of the

imputed values of the various types of plans weighted by the probability that the individual has

them, conditional on the respondents’ reported plan types and pension values.

       A simpler way, and the one that will be pursued here, is to combine all the pensions that

the individuals have and to try to impute the combined value from the information available from

the respondents. To do so, however, we must be careful about combining the pension amounts.

The value of the defined benefit plan is the value that the respondent expects to collect and

includes the effects of future years of work. On the other hand, the value of the defined

contribution plan is the amount that is accumulated in the respondent’ account, which presumably


                                                 30
only includes the effects of work to the date of the survey. To combine the two amounts for a

single individual, we should either extend the defined contribution amount out to the respondent’s

retirement date or only consider the part of the defined benefit value that is due to work to date.

       The choice is largely dictated by the purpose of the exercise. To compute a pension

amount that reflects current wealth as of the survey date, adjusting the defined benefit amount

would be appropriate. To compute a final pension wealth amount at retirement, adjusting the

defined contribution amount forward to the expected retirement age would be more advisable.

Here, we construct a pension amount to be used in conjunction with other components of wealth

as of the survey date, so we adjust the defined benefit amounts to correspond to the amount as of

the survey date. Unfortunately, there is no unique way to do this, since two approaches are

available. One approach figures the value of the pension using current tenure and current

earnings, and assumes that the individual separates from the firm immediately. A second

approach figures the discounted value of the pension assuming that the participant works until the

expected retirement age, and prorates the pension based on the proportion of eventual years of

service already accumulated. In the literature, the former approach is known as the “legal” value

of the pension, while the latter is known as the “projected” value of the pension. The argument is

akin to the familiar problem of allocating the price of an asset over time: there are a variety of

methods of figuring depreciation. In the current context, there is probably an argument for using

the projected measure of pension value, since the legal measure effectively ignores the option

value that the participant has acquired by working at the firm to date.

       To calculate the respondent’s total pension value, we rely on two amounts, one based on

the pension documents, and one based only on the respondents’ responses. The procedures are


                                                  31
similar to each other except for defined contribution pensions with voluntary contributions. The

accumulations directly reported by the respondents are taken as is, but the amounts calculated

from the pension documents are reduced according to the procedure discussed above to allow for

increasing contributions over time. To the accumulations for DC plans with voluntary

contributions, modified as described, we add the value of defined contribution pensions without

voluntary contributions. This gives two figures for total defined contribution pensions: one based

on plan documents, and one on accumulations reported by respondents. For defined benefit plans,

we multiply the amount calculated from the expected benefit amounts by the fraction of years

until retirement that have already been served. Then the total defined benefit amount is added to

the total defined contribution amount, separately for the amounts calculated from plan documents

and for the amounts based on the respondents’ answers. Thus, it would be possible for the total

pension value, calculated from the plan documents, to be the sum of a defined benefit pension and

a defined contribution pension with voluntary contributions, if those pensions are indicated in the

plan documents. At the same time, the total pension value based on the respondent’s answers

would simply be a defined contribution pension with no voluntary contributions, if the respondent

listed only that type of pension when asked about pensions.

       Table 15 tabulates the resulting total pension values as calculated from plan documents vs.

the total values calculated only from respondents’ information.27 Note that unlike the previous

tables, this one includes cases where the respondent told the survey that he or she had one type of

pension but the plan documents indicated another type. The table looks reasonably symmetric



       27
         Note that the value of DC plans with voluntary contributions is adjusted according to the
coefficients in Table 14.

                                                 32
around the main diagonal, as would be expected since we have eliminated systematic

discrepancies between calculated values and reported accumulations for the defined contribution

plans. However, there is a wide scatter, indicating that there remains a large difference between

the amounts calculated from the plan documents and those reported by the respondents.

       Table 16 reports on regressions to explain the values calculated from the plan descriptions,

which are taken to be approximately correct.28 In total there are six regressions. The first four

regressions use observations in which pension value estimates are available from both the provider

and the respondent. The first and third of these regressions use only the value of the plan

calculated from the survey questions as an explanatory variable. The second and fourth add

additional explanatory variables. The second and fourth regressions use the preferred

specification, and these results give some idea as to how much adding in the additional

explanatory variables improves the fit of the regression. The fifth and sixth regressions explain

the value of pensions obtained from provider plan descriptions, but pertain to observations where

pension amounts are not available in the respondent survey. Since the final two regressions use

only the observations for which the pension value cannot be calculated from the survey questions,

it perforce does not include that value. From Table 10 we saw that respondents who did not

report amounts for their pensions had, on average, lower values calculated from the plan

documents than did respondents who did report a value. Hence, it would not be advisable to take



       28
          Note that the provider plan values for DC plans with voluntary contributions in Table 16
are adjusted according to the coefficients in Table 14. The regressions include variables for
missing values for plan characteristics, with the value for the missing variable indicator set to 1 if
the characteristic is relevant to the type of plan and the plan characteristic is missing, and the
value of the missing variable set to zero, so that the value is picked up in the coefficient of the
variable indicating the value is missing.

                                                  33
a mechanical approach, applying a regression for those who did report pension values to impute

pensions for those who did not report pension values without any further adjustment.

       Equations 1 and 3 and equations 2 and 4 are related regressions. Because the distributions

of pension values appear to be roughly loglinear, if regressions were run on the linear values

computed from the plan documents vs. the linear values calculated from the survey questions, the

regressions would give enormous weight to very high value pensions. To avoid this, we take the

log of the pension values. However, this creates another problem, since some of the pensions,

especially those calculated from the plan documents, have zero values. For the explanatory

variable (the value calculated from the survey questions), we can take care of this by creating a

binary variable which takes on a value of one if the pension value is zero. For the dependent

variable, it requires estimating the pension value in two steps. The first step is a probit for the

probability that the pension value calculated from the plan documents will be zero. As might be

expected, this probability declines rapidly as the pension value calculated from the survey

questions increases. The second step is a regression of the log of the value from the plan

documents on a set of explanatory variables, conditional on the value being positive. The probits

are in equations 1, 2 and 5; the regressions are in the third, fourth and sixth equations.

       For those who have positive employer-provided and respondent pensions, equation 3

suggests an elasticity of employer pension value with respect to reported respondent value of

around .73. The R2 for that equation is 0.63, suggesting that self reported plan value is

associated with about two thirds of the variation in the plan value calculated from firm reports.

Holding other plan features and job characteristics constant, equation 4 suggests an elasticity of

firm reported plan values with respect to respondent values of .24, but that holds constant a


                                                  34
number of plan characteristics that are associated with higher plan value. Thus equation 4 should

be used to predict pension values, but a great deal of care should be exercised in attempting to

interpret any particular coefficients.

Other Sources of Error:

        We have not yet considered another source of error on the part of respondents. Some

individuals may not correctly report whether they are covered by a pension on their job. One

worrisome scenario occurs when a respondent reports the firm does not offer a pension, but the

firm does in fact offer a pension and the respondent is covered. When informed by the respondent

that the firm does not offer a pension, the HRS does not attempt to collect a plan description.

One way to search for such an error is to compare responses in wave 1 and wave 2 for

respondents who said they were in the same job. If the respondent said he had a pension in wave

1, he was asked about changes in that pension in wave 2, wherein he could deny he had a pension.

If the respondent said he did not have a pension in wave 1, he is asked in wave 2 whether he has a

pension. As seen from Table 17, about 20% of those saying they did not have a pension in 1992

reversed their stance in 1994, but relatively few who said they did have a pension in 1992 denied

it in 1994. Whether the asymmetry is due to the differences in the questions asked in 1994, or

whether the respondent reports a pension only if he decides to participate, and those reporting

coverage decided to participate in ‘94, is open to question. Given that a denial is stronger than

simply responding afresh to the pension question, we would have expected this pattern to some

degree, but perhaps not to this extent.

C. Social Security Comparisons

        The Social Security earnings records provided by the HRS are unique to this group of


                                                 35
surveys. Only a few researchers who work at or with the Social Security Administration have

access to comparable data. From these records, we can closely estimate for HRS respondents the

amount of covered earnings, computed as Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME), and

values of their Social Security benefits, computed as the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA).

Although there is a small chance of a mismatch, the earnings records are a gold standard.

Therefore patterns of discrepancies between respondent reports and the benefits computed from

the earnings histories are very informative. Moreover, these relationships are useful in predicting

the values of Social Security benefits for the 25 percent of HRS respondents for whom we do not

have Social Security earnings records.

       Table 18 summarizes the distributions of reported earnings based on Social Security

records and respondent reports of earnings histories for the 9472 respondents for whom HRS has

a matched earnings record.29 The data in the table are AIME computed on an annual basis, i.e.,

AIME multiplied by 12. Using respondent reports, including earnings on the current or last job in

1992, at the start of the current or last job, in a previous job, in past pension covered jobs, and

incorporating information from wave 3 on the age the respondent initially entered the labor force,

years of full time work, and years of covered work, we overestimate average indexed yearly

earnings by about 6.6 percent, overestimate average yearly earnings for men by about 3.5 percent,

and overestimate average indexed yearly earnings for women by about 23 percent. When the




       29
         Table 18 includes the social security records obtained based on permissions granted by
respondents in wave 1, as analyzed in Table 1, and in addition it includes social security records
obtained with permissions granted by respondents in waves 2 and 3.

                                                  36
differences are ordered from low to high, however, the median difference is greatly reduced.30

        Table 19 displays the joint distribution of the Average Indexed Monthly Earnings on a

yearly basis. The dispersion is narrower than the dispersion of pension values. In Table 19, there

are a total of 9472 observations; of those, 7303, or 77 percent, fall within one cell of the diagonal,

and 4066 observations, or 43 percent of the observations fall exactly on the diagonal. The R2 is

0.82.

        The univariate distributions of the primary insurance amounts on an annual basis, as

computed from respondent earnings reports and from SSA earnings records are reported in Table

20. The means as computed from respondent earnings reports are 5.8 percent higher than the

means computed from Social Security earnings records. For men, the values computed from

respondent reports are 1.4 percent above the amounts computed from Social Security earnings

records, and for women, using the values computed from respondent reports of earnings causes

benefits to be overstated by 13.5 percent. It is likely that the cap on covered earnings plays some

role in generating the discrepancy, but the cap cannot account for the fact that benefits for women

are overstated by so much more than the overstatement found for men.



        30
          It would also be of interest to estimate the relation of the benefit calculated from the
respondent’s earnings record and the benefit the respondent expects, as reported in question N46
of the HRS. However, looking at the correlation between the respondent’s estimated social
security amount and the amount calculated from the records runs against several problems. First,
less than half of the respondents ventured a guess as to the amount. Looking at the counts for
question N46, 5815 respondents reported that they expected to receive social security benefits,
but only 2563 ventured an amount. Secondly, since the question was in section N, the financial
respondent answered the question for both spouses, meaning that there is a non-random sample of
respondents answering the question for themselves. Third, there is a temporal mismatch: the
amount constructed from the record pertains to earnings through 1991, but the amount self-
reported presumably includes the effects of any future work. In addition, it is reported in dollars
of some future year, and we don’t have a good fix on the price levels in that year.

                                                 37
        In Table 21, which involves more cells than in Table 19, 6033 observations, or 64 percent

of the observations, fall within one cell of the diagonal. The observations along the diagonal

account for 31 percent of all observations (2942/9472).

        Tables 22 and 23 report the relations between the present values of own benefits as

computed from respondent earnings reports and those obtained from the Social Security

Administration. Overall, the present value of own benefits is seen in Table 22 to be 5.9 percent

too high when computed from respondent reported earnings. For men the lifetime benefits are

about 0.8 percent too high when computed from respondent earnings histories, and for women

they are 13.6 percent too high. From Table 23, we find that 68 percent of the observations are

within one cell of the main diagonal (6428/9472), and that the observations along the main

diagonal account for 34 percent of the observations (3251/9472).

        Table 24 reports coefficients for equations that relate the AIME on an annual basis,

computed from the Social Security earnings record, to variables that are observable in the survey.

These equations include observables associated with the availability of an earnings record, and

may be used to predict the annualized AIME for those observations without a Social Security

record on the basis of the observable characteristics for those respondents. When separate

equations are estimated for men and women, the regression accounts for 60 percent of the

variance in annualized AIME for men, and 66 percent of the variance for women. Since this

equation is meant for prediction, rather than for analytical purposes, it includes a number of

different measures of earnings and benefits. Consequently, the coefficients on particular variables

are not readily interpretable.




                                                 38
                                          IV. Conclusions

       We began the study by asking whether it is possible to do a reasonable job in explaining

who has a linked Social Security or pension record and who does not. There is some systematic

relationship. Those with the least valuable pensions are less likely to have a pension match.

Those with higher incomes are less likely to have a pension or Social Security match. This creates

a problem for researchers who would base their analysis of pension or Social Security wealth only

on a sample that includes respondents with linked data. Nevertheless, observables do not do a

very good job in explaining who gave permission to obtain a Social Security record. Pension

matches are more predictable, but the explanatory power is still not very high. Thus in neither

case is there is a very strong role for observables, suggesting that the penalty from restricting the

sample may not be very high. However, we have not generated evidence on selectivity with

respect to unobservables.

       We have also investigated how pension plan features and values differ under two

circumstances: when the information is obtained directly from respondents, and when the

information is obtained from the employer. In addition, we compared covered earnings histories

developed from respondent reports, and the implied Social Security benefits, with covered

earnings histories obtained from the Social Security Administration, and the implied benefits.

       For those who have matched records, we also ask whether it is possible to explain the

variation in pension values and earnings histories based on employer-provided pension records or

Social Security administrative data, using information from respondent reports, including

respondent perceptions of pension values or earnings histories, to provide the explanations.

Relatively good explanations are obtained. For most purposes, these results suggest that it will be


                                                  39
possible to predict pension and Social Security values for those without a matched record based

on the relationship between respondent reported outcomes and administrative or firm-provided

data for those with a record available. The equations we estimate can be used to predict pension

and Social Security values for those in the HRS without an attached pension or Social Security

record. The accompanying files we produce for HRS users can be used not just to impute

pension and social security wealth levels for those without a matched record, but can also be used

by researchers who require information on pension or social security wealth levels, but do not

wish to or cannot obtain permission from the HRS to use restricted data.

       Nevertheless, observed discrepancies between the firm provided and administrative

records on the one hand, and respondent reports on the other are large for many respondents,

large enough to suggest that a great deal of caution is required in any behavioral research that

uses pension or Social Security measures as explanatory variables. In addition, in the case of the

dates of early and normal retirement and the benefit reduction rates associated with defined

benefit plans, the discrepancies between self reported values and values obtained from linked data

are too wide to permit imputation. Thus researchers will have to be especially cognizant of the

effects of reporting error on parameter estimates, especially when attempting to predict the effects

of nonlinear benefit formulas on the retirement decisions made by those who do not have a

pension plan description available.

       The implications of this situation depend on the nature of the analysis. For the estimation

of retirement models, particularly models whose purpose is to estimate the effect of economic

incentives on retirement, researchers may be justified in omitting observations if the Social

Security record, or more importantly the pension record, is not available. Given the magnitudes


                                                 40
of the errors in reporting early and normal retirement ages in defined benefit plans and benefit

reduction rates, it seems likely that the retirement incentives will be severely misrepresented if

only the respondent reports can be used. Many respondents may retire at ages that correspond to

their true incentives, but if those incentives are inferred by the researcher to occur at other ages, it

will appear to the researcher that respondents are not responding to economic incentives. The

situation is better in studies that seek to simulate behavior under different hypothetical scenarios.

In simulations, it is not quite so crucial that pensions be matched exactly with the right individuals,

as long as the statistical matches are valid.

        Our findings also suggest that the behavioral models may have to be modified. It appears

that older respondents today are pessimistic about what their plans will be worth. This pessimism

is recent, and different from the situation ten years ago, when there was an important subgroup of

respondents who was overly optimistic about its benefits, and when the respondents would be

permitted to retire. The wide discrepancies we find at the individual level between the pension

reports of respondents and firms, and the Social Security amounts based on earnings reports from

respondents and computed from earnings records, further suggest that even those on the verge of

retirement have imperfect information about their pensions and Social Security. Many

respondents approaching retirement may not be reacting to the correct information, but may be

making their decisions based on a faulty understanding of their retirement programs Accordingly,

the discrepancies we find raise important questions about models of retirement and saving that

assume that households are fully informed about their financial condition, and that they fully

understand the incentives presented by complex pension and Social Security rules.




                                                   41
Table 1: Probit For Probability Permission Was Given in Wave 1 to Match the Social Security Earnings Record
             Independent Variable                        Partial Effect                          z
    female                                                    0.000                       0.01
    single                                                  -0.034                       -2.94
    no child                                                -0.018                       -0.99
    child not known                                         -0.173                       -4.81
    black                                                   -0.028                       -2.26
    Hispanic                                                -0.061                       -3.96
    high school drop out                                      0.014                       1.22
    some college                                            -0.021                       -1.69
    college graduate                                        -0.028                       -1.70
    some graduate school                                    -0.041                       -2.50
    home owner                                              -0.008                       -0.56
    assets $0 to 10K                                          0.075                       4.02
    assets 10K to 25 K                                        0.072                       3.64
    assets 25 K to 100K                                       0.035                       2.99
    assets 250K to 1000K                                    -0.038                       -3.00
    assets 1000+K                                           -0.010                       -0.44
    assets not known                                        -0.190                       -4.12
    retirement horizon <2 years                             -0.001                       -0.08
    retirement horizon 2 to 4 years                           0.006                       0.33
    retirement horizon 10+ years                              0.001                       0.09
    retirement horizon never                                -0.040                       -2.29
    retirement horizon not applicable                       -0.042                       -2.21
    retirement horizon not asked from                       -0.540                      -23.64
    proxy
    retirement horizon not known                            -0.047                       -2.70
    firm size 0 to 4 employees                               0.021                        1.04
    firm size 5 to 14 employees                              0.008                        0.38
    firm size 15 to 24 employees                             0.012                        0.38
    firm size 25 to 99 employees                             0.039                        1.88
    firm size 500+ employees                                 0.029                        2.01
    firm size not known                                     -0.013                       -0.54
    nonmanufacturing                                        -0.002                       -0.17
    industry not known                                      -0.035                       -0.62
    management                                              -0.010                       -0.89
    white collar                                            -0.015                       -1.19
    occupation not known                                    -0.172                       -1.84
    union                                                    0.020                        1.49
    union not known                                          0.054                        2.38
    annual earnings $0 to 15K                               -0.015                       -0.74
    annual earnings $15 to 30K                              -0.029                       -1.51
    annual earnings $30 to 50K                              -0.036                       -1.90
    annual earnings $100+K                                  -0.035                       -0.96
    annual earnings not known                               -0.069                       -2.02
    pension                                                 -0.009                       -0.76
    pension status not known                                 0.184                        1.95
    cons                                                                                  8.26
    Number of Observations, 12,652            Log Likelihood, -7158.599            Pseudo R2, 0.0652



                                                    42
                                      Table 2: Probit for Probability There Is a Matched Pension Provider Survey
      Independent Variable                 All Pensions              Current Job Pension            Last Job Pension           Previous Job Pension
                                    Partial Effects       z      Partial Effects        z       Partial Effects        z    Partial Effects        z
female                                   0.010        0.747           0.010        0.54              0.073         2.077       -0.011         -0.485
single                                 -0.023         -1.396         -0.018        -0.866           -0.044         -1.032      -0.036         -1.299
no child                                 0.014        0.542           0.004        0.107             0.015         0.237        0.051          1.287
child not known                        -0.032         -0.663         -0.100        -1.619           -0.071         -0.614       0.093          1.180
black                                    0.053        3.099           0.000        0.014             0.107         2.677        0.103          3.541
Hispanic                               -0.020         -0.775         -0.041        -1.261           -0.123         -1.887       0.053          1.146
high school drop out                   -0.076         -4.505         -0.034        -1.528           -0.114         -3.237      -0.102         -3.429
some college                             0.033        2.061           0.007        0.328             0.070         1.667        0.046          1.748
college graduate                         0.082        3.887           0.087        3.043             0.133         2.278        0.042          1.301
some graduate school                     0.097        4.722           0.120        4.373             0.174         2.762        0.042          1.280
home owner                               0.050        2.349           0.018        0.627             0.133         2.463        0.055          1.612
assets $0 to 10K                         0.030        1.131           0.018        0.499             0.113         1.675        0.017          0.393
assets 10K to 25 K                     -0.009         -0.324         -0.021        -0.569           -0.022         -0.306       0.030          0.645
assets 25 K to 100K                    -0.001         -0.079          0.017        0.871            -0.031         -0.811      -0.004         -0.171
assets 250K to 1000K                   -0.005         -0.28           0.026        1.162            -0.049         -1.218      -0.010         -0.358
assets 1000+K                          -0.114         -3.178         -0.106        -2.08            -0.116         -1.335      -0.113         -2.069
assets not known                       -0.051         -0.65           0.060        0.603             0.157         0.663       -0.338         -1.943
retirement horizon <2 years              0.062        3.447           0.010        0.298             0.136         1.623        0.136          4.659
retirement horizon 2 to 4 years          0.036        1.683           0.043        1.77              0.075         0.521        0.024          0.601
retirement horizon 10+ years           -0.019         -1.117         -0.013        -0.65             0.142         1.423       -0.026         -0.864
retirement horizon never               -0.037         -1.383         -0.040        -1.203            0.049         0.366       -0.011         -0.270
retirement horizon not applicable        0.005        0.122                                          0.130         1.369       -0.009         -0.124
retirement horizon not asked from      -0.012         -0.386         -0.042        -1.14             0.129         1.186        0.042          0.821
proxy
retirement horizon not known           -0.013         -0.492          0.005        0.147            -0.119         -0.953       0.010          0.239
tenure 0 to 1                           0.013         0.367          -0.027        -0.685            0.029         0.345       -0.197         -1.202
tenure 2 to 4                           0.024         0.989          -0.039        -1.36             0.083         1.271        0.089          1.498
tenure 10+                              0.058         3.806           0.016        0.736             0.058         1.227        0.077          3.402
tenure not known                       -0.138         -1.156         -0.333        -1.506           -0.124         -0.503       0.029          0.140
firm size 5 to 14 employees            -0.409         -9.053         -0.391        -8.325           -0.421         -4.083       n.a.
firm size 15 to 24 employees           -0.254         -4.736         -0.283        -4.863           -0.165         -1.509       n.a.
firm size 25 to 99 employees           -0.238         -8.855         -0.248        -8.633           -0.193         -3.425       n.a.
firm size 500+ employees                0.014         0.876           0.012        0.675             0.025         0.752      n.a.

                                                                         43
       Independent Variable              All Pensions       Current Job Pension     Last Job Pension       Previous Job Pension
firm size not known                  -0.221        -3.984   -0.227        -3.735   -0.074        -0.547    n.a.
nonmanufacturing                      0.091        5.571     0.088        3.98      0.055        1.405     0.069        2.594
industry not known                    0.032        0.458     0.043        0.452    -0.090        -0.583    0.071        0.607
management                           -0.110        -7.091   -0.047        -2.272   -0.141        -3.671   -0.141        -5.468
white collar                         -0.013        -0.75    -0.031        -1.381   -0.075        -1.832    0.040        1.455
occupation not known                 -0.253        -2.076   -0.062        -0.329                          -0.362        -2.093
union                                 0.006        0.379     0.044        2.482    -0.007       -0.216     n.a.
union not known                      -0.120        -2.134   -0.169        -0.949    0.235       0.845      n.a.
annual earnings $0 to 15K             0.022        0.772     0.062        1.631    -0.109       -1.467     0.051        1.012
annual earnings $15 to 30K           -0.007        -0.282    0.025        0.786    -0.105       -1.52      0.007        0.131
annual earnings $30 to 50K           -0.001        -0.027    0.028        0.946    -0.125       -1.869     0.051        0.993
annual earnings $100+K               -0.307        -5.348   -0.285        -4.593   -0.347       -1.557    -0.281        -1.970
annual earnings not known            -0.079        -1.042   -0.047        -0.447    0.224       1.008     -0.179        -1.354
dc plan                              -0.185        -5.96    -0.190        -4.807   -0.074       -0.91     -0.165        -2.570
combination plan                     -0.044        -1.669   -0.055        -1.884    0.131       1.615     -0.072        -1.160
Plan type not known                  -0.226        -5.159   -0.189        -3.147   -0.070       -0.572     0.016        0.069
DB plan: annual benefits 0 to 2K     -0.089        -3.44    -0.073        -1.591   -0.151       -2.6      -0.037        -1.013
DB plan: annual benefits 2 to 5K     -0.065        -2.345   -0.087        -2.084   -0.074       -1.348    -0.009        -0.200
DB plan: annual benefits 10 to 25K    0.104        4.346     0.026        0.778     0.080       1.648      0.209        5.293
DB plan: annual benefits 25+K         0.143        4.536     0.152        3.409    -0.027       -0.423     0.203        3.839
DB plan: annual benefits dk           0.005        0.19     -0.016        -0.5     -0.078       -1.067    -0.191        -0.851
DC plan: 0-10K in account             0.047        1.704     0.085        2.686    -0.093       -1.101     0.032        0.518
DC plan: 10-25K in account            0.070        2.288     0.073        2.178     0.141       1.386     -0.012        -0.163
DC plan: 100-250K in account          0.088        1.884     0.084        1.704    -0.033       -0.226      0.150        1.093
DC plan: 250+K in account             0.147        2.153     0.132        1.717     0.199       0.769       0.134        0.927
DC plan: dk amount in account         0.055        1.964     0.064        2.034    -0.079       -0.977      0.056        0.860
constant                                           1.578                  1.716                 0.159                   -4.399
No. Of Obs.                                  8682                   4448                 1384                     2839
Pseudo R2                                   0.1574                 0.1164               0.1355                   0.1221
Log Likelihood                            -5031.335              -2539.922            -772.28188               -1606.1744




                                                                44
Table 3: Pension Plan Type as Reported by the Respondent and the Firm, for Current Job Held in
            1992, Including Only Those Respondents with a Matched Pension Plan
3A: Self Reported vs. Firm Provided Plan Types
                                                Self Reported
                       Provider Report          DB        DC       Both       DK       Total

                            DB                      777      213      380        22      1392
                            DC                      160      327      111        10       608
                           Both                     409      163      315        20       907
                           Total                   1346      703      806        52      2907

3B:Percentages with Self Reported vs. Firm Provided Plan Types
                                                Self Reported
                      Provider Report            DB       DC        Both      DK       Total

                            DB                 27.0%       7.0%    13.0%     1.0%      48.0%
                            DC                  6.0%      11.0%     4.0%     0.0%      21.0%
                           Both                14.0%       6.0%    11.0%     1.0%      31.0%
                           Total               46.0%      24.0%    28.0%     2.0%      100.0%

3C: Percentages with Self Reported Plan Type Conditional on Firm Report of Plan Type
(Percent of Row Total)
                                                Self Reported
                      Provider Report              DB      DC       Both      DK        Total

                            DB                 55.8%      15.3%    27.3%     1.6%      100.0%
                            DC                 26.3%      53.8%    18.3%     1.6%      100.0%
                           Both                45.1%      18.0%    34.7%     2.2%      100.0%
                           Total               46.3%      24.2%    27.7%     1.8%      100.0%

3D: Percentage with Firm Reported Plan Type Conditional on Respondent Report of Plan Type
(Percent of Column Total)
                                                Self Reported
                      Provider Report              DB      DC       Both      DK        Total

                            DB                57.7%        3.0%    47.1%    42.3%      47.9%
                            DC                11.9%       46.5%    13.8%    19.2%      20.9%
                           Both               30.4%       23.2%    39.1%    38.5%      31.2%
                           Total              100.0%      100.0%   100.0%   100.0%     100.0%


                                              45
  Table 4: Self Reported vs. Firm Provider Reported Dates of Early Retirement for Plans Reported as Defined Benefit by Both the
                                                    Respondent and the Firm

                                                             Self Reported
Provider   <50 50    51    52    53    54     55    56    57 58     59 60         61    62    63    64     65   >65   DK Total
Reported
  <50      19    5    5     3     5     2    54     1     2     2            7          23           1     2           7   138
   50       7   24    6     3     4     1    65     3     4     4      5     8     1    14           1     1          17 168
   51       3    6          2     1           5     1     2     2      2     3           5                 1           3   36
   52       1    3    2                      11           1            1     7           1                             4   31
   53       2         1     8     1     1     9                        2     3     1     1                  1          2   32
   54                       3     1     2     8      1           1     2     5           4                  1          3   31
   55      15   11    4     6     9    12    314    22    22    22    28    37     2    160    5     4     46    7    43 769
   56       3    2          2                20      2     2     1     1     6     2     9     1            5    2     4   62
   57       3         1     1                11      4           3     3     6     2     9     2            1          7   53
   58           1                       1     6      1    8      6     3     3     1     9                  3          4   46
   59      1                      2     1    11           3      4     3     9     1     6                  5          6   52
   60      9    5     1     3     1     6    26     8     4      7     8    40     5    68           2     17    1    25 236
   61           1                             4     1            1           7     4     7     1            1          2   29
   62      2    1                 1          13     1     3      3     3     7     3    28     2     2     11    1     7   88
   63                                         1                              1           6     2                 2     1   13
   64      1                                  1           1                  1           8     2           1           3   18
   65                                         2                                         21     4     1     8           8   44
  >65                                         1      2                      1            3     1           5      1    3   17
  DK                                                 1           2          1            8                 2      1    3   18
 Total     66   59   20    31    25    26    562    48    52    58    61   152    22    390   20    11    111    15   152 1881




                                                               46
  Table 5: Self Reported vs. Firm Provider Reported Dates of Early Retirement for Plans Reported as Defined Benefit by Both the
            Respondent and the Firm, Including Only Observations Of Wave 1 Respondents Who Plan to Retire By 1995

                                                                 Self Reported
 Provider   <5    50    51    52    53    54    55    56    57        58   59    60   61   62   63    64    65    >6   DK    Tot
Reported
  <50       6     2     1     2     1           17     1                          3        5                            2    40
   50       1     5                 2     1     17          2         1    1      2        1          1                 2    36
   51       1     3                              2                                1        2                            1    10
   52             1     1                        4          1                     1                                     2    10
   53                   1                 1      3                         1      1                                     1     8
   54                                            4                         1      3                                           8
   55       4     3     1     2     3     1     57     2    5         1    5     10   1    27   2     1     4     1     5    135
   56       1     1                              9                                2             1                 1          15
   57       2                                    2     1                              2    1    1                       1    10
   58                                            2     1    3         1           1        1                            1    10
   59                               1            1                                1                                     1     4
   60       1     1           2           3      8          1              2     10        10         1     3           3    45
   61                                            2                                3         1                           1     7
   62                                            2          1              1          1     6               1           1    13
   63                                                                            1          2   1                             4
   64                                            1                               1          1                                 3
   65                                            1                                          4   1           1           3    10
  >65                                                                            1          1                                 2
   DK                                                                                                             1           1

 Total      16    16    4     6     7     6     132    5    13        3    11    41   4    62   6     3     9     3     24   371




                                                                 47
 Table 6: Self Reported vs. Firm Provider Reported Dates of Normal Retirement for Plans Reported as Defined Benefit by Both the
                                                    Respondent and the Firm

                                                              Self Reported
Provider   <50 50    51    52    53    54    55    56    57    58 59 60          61    62    63    64    65    >65 DK Total
Reported
  <50      1    1     2           2           6                       1     3           5                 1               22
   50           7                             6     1     1                 5           7     2           7           5   41
   51           1           1                 1                             1           1                 2           1    8
   52      1    1     1     1                 2                       1     2           2           1                 1   13
   53                       4     1     1     5           1     2           1                                         1   16
   54      1                1     1     1     3     1                       1           2                 1           1   13
   55      4    2     1     1     2     2    81     2     3     1     3     5          15           2    13     2     7   146
   56                       1                 9     3     1     1     1     1           3                 3     2     1   26
   57                                        13     4     7     2           2           2     1           4     1     1   37
   58           1                 1     1     8     2     5     4     1     1           5           1     6           2   38
   59      1                      1          11           3     4     3     4           3     1     1     4           3   39
   60      1    2     1     1           4    63     6     9     5    15    69     6    67     7     2    50     9    26 343
   61                                         4     1     1                13     2     5                 5     2     2   35
   62      5    2     1     3     2          19     4     5     7     8    13    10    95    10     4    68    16    21 293
   63                                         2           1           1     1           5     1     1     3     1     3   19
   64                             1           3                 2     1     1           1     2     1     2     1     2   17
   65      5    2     2     4     3     3    74     3    12    15    21    41     7    188    6     7    287   17    42 739
  >65                                                                       1           3     1           4     6     2   17
  DK        1                                                   1           1           6           1     6     1     2   19
 Total     20   19    8    17    14    12    310   27    49    44    56    166   25    415   31    21    466   58    123 1881




                                                              48
  Table 7: Self-Reported vs. Provider Annual Early Retirement Reduction Rates, for Plans Reported as Defined Benefit by Both the
                                                    Respondent and the Firm

                                                              Self Reported
Provider   0-1%      1-2%      2-3%      3-4%      4-5%      5-6%      6-7%      7-8%     8-10%      >10      % NA       Total
Reported
  0-1%       1         9         4         6         1         4         4                             5        102       136
  1-2%       5         3         3         2         2         4         4         4         1         6        83        117
  2-3%       1         3         2         5                   8         2         6                   4        97        128
  3-4%       2         2         4         7                  10         3         2         1         3        123       157
  4-5%       3         7         4         5         3         5         4         4         2         9        191       237
  5-6%       4         1         3         1         1         6         4         2                   7        102       131
  6-7%                                     1                   1                             1                  47        50
  7-8%                 1                   1                                                 1                  27        30
 8-10%       2                             2                   2         1                   1         2        31        41
 >10%                  1                   1                   2         3                             3        62        72
DK/NA        7        28        14        20         2        16         7         9         6        26        647       782
 Total      25        55        34        51         9        58        32        27        13        65       1512      1881




                                                               49
                  Table 8: Self-Reported vs. Provider Voluntary Contributions

                                                     Self Reported
Provider Report                            No                        Yes        Total
No                                        121                         57         178
Yes                                       303                        392         695
Total                                     424                        449         873




                                                50
  Table 9: Distribution of Pension Values for Current Jobs Held at Time of the Survey ($1992)

                                Defined Benefit Plans             Defined Contribution Plans
                             Respondent           Provider       Respondent         Provider
                              Reported            Reported        Reported          Reported
        Percentile
           95                  385,497                 523,704     200,000           347,265
           90                  311,775                 387,276     128,322           223,951
           75                  211,733                 227,373      45,000           100,030
           50                  116,327                 112,380      15,000            29,067
           25                    48,084                 49,767       4,500             6,093
           10                    16,805                 24,223       1,200               750
            5                     9,231                 11,252         400                   0
      Mean Values             148,015              168,405         59,105           85,790
       Number of                          1,122                               641
      Observations

Columns 1 and 2 are present values as of the date of expected retirement, discounted to 1992.
They are not prorated to allow comparisons between individual and firm reports of DB plan
values, as the individual reports were as of the date of expected retirement. The DB and DC
amounts in this table are not comparable since the DC amounts are account balances as of 1992,
and do not include future contributions.




                                                  51
             Table 10: Self Reported Vs. Provider Reported Amounts Accumulated in Defined Benefit Plans

                                                 Self Reported
  Provider   0     0-5K     5-10K    10-20K 20-50K 50-100K 100-             200-    500- 1M    >1M        DK    Total
 Reported                                                      200K         500K
      0              6        3         3      5         4       6            5        1                  157    190
   0K-5K                      2         1      1                              1                            7     12
  5K-10K             3        2         2      1         1       3            2                            6     20
 10K-20K             5       13         7      6         3       3            1                           42     80
 20K-50K             3       19        31     65        38      25            9        1                  133    324
50K-100K             2        3         8     51        91      55           14                           141    365
100K-200K    1       1        5         3     21        63      131          62        1                  113    401
200K-500K                               6      7        16      84           147       2                  63     325
 500K-1M             1                         3                 5           43        7         2         6     67
    > 1M                                                                      2        2                          4
     DK              1                           5        2         2         1                           82     93
    Total    1      22       47        61       165      218       314       287       14        2        750   1881




                                                        52
             Table 11: Self Reported Vs. Provider Reported Amounts Accumulated in Defined Contribution Plans

                                                   Self Reported
  Provider     0       0-5K     5-10K   10-20K 20-50K 50-100K        100-      200-    500- 1M    >1M          DK    Total
 Reported                                                            200K      500K
      0        2        28        8         9        6           4     2                                       38    97
   0K-5K       1        58       14         7        5           1     1                                       25    112
  5K-10K                22       13         5        2           1               1                             12    56
 10K-20K       1        18       22        23       13           3      2                                      26    108
 20K-50K       1        18       19        21       37          10      2        2        1                    31    142
50K-100K                 9       12        13       27          18     15        3                             35    132
100K-200K                5        5        11       27          16     12        6        2        1           21    106
200K-500K                1        1         3       14          15     14       14        2        3           12    79
 500K-1M                                                         1               4                              1     6
    > 1M                          1                              1               1        1                           4
     DK                  4        1         4       11           3                                             51    74
    Total      5        163      96        96       142         73     48       31        6        4           252   916




                                                           53
 Table 12: Self Reported Vs. Provider Reported Amounts Accumulated in Defined Contribution Accumulated Amounts for Plans
                                               without Voluntary Contributions

                                                      Self Reported
  Provider          0   0-5K    5-10K     10-      20-       50-      100-    200-      500-     >1M       DK       Total
 Reported                                 20K      50K      100K      200K    500K      1M
      0         1        10       3        1        1         1                                             11       28
   0K-5K                 15       4        2        2         1        1                                     9       34
  5K-10K                  4       4        3        1         1                                              2       15
 10K-20K                  4       2        6        5         2        2                                     6       27
 20K-50K                  3       4                 8         2        2        2         1                  8       30
50K-100K                  2                 2       2         3        6        2                           10       27
100K-200K                 2       1                 3         1        1        2         1        1         4       16
200K-500K                                           1         1                 1                  2                  5
 500K-1M
    > 1M
     DK                                     1        1                                                      4         6
  Total         1        40       18       15       24          12     12       7         2        3        54      188




                                                           54
                  Table 13: Reported Accumulations and Calculated Values of Defined Contribution Pensions

                                                                  Calculated Value of Pension
                                  0-5K      5-10K     10-20K      20-50K   50-100K 100-200K 200-500K 500K-1M           >1M

                                                          Pensions Without Voluntary Contributions
Median Accumulation               1,900     7,000     14,000      24,850    92,000    40,000    400,000        -         -
 Reported By Respondents
Median Value Calculated from      1,207     7,668     15,924      27,972    67,050    142,295   287,970        -         -
 Pension Documents
Number of Observations             42         13        21          22        17        12           5
                                                             Pensions With Voluntary Contributions
Median Accumulation               3,375     4,200      7,000      15,000    30,000    37,500    94,500      206,000   201,750
 Reported By Respondents
Median Value Calculated from      1,146     6,945     15,090      30,389    69,141    131,885   292,690     550,933 1,151,112
 Pension Documents
Number of Observations             104        31        61          89        80        73           62       5         4




                                                             55
 Table 14: Median Regression for the Over Prediction of Pension Values Calculated from Plan
                                        Documents

                   Defined Contribution Plans with Voluntary Contributions
Dependent variable is the ratio of the value of the pension calculated from plan documents to
the accumulation reported by the respondent.
Explanatory Variables:                                             Coefficient         t-statistic
 Constant                                                              3.1822              3.56
 ln (pension value calculated from plan documents)                    -0.4200              2.39
 [ln (pension value calculated from plan documents)]2                  0.0152              1.77


Number of Observations                                                           467




                                              56
Table 15: Pension Value As Calculated From Plan Documents Vs. Pension Value As Calculated From Respondent Reports, All Plans



                                                       Self Reported
  Provider       0       0-5K    5-10K      10-      20-       50-     100-     200-      500-     >1M       DK      Total
 Reported                                   20K      50K      100K     200K     500K      1M
      0          5        67       30        35       31       14       11        4        2         0       295        494
   0K-5K         1        77       20         7       11        1        2        1        0         0       88       208
  5K-10K         0        26       24        22       14        2        5        0        0         0       81        174
 10K-20K         1        20       26        43       49       18        4        2        0         0       98         261
 20K-50K         0        11       12        38       92       61       31       14        2         0       176        437
50K-100K         0         3        4         9       39       90       72       21        2         0       163       403
100K-200K        0         1        5         2       15       59       121      56        4         2       111       376
200K-500K        0         1        0         4        4       15       67       128       9         1       53         282
 500K-1M         0         0        0         0        2        0        3       26        6         2        6          45
    > 1M         0         0        0         0        0        0        0        2        2         1        0           5
     DK          1         4        2         2       10        4        3        1        0         0       143        170
   Total         8       210       123      162      267      264       319      255       27        6      1214      2855




                                                            57
                                                    Table 16: Regression of Provider Total Pensions on Self-Reported Pensions Plus Other Variables

Independent Variable            Dependent Variable =1       Dependent Variable =1       Dependent Variable is ln    Dependent Variable is ln     Dependent Variable =1 if   Dependent Variable is ln
                                if Provider Pension = 0     if Provider Pension = 0     Provider Pension Value;     Provider Pension Value;      Provider Pension = 0;      Provider Pension Value;
                                                                                        Includes Observations       Includes Observations        Includes Observations      Includes Observations
                                                                                        With Positive Provider      With Positive Provider       With Zero Self Reported    With Positive Provider
                                                                                        and Self Reported           and Self Reported                     Values            and Zero Self Reported
                                                                                                 Values                      Values                                                  Values

                                Coefficient    z            Coefficient     z           Coefficient     t           Coefficient     t            Coefficient    z           Coefficient     t
constant                         1.8518        -3.634         1.3436        0.843        2.8820         17.516       0.3946         .627           1.1667       0.609       -1.7049        -1.791
respondent reports zero         -1.5584        -12.302       -0.1049        -0.199       6.2749         14.304       2.1122         5.941
  pension value
ln of value respondent          -0.3005        7.610         -0.1265        -3.044        0.7347        48.866        0.2393        11.914
  reports
current age                                                  -0.0001        -0.012                                    0.0641        13.126           -0.0103    -0.847       0.0925        14.631
age at hire                                                   0.0051        0.839                                    -0.0588        -24.723           0.0268    4.348       -0.0780        -23.671
age expects benefits to begin                                 0.0277        0.020                                    -0.0304        -4.114           -0.0482    -2.486      -0.0124        -1.514
age benefit expected missing                                                                                                                         -0.6440    -0.535      -1.6050        -3.096
respondent has only dc plan                                   2.1980        1.712                                    -2.7741        -6.090            0.0819    0.062       -3.0848        -5.504
respondent has db and dc, or                                 -0.2497        -1.107                                   -0.2605        -3.290           -0.4248    -1.829      -0.2903        -2.542
   combination plan
early retirement age, db                                      0.1299        0.666                                     0.0036        0.599            0.0153     0.836       -0.0272        -3.468
 plan, =0 for DC plan
respondent reports can                                                                                                0.0180        0.036                                   -1.7266        1.921
 collect benefits at any age
early retirement age missing                                  0.6858        0.570                                     0.1531        0.422            1.0917     0.989       -1.7534        -3.694
normal retirement age, db                                    -0.0191        -1.134                                   -0.0037        -0.695           0.0087     0.486        0.0016        0.205
  plan, =0 for DC plan
normal retirement age                                        -1.5753        -1.395                                   -0.1793        -0.529           0.5958     0.529        0.1609        0.324
  missing
annual reduction factor, db                                  -3.5662        -0.954                                   -0.0411        -0.080           1.4351     0.901       -0.0061        -0.008
  plans, =0 for dc plans
reduction factor missing                                     -0.2735        -0.966                                   -0.0267        -0.411            0.0914    0.353        0.1601        1.407
contribution rate for                                        -1.0265        -0.704                                    1.2385        1.981            -3.8001    -2.039       1.7229        1.964
  401k/403b/sra plans, 0
  otherwise
contribution rate missing                                    -0.1614        -1.008                                    0.1486        1.941             0.2449    1.208         0.3791       3.326
female                                                        0.0170        0.142                                     0.1380        3.035            -0.3595    -2.658        0.2552       3.703
ln earnings                                                  -0.2999        -2.819                                    0.7975        16.156           -0.1231    -0.923        1.2024       16.621
zeroearn                                                     -2.8484        -2.144                                    8.2435        13.437                                  (dropped)
fulltime                                                     -0.1308        -0.834                                   -0.1273        -1.924           -0.2316    -1.319       -0.3411       -3.531
union                                                         0.2526        2.234                                     0.0259        0.632             0.1450    1.268         0.1835       3.112
manufacturing                                                 0.2150        1.326                                    -0.0450        -0.685           -0.2963    -1.392       -0.2656       -3.018




                                                                                                 58
Independent Variable          Dependent Variable =1     Dependent Variable =1     Dependent Variable is ln   Dependent Variable is ln   Dependent Variable =1 if   Dependent Variable is ln
                              if Provider Pension = 0   if Provider Pension = 0   Provider Pension Value;    Provider Pension Value;    Provider Pension = 0;      Provider Pension Value;
                                                                                  Includes Observations      Includes Observations      Includes Observations      Includes Observations
                                                                                  With Positive Provider     With Positive Provider     With Zero Self Reported    With Positive Provider
                                                                                  and Self Reported          and Self Reported                   Values            and Zero Self Reported
                                                                                           Values                     Values                                                Values
                              Coefficient    z          Coefficient     z         Coefficient     t          Coefficient    t           Coefficient    z           Coefficient     t
public employment                                         0.3303        2.019                                  0.4032       6.931        -0.0031       -0.018        0.4075        4.130
manager or professional                                   0.3655        2.359                                  0.2653       4.632         0.4016       2.168         0.0191        0.216
white collar                                             -0.0198        -0.135                                 0.2453       4.394         0.5067       3.043        0.0576        0.707
firm size >100                                            0.0586        0.386                                 -0.0494       -0.738       -0.4179       -2.472       0.0589        0.529
firm size missing                                         0.7342        1.794                                  0.0237       0.114        -0.1610       -0.348      -0.1085        -0.296
health is good                                           -0.0766        -0.701                                 0.0066       0.156         0.1376       1.129         0.0144       0.227
health is poor                                            0.0467        0.255                                 -0.0348       -0.474        0.0621       0.328        -0.0761       -0.788
plans over next few months                                0.1812        1.545                                 -0.0019       -.04          0.0711       0.541        -0.0063       -0.090
 or years
planning horizon is 5 to 10                               0.0591        0.348                                 0.0687        1.013        -0.0121       -0.057      -0.0145        -0.144
  years, or more than 10
years
planning horizon not                                      0.2955        0.915                                 0.2286        1.621        -0.3081       -1.074      -0.0578        -0.377
  available
number of words recalled in                              -0.0163        -0.873                                0.0167        2.427        -0.0119       -0.559      -0.0008        -0.072
  second test
missing recall measure                                   -0.0247        -0.079                               -0.0393        -0.289       0.1249        0.393        0.1580        0952


Number of Observations           1614                      1611                      1415                       1415                       1067                       776

Adjusted or Pseudo R2           0.1525                    0.2686                    0.6297                     .7970                       .4133                     .7256




                                                                                            59
                   Table 17: Pensions Over Time In The Same Job

                                            1994 Observation
                                            No Pension            Pension
1992 Observation   No Pension               1075                  271
                   Pension                  73                    3138




                                       60
               Table 18: SSA Vs. Respondent Reported Earnings (AIME, Expressed on an Annual Basis, in 1992 Dollars)

                          All Respondents                      Male Respondents                       Female Respondents
                 Respondent     SSA     Difference    Respondent       SSA      Difference    Respondent      SSA        Difference
    Mean              13378     12548        -1190          19909      19230          -680           8545       6926         -1620
  Percentile
      95              31958     30820         7720          33341      32587        10221           24526      20228          4702
      90              29422     28252         4785          32022      31034         6915           20330      16211          2950
      75              22922     20773         1481          28356      27261         2609           13280      10425           778
      50              12110     10070         -453          21866      20551          -245           6554       5067           -611
      25                3969     3513        -3660          12366      11570         -3778           1850       1754         -3572
      10                 462      903        -8225           3853       4772         -8815              0        394         -7730
      5                    0      264       -11952             757      2180       -13526               0           91      -10945
  Number of                    9472                                  4328                                    5144
   Obser.
 Correlation                   0.82                                   0.72                                   0.76

This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3. Average
Indexed Monthly Earnings, expressed on an annual basis, equals AIME*12.




                                                                61
      Table 19: Distribution of Respondent And SSA Reports of Average Indexed Yearly Earnings (Thousands of 1992 Dollars)

                                                              SSA Records
  Respondent 0 - 4         4-8       8 - 12 12 - 16 16 - 20 20 - 24 24 - 28 28 - 32 32 - 36 36 - 40                  40+     Total
    Report
     0-4         1803       358        105       34        27        21        18        14         2      0          0      2382
     4-8          395       519        182       70        32        16        10         4         2      0          0      1230
    8 - 12        173       338        358       136       49        25        10         6         2      0          0      1097
    12 - 16        72       148        264       228      144        63        22         9         0      0          0       950
    16 - 20        47       62         145       217      178       125        75        18         3      1          0       871
    20 - 24        31       40         63        117      195       184       136        41        10      0          0       817
    24 - 28        32       13         46        50        94       206       287       125        16      0          0       869
    28 - 32        13       20         14        23        39        76       188       334        83      0          0       790
    32 - 36         6        6         16        14        24        25        44       141       172      0          0       448
    36 - 40         0        1          0         0         0         1         3         3         4      3          0       15
      40+           0        0          0         0         1         0         1         0         1      0          0        3
     Total       2572      1505       1193       889      783       742       794       695       295      4          0      9472
This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3. Average
Indexed Yearly Earnings equals Average Indexed Monthly Earnings, expressed on an annual basis, which equals AIME*12.




                                                                 62
          Table 20: SSA Vs. Respondent Reported Primary Insurance Amount, Expressed on an Annual Basis (in 1992 Dollars)

                         All Respondents                       Male Respondents                       Female Respondents
                Respondent     SSA       Difference   Respondent       SSA      Difference    Respondent       SSA        Difference
   Mean                6293      5948          -345          8399        8282         -117           4521        3984            -537
  Percentile
     95              12003      11806         3153         12189        12087         3829          10078        8780           2659
     90              11507      11156         1944         12014        11844         2404           8823        7607           1561
     75                9574      8940          623         11201        10867          887           6725        5861            464
     50                6371      5764          -171          9252        8873           -59          4727        4209            -295
     25                3323      2959        -1316           6431        6203        -1124           1554        1479           -1495
     10                 386       758        -2901           3201        4012        -2716               0        332           -3053

      5                   0       222        -4216            646        1833        -4208               0           76         -4219
 Number of                     9472                                   4238                                    5144
  Obser.
 Correlation                   0.81                                   0.71                                    0.76

This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3. The
Primary Insurance Amount is multiplied by 12.




                                                                 63
 Table 21: Distribution of Primary Insurance Amount Based on Respondent And SSA Reports (Thousands of 1992 Dollars, Expressed
                                                       on an Annual Basis)

                                                          SSA Records
 Respondent     0-1     1-2     2-3    3-4     4-5     5-6 6-7 7-8             8-9    9 - 10 10-11 11-12 12-13        13+       Total
   Report
    0-1          731    240     99      64      67      45      16     14       9      10       9      10       1       0       1315
    1-2          120    128     84      43      54      25      12      5       5       3       1       1       0       0        481
    2-3          60     88      93      62      62      33      12      5       5       2       5       4       0       0        431
    3-4          42     49      65      71      87      36       8      6       2       4       2       1       0       0        373
    4-5          54     70      112     121     250     133     50     31      19       9       6       3       1       0        859
    5-6          46     45      52      70      221     291     125    49      29      11       6       4       1       0        950
    6-7          17     24      30      32      137     209     195    103     63      26      14       6       2       0        858
    7-8          16     10      20      19      46      114     180    145     104     54      29      11       2       1        751
    8-9          12      7      11       8      31      72      112    137     131     95      63      18       6       0        703
   9 - 10        11      5      10       9      21      41      53     101     150     135     109     50       8       0        703
   10-11         14      3       4       9       3      27      33     48      87      149     220     120     17       0        734
   11-12          4      6       1       6      16      14      17     26      50      88      159     375     76       0        838
   12-13          3      1       3       0       7       9      15     10      20      23      44      150     176      0        461
    13+           0      0       0       1       0       0       0      2       1       1       3       2       4       1        15
   Total        1130    676     584     515    1002    1049     828    682     675     610     670     755     294      2       9472

This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3. The
Primary Insurance Amount is multiplied by 12 to express it on an annual basis.




                                                                 64
                       Table 22: SSA Vs. Respondent Present Value of Social Security Benefits (1992 Dollars)

                           All Respondents                      Male Respondents                         Female Respondents
                Respondent       SSA     Difference    Respondent        SSA     Difference   Respondent        SSA         Difference
    Mean          55745         56222         -3123       71880         71305        -844       42170          37130          -5041
  Percentile
     95          113163         109625       28315       119057         117684     32868        97495          85268          24281
     90          100862         97570        17501       110794         108923     20649        83782          72367          14584
     75           81624         76572         5558        94583         92596       7374        62816          54192           4128
     50           55678         50471         -1423       75379         72692        -400       42207          36548          -2585
     25           29682         26637        -11635       51592         49702       -9327       13963          13511         -13789
     10            3331         6807         -26340       26403         30988      -23195            0          2977         -27956
      5                0        2031         -38845         4891        14643      -36082            0           665         -40012
 Number of                      9472                                    4328                                   5144
  Obser.
 Correlation                    0.81                                    0.75                                    0.77

This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3.




                                                                   65
         Table 23: Distribution of Present Values of OWN Social Security Benefits Based on Respondent And SSA Reports
                                                      (1,000's of 1992 Dollars)

                                                               SSA Records
 Respondent     0-     10 -    20 -     30 -    40 -    50 -      60 -   70 -   80 -    90 -   100-    110-    120-     130   Total
   Report       10      20      30       40      50      60        70     80     90     100     110    120      130       +
   0 - 10      788     249     104     73      69      30        17      13     9       6       6      6        1       1     1372
   10 - 20     137     151     92      71      40      20        8       5      2       3       0      1        0       0     530
   2 0- 30     78      101     126     91      52      20        6       4      3       2       2      2        1       0     488
   3 0- 40     54      91      112     225     130     53        18      13     8       3       2      2        0       1     712
   4 0- 50     57      63      95      213     343     132       70      20     21      5       0      3        1       0     1023
   50 - 60     32      44      46      98      285     286       157     58     23     12       2      4        1       0     1048
   6 0- 70     24      19      18      52      131     210       227     138    50     20       3      5        0       1     898
   70 - 80     20      12      22      30      73      118       195     231    125    40      16      1        3       2     888
   80 - 90     10      1       9       13      30      60        102     204    206    100     29      9        3       1     777
  90 - 100     7       8       7       13      25      35        53      927    157    260     63     17        2       4     743
  100-110      3       5       1        6       9      7         12      23     50     103     155    38        4       1     417
  110-120      9       0       1        4       5      7         8       15     19     20      67     127      23       8     313
  120-130      1       2       1        0       1      4         1       6      4       7      13     29       52       7     128
    130+       3       0       1        1       0      4         3       4      1       4      10     11       19       74    135
    Total      1223    746     635     890     1193    986       877     826    678    585     368    255      110      100   9472

This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3.




                                                                   66
          Table 24: Regressions of Average Indexed Yearly Earnings Calculated from Social Security Records on Average Indexed Yearly Earnings Calculated from Earnings Imputed From Survey

 Independent Variables                            All Observations With Matched Social Security Earnings Records              Observations for Males With           Observations for Females With
                                                                                                                              Matched Social Security Earnings      Matched Social Security Earnings
                                                                                                                                                Records                               Records

                                                  Coefficient             t             Coefficient             t             Coefficient             t             Coefficient               t
 constant                                         1862.567              -19.016          4981.976              13.855          3402.957               3.648          1398.607                  4.305
 AIME calculated from earnings imputed from          0.7777729          137.799              0.508322          45.367              0.496085          26.184              0.464773             32.268
    survey
 AIME imputed from expected benefit amount                                                   0.098246          12.103              0.098774           7.976              0.081594               7.976
 AIME from expected benefit missing                                                        575.1495             2.844           -140.401             -0.296            551.66                   2.785
 AIME from earnings imputed from survey                                                     -0.01288           -1.123              0.022119           1.061             -0.02161               -1.405
  interacted with missing value indicator
 female                                                                                  -5007.04              -37.722           (dropped)                             (dropped)
 married                                                                                   133.7257              0.983          1533.768              5.438           -702.969                -5.434
 resondent working at time of survey                                                       460.8062              1.822           919.6561             1.078            543.8686                2.509
 earnings in current job                                                                     0.037378            7.207             0.021982           2.789              0.050138              7.390
 indicator respondent had section G job                                                   -618.953              -2.284         -1119.76              -1.27            -305.116                -1.291
 earnings from section G job                                                                 0.04359             6.015             0.047313           4.047              0.065221              6.634
 self employed                                                                           -1206.42               -7.305         -1151.8               -4.161          -1337.15                 -7.311
 worked for federal government in past                                                   -1304.03               -6.934         -2234.92              -7.254           -148.641                 -.698
 worked for a state government in past                                                    -262.562              -2.006          -312.554             -1.388           -141.215                -1.040
 reported a nonSocial Security job in past                                                -991.027              -6.688         -1186.12              -4.735          -1025.29                 -6.330
 current or last five year job was fulltime                                               -399.307              -2.710          -744.787             -2.319           -102.916                -0.742
 respondent had a pension in any job                                                      2441.358              17.927          3051.091             12.179           2068.543                14.877
 union in main job                                                                         150.4643              1.088           303.0848             1.331            -37.2376               -0.237
 management/professional in main job                                                      1099.166               8.029          1308.136              5.657            990.0998                6.561
 manufacturing in main job                                                                1640.825              11.643          1860.837              8.255           1183.972                 7.164
 indicator survey available for 1996                                                        35.57308             0.215           698.9399             2.506           -801.524                -4.402
 reported health excellent or very good                                                    105.3806              0.849           152.5965             0.692            142.7883                1.110
 reported health fair or poor                                                             -595.914              -3.873          -725.832             -2.643           -456.815                -2.866
 health variable not available                                                             (dropped)                             (dropped)                             (dropped)
 plans over next few months or next year                                                  -332.302              -2.74           -577.749             -2.582            -96.458               -0.792
 plans over 5 to 10 years, or > 10 years                                                  -155.735              -0.813           135.3838             0.399           -374.559               -1.888
 planning horizon not available                                                           -448.932              -1.5            -404.633             -0.772           -605.107               -1.887
 words recalled in second test                                                              33.78321             1.735            47.17687            1.254             39.51627              2.082
 recall variable missing                                                                   415.102               1.282           509.4233             0.937            433.8685               1.162

 Number of Observations                                          9472                                   9472                                  4328                                  5144

 Adjusted R2                                                       0.6672                               0.7535                               0.5992                               0.6550
This table includes the Social Security records obtained with permissions granted by respondents to HRS waves 1, 2 and 3. Average Indexed Yearly Earnings equals AIME times 12.




                                                                                                  67
                                                  Ratios of Median Reported Accumulations to Median Calculated
                                                     Pension Values for DC Plans With and Without Voluntary
                                          3.5
                                                                          Contributions
Ratios of Median Reported Accumulations




                                           3
  to Median Calculated Pension Values




                                          2.5


                                           2


                                          1.5


                                           1


                                          0.5


                                           0
                                                0-5K    5-10K   10-20K       20-50K        50-100K   100-200K    200-500K     500K-1M   >1M
                                                                              Calculated Value of Pension


                                                                W ithout Voluntary Contributions     W ith Voluntary Contributions




                                                                                      68
                                          References

Anderson, Patricia, Alan Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “Trends in Labor Force
Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pensions and Social Security in the
1970's and 1980's”. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), pt. 1, October: 757-783.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1988. “Social Security Benefits: An Empirical Study of Expectations and
Realizations”. In R.R. Campbell and E. Lazear, editors, Issues in Contemporary Retirement.
Stanford, California: Hoover Institution. 312-335.

Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber. 1999. “Social Security and Retirement”. Paper presented
at NBER Summer Institute.

Gustman, Alan L. and F. Thomas Juster. 1996. “Income and Wealth of Older American
Households: Modeling Issues for Public Policy Analysis”. In Eric A. Hanushek and Nancy
Maritato, editors, Assessing Knowledge of Retirement Behavior. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press: 11- 53.

Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1999.
“Pension and Social Security Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study”. In James Smith and
Robert Willis, editors, Wealth, Work and Health, Innovations in Measurement in the Social
Sciences. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press: 150-208.

____________________, forthcoming. “Evaluating Pension Entitlements”. In Olivia Mitchell,
editor, Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press for the Pension Research Council.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier, 1989. “An Analysis of Pension Benefit Formulas,
Pension Wealth and Incentives from Pensions”, Research in Labor Economics 10: 53-106.

____________________, 1999a. “Employer-provided Pension Data in the NLS Mature
Women’s Survey and in the Health and Retirement Study”. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 7174. June.

____________________, 1999b. ‘Changing Pensions in Cross-Section and Panel Data: Analysis
with Employer-provided Plan Descriptions”

Haider, Steven and Gary Solon. 1999. “Evidence of Non-Response Bias in the HRS Social
Security Files”. Xerox. Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Lumsdaine, Robin. 1996. “Factors Affecting Labor Supply Decisions and Retirement Income”.
In Eric A. Hanushek and Nancy Maritato, editors, Assessing Knowledge of Retirement Behavior.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press: 61-115.


                                              69
Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Olivia S. Mitchell. Forthcoming. “New Developments in the Economic
Analysis of Retirement”. In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor
Economics.

Olson, Jan. Forthcoming. “Linkages with Data from SSA Records in the Health and Retirement
Study”. Social Security Bulletin.




                                            70
Appendix Table 1: Matching Rates of Social Security Records and Pension Plan Descriptions
                              With Respondent Records

                         Matching        Number of Total   Matching Rates     Number of
                         Rates for        Observations     for Pension Plan   Observations
                       Social Security                       Descriptions
                          Records

Gender
Men                         71.1            [ 5867]             55.5            [ 4972]
Women                       72.2            [ 6785]             54.6            [ 3710]
Combined                    71.6            [12652]             55.2            [ 8682]
Age
<= 50                       73.7             [ 1595]            60.7            [ 971]
51-61                       71.3             [ 9742]            54.7            [ 6951]
>= 62                       72.4             [ 1315]            57.7            [ 1008]
Marital Status
Married                     72.4             [ 9896]             56             [ 6997]
Single                      70.1             [ 2756]            53.4            [ 1685]
Parents
Yes                         72.2            [11743]              55             [ 8003]
No                          68.3             [ 754]             57.9            [ 547]
Race
White                       71.8             [ 9415]            54.7            [ 6870]
Black                       71.7             [ 2064]            62.7            [ 1360]
Hispanic                     69              [ 1173]            48.4            [ 452]
Education
< HS                        73.4             [ 3696]            47.6            [ 1675]
HS Grad                     74.1             [ 4424]            54.5            [ 3064]
Some Coll                   69.4             [ 2320]            55.7            [ 1812]
Coll Grad                   68.6             [ 1040]            56.3            [ 951]
Grad Sch                    66.7             [ 1172]            62.4            [ 1180]
Residence Status
Homeowner                   71.1            [10205]             56.2            [ 7517]
Renter                      73.3            [ 2447]             49.6            [ 1165]
Assets
< 10K                       75.8             [ 1949]            49.9            [ 781]
10-25K                      77.5             [ 812]             51.8            [ 447]
25-100K                     74.6             [ 3565]             56             [ 2571]
100-250K                    70.8             [ 3304]            57.7            [ 2744]
250K-1M                     65.2             [ 2393]            57.5            [ 1809]
1M+                         63.9             [ 534]             33.1            [ 280]
Retirement Horizon
< 2 Yrs                     73.5             [ 2939]            62.7            [ 2146]
        2 to 4 years        74.2             [ 1040]            61.6            [ 972]
        4 to 9 years        74.5             [ 2071]            55.6            [ 1794]


                                                 71
                            Matching           Number of Total       Matching Rates          Number of
                            Rates for           Observations         for Pension Plan        Observations
                          Social Security                              Descriptions
                             Records
  10+                           74.1               [ 2396]                 50.1                 [ 2077]
  Never Retire                  71.1               [ 1069]                 45.5                 [ 549]
  Self Employed
  Yes                           67.9               [ 1564]                  0                   [ 184]
  No                            72.8               [10022]                 56.8                 [ 8498]
  Combined                      72.1               [11586]                 55.2                 [ 8682]
  Tenure with Firm
  < 2 Years                     72.6               [ 578]                  51.7                 [ 269]
          2 to 4 Years          71.2               [ 775]                  52.5                 [ 657]
          5 to 9 Years          73.8               [ 2286]                 41.7                 [ 1825]
  10+ Years                     71.7               [ 7944]                  60                  [ 5894]
  Size of Firm
  <5                             71                [ 805]                   17                   [ 90]
                  5-14          72.4               [ 609]                  25.3                 [ 163]
  15-24                         65.4               [ 242]                  45.4                  [ 97]
  25-99                         74.6               [ 611]                  40.3                 [ 432]
  100-499                       75.2               [ 750]                  56.5                 [ 710]
  500+                          72.7               [ 1634]                 73.9                 [ 1784]
  Industry
  Manufacturing                 74.7               [ 2520]                 49.5                 [ 2318]
  Other                         71.5               [ 8971]                 57.5                 [ 6283]
  Occupation
  Mgmt/Prof                     69.2               [ 3318]                  57                  [ 3006]
  White Collar                  70.7               [ 2871]                 52.6                 [ 2113]
  Blue Collar                   75.4               [ 5356]                 55.2                 [ 3528]
  Union Status
  Union                         72.1               [ 2122]                 70.1                 [ 2253]
  Nonunion                      71.9               [ 5448]                 62.1                 [ 3576]
  Annual Earnings
  < 15K                         74.4               [ 4630]                 44.2                 [ 2427]
  15-30K                        71.9               [ 3519]                 54.6                 [ 3169]
  30-50K                        70.3               [ 2089]                 63.5                 [ 2069]
  50-100K                       72.4               [ 879]                  67.2                 [ 810]
  100K+                         63.5               [ 191]                  30.4                 [ 128]
  Pension
  Yes                           72.6               [ 5056]
  No                            71.8               [ 6530]
The observations in this table use the HRS survey weights. Percentages in column 2 are for permissions as
reported in V136, wave 1. Job characteristics in column 1 are for the longest job. Calculations for columns 3 and 4
include only jobs offering pensions. Numbers in brackets are the observations over which the percentage is taken.
Percentages are weighted averages.



                                                        72
         Appendix Table 2: Matched Pension Plans by Type of Pension and Pension Value

      Respondent Reported                Matching Rates for Pension   Number of Observations
            Pension                          Plan Descriptions
         Characteristic
 Pension Type
 Defined Benefit                                      59.1                   [ 4528]
 Defined Contrib                                      40.8                   [ 2446]
 Combination                                          69.2                   [ 1368]
 DB Annual Benefit
 < 2K                                                 41.8                   [ 664]
 2-5K                                                 49.8                   [ 663]
 5-10K                                                61.4                   [ 794]
 10-25K                                               71.6                   [ 1475]
 25K+                                                 76.9                   [ 642]
 DC Account Value
 < 10K                                                46.9                   [ 1258]
 10-25K                                               58.9                   [ 627]
 25-100K                                              54.5                   [ 641]
 100-250K                                             68.1                   [ 184]
 250K+                                                52.0                    [ 86]

The observations in this table use the HRS survey weights.




                                                       73
