                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE COSTS
                             AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
                                  INFLOWS TO U.S. STATES

                                             Wolfgang Keller
                                             Arik Levinson

                                           Working Paper 7369
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7369


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1999




This paper was first presented as part of the International Seminar on International Trade (ISIT)
conference. We have benefitted from funding provided by the National Science Foundation and the Wisconsin
Alumni Research Foundation, and from invaluable research assistance by Joe Hendrickson. Wayne Gray,
Kevin Hassett, Jim Hines, John List, Gib Metcalf, Domenico Siniscalco, Matthew Slaughter, and numerous
participants in seminars at the ISIT conference andthe NBER have provided especially constructive
comments. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors, and not of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by Wolfgang Keller and Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Environmental Compliance Costs and
Foreign Direct Investment Inflows to U.S. States
Wolfgang Keller and Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 7369
September 1999
JEL No. F2, H73, Q2

                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper estimates the extent to which changing environmental standards have altered patterns
of international investment. Our analysis goes beyond the existing literature in three ways. First, we avoid
comparing regulations in different countries by using data on inward foreign direct investment (FDI) to the
U.S. and on differences in the regulatory stringency of U.S. states. This approach has the advantage that
data on environmental stringency in U.S. states are more comparable than that for different countries, and
that U.S. states are more similar than countries in other difficult-to-measure dimensions. Second, our
measure of environmental stringency accounts for differences in states’ industrial compositions, an
acknowledged problem for earlier studies. Third, we employ a panel of annual measures of relative
regulatory stringency from 1977 to 1994, allowing us to control for unobserved state characteristics that
may be correlated with both FDI and compliance costs. We find some evidence of small deterrent effects
of environmental regulations in particularly pollution-intensive industries, but no evidence of large or
widespread effects. While the broad conclusions are consistent with the existing literature, this paper does
address three important concerns with that literature.


Wolfgang Keller                                        Arik Levinson
University of Texas                                    University of Wisconsin
Economics Dept.                                        Economics Dept.
Austin, TX 78712                                       Madison, WI 53706
and NBER                                               and NBER
keller@eco.utexas.edu                  amlevins@facstaff.wisc.edu
  Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct Investment Inflows to U.S. States


I. Introduction.

         In recent years, a variety of interest groups have called for addenda to international trade

agreements to harmonize domestic labor standards, antitrust policies, and environmental

regulations. Industry representatives in the U.S. worry that stricter standards will put U.S.

manufacturers at a competitive disadvantage. Environmentalists fear that linked trade agreements

will prevent countries from setting their desired levels of environmental regulation. Free trade

advocates worry that countries may be able to circumvent international agreement on tariffs by

choosing strategic levels of domestic regulation (Ederington, 1998; Copeland, 1990). And some

economists have worried that governments may seek to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) by

competitively undercutting each other’s environmental standards (Bhagwati and Srinivasan, 1995).

All these fears are based on the presumption that domestic regulations affect the location of FDI

in quantitatively important ways. This paper tests that presumption by asking whether FDI to

U.S. states has responded significantly to relative changes in states’ environmental compliance

costs.

         As recently as the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

negotiations, FDI was considered a "new issue" (Baldwin 1995). Today, however, the

relationship between trade and FDI has become recognized, in part because multinational

corporations associated with FDI account for a large and growing portion of world trade. 1 At a

simple level, two processes work in opposite directions. As world trade barriers fall, firms may


         1
         In 1994, 36.3 percent of U.S. imports and 42.7 percent of U.S. exports involved intra-
firm trade between multinational parents and affiliates (BEA, 1997).

                                                   1
be more easily able to outsource parts of their manufacturing operations, resulting in increasing

FDI. On the other hand, trade agreements diminish one important motive for FDI--to

circumvent tariffs.

       From 1982 to 1996, the fraction of U.S.-owned manufacturing located outside U.S.

borders rose from 10.9 percent to 13.0 percent, and overall U.S. FDI abroad rose from $224 to

$498 billion, an average annual growth rate of 5.7 percent. 2 Some analysts have concluded that

U.S. producers are taking advantage of falling tariffs by investing abroad to avoid relatively high

taxes, factor costs, and regulatory standards in the U.S. 3 However, the fact that inward FDI to

the U.S. has also increased over the last two decades suggests that there must be other forces

working in favor of investing in the U.S. 4

       The specific issue we address in this paper is the implicit assumption that underlies calls

for environmental harmonization: that FDI does in fact respond significantly to international

differences in regulatory stringency. Despite numerous attempts in the economics literature,

there is little robust or quantitatively significant evidence that environmental regulations affect




       2
         These numbers are for the GDP of majority-owned U.S. subsidiaries, from Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) data; this is the preferred measure of the economic importance of FDI,
see Lipsey et al. (1998). Transactions are classified as FDI if a foreign entity owns 10 percent or
more of the securities of an incorporated business, or an equivalent interest in an unincorporated
business. Mataloni (1999) shows that for 80 to 85 percent of such foreign-owned manufacturers,
the foreign entity owns more than a 50 percent interest.
       3
         The overview of the evidence in Caves (1996) indicates that different production costs
affect the location of FDI, and recent theoretical work by Horstmann and Markusen (1992),
Brainard (1993), and Keller (1998) builds on this fact.
       4
        Foreign-owned firms accounted for 2.6 percent of manufacturing GDP in the U.S. in
1977, and for 9.2 percent in 1996 (BEA 1999).

                                                  2
the location of FDI. The next section describes our empirical methodology and how it compares

to previous analyses of environmental regulations and FDI, and section III presents our results.



II. Measuring the Effects of Regulations on FDI.

        Most papers in this literature note the inherent difficulties in quantifying the stringency of

national environmental standards. Even if one could accurately measure stringency, countries

differ on so many other grounds that it is hard to attribute any differences in FDI inflows to

environmental regulations. Until recently, most analysts have thus resorted to comparing

investment in developing countries to that in industrialized countries, assuming that industrialized

countries have more stringent standards (Low, 1992; Leonard, 1988). While this assumption

seems realistic, the fact that industrialized countries are nevertheless the largest exporters of

polluting goods suggests that differences in economic activity are not caused by environmental

policy alone. World trading patterns are in part determined by factors and technologies that are

not readily observable, and therefore difficult to control for statistically, and the same is likely true

for FDI patterns.

        We overcome the difficulties of comparing different countries by looking at the flow of

investment from foreign countries into U.S. states as a function of state regulatory stringency.

This gives us two advantages: there are much better data on state environmental compliance costs

than on international costs, and different states are more comparable than different countries on

non-environmental grounds. The states hold a large and increasing fraction of the responsibility

for setting environmental standards in the U.S., and even those standards that are set federally

impose different costs depending on the characteristics of the affected states.


                                                   3
       We examine two types of FDI data. The first is data on the value of gross property, plant

and equipment owned by foreign-owned manufacturers, and manufacturing employees working

for foreign-owned firms, from the series Foreign Direct Investment in the United States of the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Though comprehensive, these data may have two

disadvantages for our purposes. First, they include both new and existing facilities. Since most

state environmental regulations impose stricter standards on new facilities, states with more new

investment will have higher average compliance costs, which might induce a bias in our study

against finding a deterrent effect of environmental regulations.

       Second, the BEA data include mergers and acquisitions. If the regulatory differences

among states are capitalized into purchase prices (foreign investors receive a discount when

buying manufacturers in stringent states), then we would expect there to be no deterrent effect of

strict regulations on mergers and acquisitions. Therefore, to avoid bias caused by differential

treatment of new investment or compliance cost capitalization, as a second approach we examine

planned new foreign-owned factory openings using data from a different series, also titled Foreign

Direct Investment in the United States, collected by the International Trade Administration (ITA).

These ITA data have the drawback that relatively few new foreign-owned manufacturing plants

are observed in any given state in any year. From 1977 to 1994, the data contain only 958 new

plants. Nevertheless, the ITA and BEA data together provide a comprehensive picture of FDI to

U.S. states. By comparing foreign direct investment to different states rather than to different

countries, we believe that we increase enormously our chances of accurately measuring regulatory

stringency and of sufficiently controlling for other characteristics that attract or deter investment.




                                                   4
       The second problem with the existing literature on the effects of environmental regulations

is that most papers rely on cross-sectional data.5 This makes it impossible to account for

unobservable state characteristics that may be correlated with both regulatory stringency and

investment. For example, suppose that some state is endowed with a natural resource desirable to

a polluting industry. As a consequence, that state will be likely to attract investment in that

industry, and may simultaneously be induced to regulate stringently the pollution emanating from

the industry. Both investment and regulatory stringency will be positively correlated with the

presence of the desirable resource, inducing a spurious positive correlation between FDI and

environmental stringency. As another example, suppose that some states have a tendency to favor

polluting industries, perhaps because those industries are particularly important to the states’

economies, or because those industries have long histories in the states. In this case, investment

and regulatory stringency will be negatively correlated. If the estimation does not account for the

unobserved resource, or the unobserved protection of polluting industries, then it will impart an

omitted variable bias on the predicted effect of regulatory stringency on investment.

       By contrast, several recent studies of domestic investment use panel data and find

reasonably sized and statistically significant negative effects of environmental stringency on

economic activity. Henderson (1996), Greenstone (1998), and Kahn (1997) use data on whether

or not each county in the U.S. is in compliance with national ambient air quality standards. These

standards are set uniformly at the federal level, and are thus unrelated to particular county

characteristics, whether observed or otherwise. States are required to enforce more stringent



       5
        See, for example, Friedman, et al. (1992), Kolstad and Xing (1997), or Co and List
(forthcoming1998).

                                                  5
pollution standards in counties declared out of compliance, and all three studies find that such

counties subsequently experience fewer new plant births or less manufacturing employment

growth. However, it is difficult to interpret the general magnitude of the effect of this zero-one

measure of regulatory stringency without knowing how much more costly are the environmental

regulations in non-compliant counties.

       We address this second problem, omitted variable bias, by examining investment and

regulatory stringency over an 18-year period, from 1977 to 1994, which allows us to control for

unobserved time-invariant state characteristics in the estimations. Rather than use a zero-one

measure of regulatory stringency, such as counties’ compliance status, we use a continuous, time-

varying measure of the pollution abatement costs in each state, based on data from the Pollution

Abatement Costs and Expenditures (PACE) survey, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau as part

of the Annual Survey of Manufactures.

       The third shortcoming of much of the existing literature on investment responses to

environmental regulations is that quantitative measures of regulatory stringency typically fail to

account for regions’ industrial compositions. Friedman, et al. (1992), Crandall (1993), and Co

and List (forthcoming), for example, measure environmental stringency using total statewide

pollution abatement costs from the PACE survey, and conclude that investment is largely

unaffected by environmental regulations. As they note, however, the problem with their measure

of costs is that states that attract polluting industries will have higher abatement expenditures than

states that have cleaner industrial compositions even if the regulatory stringency faced by




                                                  6
individual firms is the same for all states.6 If lax regulations do attract polluting industries,

pollution abatement spending may in fact be negatively correlated with the stringency of state

regulations.

        We address this third problem by measuring state pollution abatement costs from the

PACE data, adjusted using each state’s industrial composition. Ideally, one would study this issue

industry-by-industry, using separate measures of pollution abatement costs for each industry to

assess regulatory stringency. While abatement costs by state and industry are published annually

by the Census Bureau, so many of the observations are censored to prevent disclosure of

confidential information that the data are not comparable year-to-year or state-to-state.

Therefore, we propose an alternative index.7

        The index compares the actual pollution abatement costs in each state, unadjusted for

industrial composition, to the predicted abatement costs in each state, where the predictions are

based solely on nationwide abatement expenditures by industry and each state’s industrial

composition.8 Let the actual costs per dollar of output be denoted


        6
         Co and List (forthcoming) also examine inward FDI’s cross-sectional correlation with
state environmental agencies’ budgets, and with ambient pollution readings in each state, with
similar outcomes: coefficients are small, often statistically insignificant, and are not larger in
magnitude for more pollution-intensive industries.
        7
        More details about this index, and a comparison of it with other indices of state
environmental standard stringency can be found in Levinson (1999). Gray (1998) and Levinson
(1996) construct similar indices using the confidential plant-level Census data. The advantage of
the index used here is that it is available publicly and yields information similar to that from the
unpublished Census data.
        8
        For two reasons, we use pollution abatement operating expenses (as opposed to capital
expenses) in the index. First, operating expenses for pollution abatement equipment are easier for
PACE survey respondents to identify separately. Abatement capital expenses may be difficult to
disentangle from investments in production process changes that have little to do with pollution

                                                    7
                                                          Pst
                                               Sst   '                                               (1)
                                                          Yst

where Pst is pollution abatement costs in state s in year t, and Yst is the manufacturing sector’s

contribution to the gross state product (GSP) of state s in year t. Sst is the type of unadjusted

measure of regulatory stringency commonly used, and it overstates the stringency of states with

more pollution-intensive industries and understates the stringency of states with relatively clean

industries.

        To adjust for states’ industrial compositions, compare (1) to the predicted abatement costs

per dollar of GSP in state s:


                                                     j Y YP
                                                     39
                                      Sˆst   ' 1              sit        it
                                                                                  ,                  (2)
                                              Yst i'20              it

where industries are indexed from 20 through 39 according to their 2-digit manufacturing SIC

codes,9 Ysit is industry i's contribution to the GSP of state s at time t, Yit is the nationwide

contribution of industry i to national gross domestic product, and Pit is the nationwide pollution
                                                                              ^
abatement operating costs of industry i. In other words, Sst is the weighted average of national

pollution abatement costs in each 2-digit industry, where the weights are the shares of each

industry in state s at time t.




abatement. Second, abatement capital expenditures are highest when new investment takes place.
So states that have thriving economies and are generating manufacturing investment tend to have
high levels of abatement capital expenses, regardless of the stringency of those states’
environmental laws. Operating costs are more consistent year-to-year.
        9
         SIC code 23 (apparel) is omitted because it is relatively pollution-free, and as a result no
data for that industry are collected by the PACE survey.

                                                          8
        The industry-adjusted index of relative state stringency, Sst*, is simply the ratio of actual

expenditures in (1) to the predicted expenditures in (2)10


                                             (       Sst
                                           Sst   '          .                                      (3)
                                                     Sˆst

When Sst* is greater than 1, industries in state s at time t spent more on pollution abatement than

those same industries in other states. By implication, states with large values of Sst* have

relatively more stringent regulations.11

        In section III.2, we use the BEA's continuous measures of FDI to estimate models of three

different types: a pooled ordinary least squares specification as a benchmark, a fixed-effects least-

squares (within groups) estimator, and a dynamic panel data model that includes the lagged

dependent variable as a regressor. In section III.3, we employ the ITA's data on new factory

openings to estimate Poisson and other count data models. Before that, however, we begin with

simple descriptive statistics.



III. The Evidence.

III.1 Descriptive Statistics.

        Table 1 presents summary statistics of S*, S, and FDI by state. The first column contains

the average industry-adjusted index S*, from 1977 to 1994, as described by equation (3). The


        10
         The state’s GSP is in both the numerator and the denominator of (3), so equation (3) can
                         ^          ^
be expressed as Sst*=Pst/Pst, where Pst is the summation term in (2).
        11
          Support for the inference that relatively high abatement costs indicate relatively stringent
regulations can be found in Berman and Bui (1999), which regresses pollution abatement costs at
the 4-digit SIC-code level on detailed changes in industry-specific regulations, and finds strong
positive associations.

                                                     9
second column contains the unadjusted index, S, as described by equation (1).12 The correlation

between the two is about 0.7. A number of states that appear to have relatively high stringency

according to the unadjusted index, have much lower ranking after accounting for their industrial

compositions. New Jersey, for example, falls from the 20th most stringent state, in column (2) to

the 34th in column (1). Other states’ apparent stringency improves after controlling for their

industries. Florida rises from 25th to 13th. Using the unadjusted measure of standard stringency

in column (2), pollution abatement expenditures as a share of gross state product from

manufacturing, would give a misleading picture of Florida’s and New Jersey’s relative

environmental compliance costs.

       Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 present the average value of gross property, plant and

equipment (PP&E) of foreign-owned affiliates from 1977 to 1994, for all manufacturers and for

the chemicals industry, respectively.13 At the bottom of Table 1 are these same averages for the

states with the 5 lowest and 5 highest adjusted pollution abatement indices, S*, and for the 20

lowest and highest. On average, the five states with the lowest stringency indices have lower

values of PP&E for foreign-owned affiliates than the five states with the highest indices, and the

20 states with the lowest indices have about the same value of PP&E as the 20 states with the

highest stringency. Even looking at SIC code 28, "chemicals and allied products," the five states

with the lowest stringency indices have lower values of PP&E than the five states with the highest



       12
          Because no PACE data were collected in 1987, Table 1 and all subsequent tables omit
that year.
       13
         We use SIC 28, chemicals and allied products, as an example of a pollution-intensive
industry. Of the relatively polluting industries, SIC 28 has the most consistently reported
uncensored data in the BEA publications.

                                                10
indices, and a similar pattern is observable for the 20 lowest and 20 highest states. For many

reasons, we would not expect to find a deterrent effect of environmental stringency on FDI as

measured by the value of PP&E in these cross-section comparisons. Those states that do not

attract a lot of polluting manufacturing probably do not enact stringent regulations -- there is

simply less need to worry about industrial pollution in states with less industrial activity, and those

states that do attract polluting manufacturing may respond by enacting more stringent regulations.

       Columns (5) and (6) report similar statistics for employees of foreign-owned affiliates.

Here, for all manufacturing and for chemical manufacturing alone, those states with lower

environmental compliance costs tend to have more employees. Finally, columns (7) and (8)

display the number of planned new foreign-owned plants, from the ITA data. The states with the

five lowest stringency indices, and those with the 20 lowest indices, have more annual planned

new plant births than the 5 and 20 most stringent, respectively, and this holds true for all

manufacturing plants and for the 7 most pollution-intensive 2-digit SIC codes.14 Again, however,

we do not expect these cross-section comparisons to be particularly informative.

       The primary advantage of these data over most previous attempts to assess responsiveness

to regulatory stringency is their intertemporal variation. Table 2 begins to take advantage of the

panel nature of these data by examining changes in stringency and FDI. It compares the average

stringency and FDI for the first 5 years of the data (1977-1981) to the averages for the last 5

years (1990-1994). The five states whose average stringency fell most during this time period

saw their industry-adjusted index of abatement costs fall by 0.597, their average annual value of


       14
         The SIC codes included in column (8) are 26 (pulp and paper), 28 (chemicals), 29
(petroleum), 32 (stone clay and glass), 33 (primary metals), and 34 (fabricated metals). These are
the industries studied in Co and List (forthcoming).

                                                  11
PP&E grow by $2.5 billion, their average employment in foreign-owned manufacturers grow by

16,698, and their average annual number of new plants grow by 0.32. On the other hand, the five

states whose stringency increased the most over the 18 years saw their average index increase by

0.446, their average PP&E grow by only $0.8 billion, their average employment grow by 3,658,

and their average number of new plants remain unchanged. While this comparison suggests that

states that became more stringent attracted less FDI, the 5 lowest and 5 highest states tend to be

the smallest, and much of their variance may be due to noise in the data.

       To account for this, the middle two lines of Table 2 examine the 10 states whose relative

stringency declined most to the 10 states whose stringency increased most. With the exception of

employment in the chemical industry, in every case FDI increased more to those states whose

relative environmental stringency declined. The bottom two rows of Table 2 conduct the same

exercise for the lowest 20 states and highest 20 states. In general, similar patterns appear,

especially for the dirtier industries, though they are muted somewhat by the fact that comparisons

among 40 of the 48 continental states necessarily blurs the contrast between states with increasing

and decreasing index values.

       Table 2 is remarkable, in that it appears to present strong evidence of a deterrent effect of

environmental regulations, especially with regard to new plant births in the last two columns.

However, the table is based on comparisons that do not control for other observable state

characteristics that may have been changing during the same time period. In the next two

sections, we control for other such state characteristics, and find that the observed deterrent effect

of regulations on FDI largely disappears.




                                                 12
III.2 Estimates using aggregate, continuous data.

        To control for other characteristics of states, we estimate variants of
                                 FDIst   ' Sst( % Xst % ds %         st,                              (4)
where FDIst is a measure of foreign direct investment in state s during year t, S*st is as defined by

equation (3), Xst is a set of other state characteristics that may affect investment -- market

proximity, taxes, energy costs, land prices, wages, unionization, etc. -- ds is a set of state-specific

time-invariant indicator variables, and   st   is an error term. The state fixed effects, ds, will account

for unobservable state characteristics that would otherwise impart an omitted variable bias.

        Table 3 presents the first such estimations. The first column presents means and standard

deviations of the regressors. Market proximity is a distance-weighted average of all other states’

GSPs. Along with population, this measures the size of the domestic market that may be served

by the FDI. Unemployment rates are included to capture labor market characteristics, although of

course FDI may affect unemployment simultaneously. Unionization rates measure labor

militancy, and may also serve as a regional indicator, since union membership is so much lower in

the South. Wages are included as a regressor, though their general positive coefficients may

indicate more about productivity than unit labor costs. Total road mileage is included as a

measure of public infrastructure, and land prices and energy prices are included to capture factor

costs, though they too may be simultaneously determined. Finally, tax effort is an index,

calculated as actual tax revenues divided by those that would be collected by a model tax code, as

calculated by the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR). Finally, we

include a time trend ("year"), and note that we have run most of the specifications using year

dummies with almost identical results (not reported).


                                                      13
        As a benchmark against which to compare the fixed-effects estimates, columns (2) and (3)

contain pooled, OLS regressions of PP&E in the manufacturing sector and the chemical industry,

respectively, on the industry-adjusted index of environmental stringency and other covariates,

without including state fixed effects (ds). Controlling for other state characteristics, PP&E

appears to be positively correlated with stringency, though the coefficient is insignificant for the

chemical industry. However, columns (2) and (3) likely omit state characteristics correlated with

both FDI and environmental regulations. Once we include state fixed effects, in columns (4) and

(5) the stringency coefficient becomes negative for both manufacturing (!55) and chemicals

(!199), and is statistically significant for chemicals.15

        To interpret the size of these coefficients consider the following. The fixed-effects

coefficient in column (5) suggests that a one-unit increase in the stringency index is associated

with a decline in chemical industry PP&E by $199 million. The standard deviation of this index

within states over time ranges from 0.04 for Wisconsin to 0.56 for Colorado, and averages 0.18.

So the coefficient suggests that a one standard deviation increase in the index, for the average

state, is associated with a decline in the value of PP&E of foreign-owned chemical manufacturers

of $36 million. This amounts to less than 4 percent of the annual average chemical industry

PP&E of $1017 million per state.

        Table 4 runs some robustness checks on the results described in Table 3. In the first row

we run the exact same specifications as in Table 3, but with employment as the dependent variable

rather than PP&E. Here the OLS regressions have statistically insignificant stringency



        15
        Hausman tests of random effects versus fixed effects models consistently reject the
assumption that the error terms are uncorrelated with the regressors.

                                                   14
coefficients, while again the fixed-effects regression for the chemical industry has the only

negative and statistically significant stringency coefficient (!991). If we take literally the

coefficient for the chemical industry, it suggests that a one-standard-deviation increase in a state’s

environmental stringency index (+0.18) is associated with 178 fewer jobs in that industry, a fall of

about 2.3 percent relative to the average of 7692 employees in foreign-owned chemical plants per

state.

         In the second row of Table 4 we estimated the same set of regressions from Table 3 using

the unadjusted index S. This is the index that has often been used by the literature without

controlling for states’ industrial compositions. The fixed-effects stringency coefficient for the

chemical industry (!4597) is less statistically significant, which we would expect if the industrial

composition of some states is making them appear less stringent than they actually are. In

addition, the point estimate is even smaller than in the case of the industry-adjusted index. The

average within-state standard deviation of the unadjusted index is 0.0034. A one standard

deviation in the unadjusted index, for the average state, is therefore associated with a decline in

the value of PP&E of foreign-owned chemical manufacturers of $15 million, about 1.5 percent of

average annual chemical industry PP&E. The third row of Table 4 contains the same

specification, using employment in foreign-owned manufacturing facilities as the dependent

variable, and has a similar pattern of coefficients. The unadjusted index of compliance costs again

yields coefficients that are biased upwards.

         To address concerns that year-to-year noise in the data mask long-run trends, in rows (4)

and (5) of Table 4 we estimate specifications based on averages of the data over three time

periods: 1977-81, 1982-86, and 1988-94. The 48 states, and three time periods, comprise 144


                                                  15
observations. The pattern of coefficients is largely similar to those using the annual data. The

pooled specifications in columns (1) and (2) yield positive coefficients that are insignificant for the

industry-adjusted index (S*), significant for the unadjusted index (S). The fixed-effects

specifications (with only three time periods) in columns (3) and (4) yield mostly negative and

insignificant coefficients.

        So far, the evidence presented has all been based on a static model of investment in which

annual measures of FDI are regressed on concurrent state characteristics. However, one might

object that investment is by nature a dynamic process. FDI may, for example, be a function of

expected future state characteristics. In addition, FDI to existing facilities will be a function of

past investments to those facilities. In either case, the usual orthogonality conditions may not

hold across time. To explore this issue in a dynamic context, suppose that a reduced form

relationship for FDI can be characterized by the following equation:16


                              FDIst   ' FDIs,t&1 % Sst( % Xst % ds %               st                  (5)

Equation (5) states that FDI is a function of current state characteristics and lagged values of

FDI. Both FDIst and FDIs,t-1 are functions of ds, a part of the unobserved error term, and

therefore OLS fixed-effects estimates of (5) will be biased because FDIs,t-1, a regressor, is

correlated with the error term (Amemiya 1985).

        Arellano and Bond (1991) suggest a GMM estimation of (5) that uses lagged values of

FDIs,t-1 as instruments for FDIs,t-1, and first differences to eliminate the fixed state effects ds:

                              FDIst   '   FDIs,t&1   %        S(st   %   Xst   %        st             (6)



        16
             This discussion is based on Baltagi (1995) and Arellano and Bond (1991).

                                                         16
where     symbolizes first differences. Since FDIs,t-2 is correlated with FDIs,t-1, but not correlated

with FDIst, it is a valid instrument. In fact, all past values FDIs,t-3, FDIs,t-4, and so on, as well as

values of the exogenous variables S* and X, are valid instruments for FDIs,t-1.

        Row (6) of Table 4 presents the coefficient      from GMM estimates of (6) using the

Arellano and Bond estimator as programmed in Doornik et al. (1999).17 When equation (6) is

estimated using all manufacturing FDI, in column (3), the coefficient (2.4) is tiny and statistically

insignificant, though still positive. Turning to the chemical industry, in column (4), the coefficient

(!338) is negative and statistically significant, and 70 percent larger than the fixed-effects estimate

(-199) from Table 3. Even this larger estimate, however, implies that a one-standard-deviation

increase in compliance costs is associated with decline in FDI of less than 6 percent. Compared

with the pooled cross-section analyses in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3, this provides more

evidence that the positive coefficients found in cross-section analyses are spurious, and are based

on unobserved characteristics correlated with both environmental regulations and economic

activity.18

        In sum, using continuous data on investment and employment by foreign-owned

manufacturers in U.S. states, we do not find broad evidence that stringent environmental

regulations are reducing FDI overall, though they may be affecting FDI by particularly pollution-



        17
        Doornik, Bond, and Arellano’s GMM estimation is written for the computer package Ox,
and may be downloaded from http://www.nuff.ox.ac.uk/Users/Doornik/. See Doornik (1998) and
Doornik et al. (1999).
        18
          It is also notable that the parameter on lagged FDI is precisely estimated at about 0.9
in these specifications. This means that states hosting relatively high levels of FDI in any given
year experience slower growth of FDI in subsequent years, implying that, ceteris paribus, the
levels of FDI are converging across U.S. states.

                                                   17
intensive industries. However, even when we estimate statistically significant coefficients, their

implied magnitudes are generally small economically. These results are obtained from an analysis

that has addressed three important problems that pervade much of the previous literature: it

examines inflows of FDI to U.S. states; it uses a panel of data to account for unobserved

heterogeneity among states; and it uses a quantitative measure of stringency based on compliance

costs, adjusting for states’ industrial compositions.

       Despite these strengths, the measure of FDI used thus far is not without a few

weaknesses. One important problem is that changes in observed FDI can result from new plants

being constructed, old plants being closed, or from expansions and contractions of existing plants.

Each of these four types of changes may respond quite differently to changes in environmental

regulations, depending on how the regulations are written. Many state environmental regulations

consist of "new source performance standards" that are more stringent for new plants than for

existing plants. These standards effectively raise barriers to entry that protect existing older

plants. Using aggregate data may conceal effects that work in opposite directions. A second

problem with the BEA data is that they include FDI in the form of mergers and acquisitions. If

future environmental compliance costs are capitalized into the prices paid for acquisitions, then

cost differences among states will be exactly offset by price differences and will in theory have no

effect on FDI. Consequently, in order to isolate the effects of regulations on the location of FDI,

without the offsetting effect of grandfather regulations or cost capitalization for existing

investment, in the next section we use establishment-level data to focus on new plants only.




                                                  18
III.3 Estimates using establishment-level count data.

       To examine FDI in new plants only, we turn to the International Trade Administration

(ITA) data. Though the data include acquisitions, mergers, joint ventures, real estate

transactions, equity increases, plant expansions and new plants, we focus only on the new plants.

Because the ITA data do not come from a mandatory survey, they may miss some foreign

investment. However, the ITA’s claim that its data cover "the vast majority of significant foreign

direct investment transactions" is confirmed by BEA officials.19

       We begin by estimating the effect of environmental regulations on FDI using the basic

Poisson specification:

                                                           &   st
                                                                    nst
                                                       e
                                       prob(nst)   '                st
                                                                                                            (7)
                                                           nst!

where nst is the number of new plants in state s in year t, and            is the Poisson mean and variance.

We make the standard assumption that log       = Xst +
                                              st                     , where Xst are state characteristics and
                                                                    st


is a vector of parameters to be estimated via maximum likelihood.20

       Table 5 contains estimates of . When the data are pooled, the coefficient on the industry-

adjusted index of environmental regulatory stringency (!0.049) is negative but not significant.

Furthermore, the coefficient suggests that a one-standard-deviation increase in the index would be



       19
         Personal correspondence. The ITA data come from newspapers, magazines, and
business and trade journals, as well as from public files of Federal regulatory agencies such as the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Federal Reserve
Board.
       20
         Gourieroux, Monfort and Trognon (1984) have shown that the parameters are
consistently estimated even if the Poisson distributional assumption does not hold, as long as the
conditional mean, log st=Xst , is correctly specified.

                                                   19
associated with only a 0.9 percent decline in the annual number of new plants. Turning to the

polluting industries in column (2), the stringency coefficient is positive, though again statistically

insignificant.

        However, the pooled specifications in columns (1) and (2) make no use of the panel of

data, and are almost certainly misspecified, since the error terms     st   are likely to be correlated

within states. Therefore, in columns (3) and (4) we estimate a fixed-effects Poisson regression,

based on Hausman, Hall and Griliches (1984). For all manufacturing industries, in column (3), the

stringency coefficient remains insignificant, though for the sample of polluting industries the

stringency coefficient is positive and significant. This finding is puzzling, especially since it

appears to contradict the simple differences of means in Table 2 and the findings based on the

BEA data on PP&E and employment in Table 3.

        In Table 6 we present some alternative count-data models. Because the Poisson

regressions impose the strong assumption that the mean equals the variance ( ), in the first row

we estimate the same models using a negative binomial specification. Here the fixed effects

models are not fixed effects in the ordinary sense of the term, but rather refer to the distribution of

the dispersion parameter, not to the Xst term. The results largely parallel those of the more

restrictive Poisson regression. The stringency coefficient is negative, small, and statistically

insignificant for the pooled data, and positive, small and insignificant for the fixed-effects models,

though curiously it is close to statistical significance for the polluting industries.21



        21
         We have also used the ITA data to estimate a fixed-effects multinomial logit model
(Chamberlain, 1980). The pattern of environmental stringency coefficients (not reported here) for
all manufacturers and dirty industries, and for the adjusted and unadjusted indices, parallels that
for the Poisson regressions.

                                                    20
        In the second and third rows of Table 6 we estimate the count data models using the

unadjusted index of stringency. In most cases the stringency coefficients are positive, much

larger, and more statistically significant than those for the industry-adjusted index. This result

confirms our suspicions about the unadjusted index used by others: it is higher for states that

have a lot of investment in dirty industries, and is therefore more of an indicator of polluting

industrial compositions than stringent regulations.

        In columns (4) and (5) of Table 6 we present estimates based on the multi-year averages

of the data, to address concerns that year-to-year noise masks substantive changes. The pooled

specifications in columns (1) and (2) yield negative, statistically significant coefficients, and these

shrink and become insignificant once fixed effects are added in columns (3) and (4). Again, the

pattern is exaggerated in row (5), which uses the unadjusted index (S) and is therefore biased in

favor of finding a positive association between FDI and compliance costs.

        Finally, one might be concerned that the Poisson regressions are biased because so many

of the states had zero plant births in any given year. Of the 768 state-year observations, 412

experienced zero plant births during the 16 years, and 519 experience zero births in the polluting

industries. Consequently, in rows (6) and (7) of Table 6 we estimate a "zero-inflated Poisson"

(also called a "hurdle model") version of the basic pooled specifications (Greene, 1997). These

assume that the number of new plants in a state, nst, is governed by the following process:


                                  prob(nst'0)   ' e&
                                                       &  & n
                                  prob(nst'n)   ' (1&e )e&                                         (8)
                                                    n!(1&e )
The specifications at the bottom of Table 6 use a logit model to estimate the top equation, with

state populations, market proximity, unionization rates, and road mileage as regressors. The

                                                  21
results are similar to those from the basic Poisson regression in Table 5 and in column (2) of Table

6. The stringency index is insignificant in the pooled data for all manufacturing and for the

polluting industries. We conclude from these pooled models that the many states with zero new

plant births in some years are not driving the results. As with almost every other specification,

using the unadjusted measure of compliance costs, S, in row (7) upwardly biases the compliance

cost coefficient.



IV. Discussion and Implications.

        Before drawing conclusions based on these results, we must acknowledge several

important caveats. First, our industry-adjusted index of environmental stringency, S*, controls for

states’ industrial compositions at the level of 2-digit SIC codes. While this surely accounts for a

lot of the differences among states, there is equally certain to be heterogeneity among states

within 2-digit classifications. For example, industry code 26, pulp and paper, contains paper mills,

which are among the most pollution-intensive manufacturers, along with envelope assemblers,

which emit very little pollution. To the extent that some states contain relatively more pulp mills

and others merely assemble envelopes, high abatement costs in the former will not necessarily

reflect more stringent environmental regulations. Consequently, one explanation for this paper’s

failure to measure a large, robust deterrent effect of environmental regulations on investment is

that the 2-digit industry adjustment may still mask considerable heterogeneity, and that states that

find themselves attracting relatively polluting industries -- within any given 2-digit SIC code --

may respond by enacting strict regulations. While this concern certainly merits inquiry, such an

analysis is beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore, by controlling for state industrial


                                                 22
compositions at the 2-digit level we have both pointed out the importance of this measurement

issue, and have controlled for a significant fraction of heterogeneity in state industrial

compositions.

       A second caveat involves the efforts that states make to attract and retain certain

industries. These efforts are largely unmeasured in the current estimations. However, one can

easily imagine that changes in state efforts to promote investment in particularly polluting

industries may be correlated with environmental regulations affecting those industries. It may be

that states enacting stringent environmental regulations enact compensatory tax breaks or

infrastructure subsidies. Or, it may be that states enacting weak pollution regulations are also

inclined to pass generous investment subsidies. Under the former circumstances, we are likely to

have underestimated the deterrent effect of regulations, absent the development incentives. Under

the latter scenario, we may be overstating the effect of environmental regulations by falsely

attributing some of the effects of unobserved development incentives to correlated observed low

environmental costs. Again, analysis of the political economies of state pollution regulations lies

outside our agenda for this paper.

       Third, our industry-adjusted index makes no attempt to control for the relative age of

different states’ manufacturers. This is important because many state environmental standards are

more strict for new sources of pollution than for existing sources. Consequently, states such as

Florida, that have relatively new manufacturing bases, have relatively high compliance costs, even

after controlling for their industrial compositions. Conversely, states such as Connecticut that

have relatively old manufacturers will experience lower compliance costs. There is, therefore, a

potential positive correlation between the amount of new investment and our industry-adjusted


                                                  23
index of regulatory stringency. Evidence suggests, however, that such a correlation may be

insignificant (Levinson, 1996).

        In studying the effect of differences in environmental compliance costs on the location of

inward FDI to U.S. states, our approach has two distinctive features. First, our measure of

stringency controls for the industrial composition of states. The results indicate that this is

important: both the least-squares and the Poisson regressions yield stronger and more positive

association between environmental regulations and FDI with the unadjusted, compared to the

adjusted abatement cost index. This suggests that a high unadjusted abatement cost index

primarily reflects a high share of industrial activity in polluting industries. Therefore, results from

studies that do not take this composition effect into account allow only very limited inferences.

        Second, our panel approach controls for unobserved heterogeneity through the inclusion

of fixed effects. It is not clear a priori which way the omitted-variable bias, if any, goes, but with

the continuous PP&E and employment data for all investment in Tables 3 and 4, the coefficients

on the environmental variables fall when state fixed effects are added to the model. For the count

data on new investment in Tables 5 and 6, however, the environmental coefficients rise with the

inclusion of the state fixed effects.

        In addition to the literature on the effects of environmental regulation on FDI, this paper is

related to work examining the effect of interstate tax differentials on new firm location in the

United States and on the effect of tax differences across the U.S. states on FDI inflows. Hines

(1996) studies the effects of corporate income tax differences in U.S. states on inward FDI by

comparing investment from the U.K. and Japan with that from a set of other OECD countries,

where differences in their respective foreign tax credit systems make the former two countries less


                                                  24
"US tax sensitive" than the other countries. Based on this identifying assumption, which also goes

some way to addressing the omitted variable problem, Hines estimates much stronger effects from

income taxation on FDI location than we have done here.22

       Bartik (1985) and Papke (1991) are two examples of recent work on the effect of income

taxation on domestic investment in the U.S. states. The former estimates tax elasticities of -20 to

-30 percent, but his specification based on a cross-section of data around 1972 does not fully

address issues of unobserved heterogeneity.23 Papke (1991) also employs a fixed-effects Poisson

specification with panel data, estimating elasticities of firm births with respect to marginal

effective income tax rate increases between -160 and -1570 percent for certain industries. Her

estimates are also far larger than what we have estimated for environmental regulations. Thus,

while changes in income taxation across U.S. states might trigger large measurable responses in

the location of firms’ investments, the same cannot be said about the effect of changes in

environmental compliance costs.

       Finally, while the motivation for this research is to draw inferences about the sensitivity of

FDI to international differences in environmental stringency, we recognize that the stringency of

environmental legislation differs much more across countries than across U.S. states. However,

the variation in other characteristics such as factor costs, market access, transportation costs, and

exchange rate risks also varies more across countries than across states. Thus, our analysis does



       22
          Specifically, for every one percent increase in taxation, the share of FDI owned by "US
tax-sensitive" countries drops by ten percent, and the share of these countries in the number of
total foreign affiliates drops by three percent.
       23
         Moreover, even the nested logit specification that Bartik employs does not fully address
the problems associated with the ’Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives’ assumption.

                                                  25
not necessarily underestimate the sensitivity of FDI location with respect to environmental

legislation at the international level.

        In sum, despite three important improvements over the existing literature, the results

presented here largely confirm the perception among economists who have looked for statistical

evidence of the deterrent effect of environmental regulations on economic activity. Such effects,

if they exist at all, appear to be small and confined to a few polluting industries. We do feel,

however, that we have assembled the best possible data set with which to ask this important

question, and that we have eliminated several potential explanations for the lack of statistical

evidence. By looking at FDI inflows to U.S. states we examine comparable jurisdictions with

comparable environmental compliance cost data. By adjusting for those states’ industrial

compositions, we eliminate bias caused by the uneven distribution of industries among states.

And by examining FDI and environmental stringency using a 17-year panel, we control for

potential unobserved heterogeneity among states that may be correlated with both the amount of

FDI and the stringency of state regulations.




                                                 26
References

Amemiya, Takeshi. 1985. Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press.

Arellano, Manuel, and Bond, Stephen R. 1991. "Some test of specification for panel data: Monte
       Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations" Review of Economic Studies
       58, 277-297.

Baldwin, Robert E. 1995. "An Economic Evaluation of the Uruguay Round Agreements," S.
      Arndt and C. Milner (eds.), The World Economy: Global Trade Policy 1995, Blackwell
      Publications, Oxford, pp. 153-172.

Baltagi, Badi H. 1995. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Bartik, Timothy. 1988. "The Effects of Environmental Regulation on Business Location in the
        United States," Growth and Change Summer 22-44.

Bartik, Timothy. 1985. "Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the
        Effects of Unionization, Taxes, and other Characteristics of States," Journal of Business &
        Economic Statistics Vol.3, 1: 14-22.

Becker, Randy and Vernon Henderson. 1977. "Effects of Air Quality Regulation on Decisions of
       Firms in Polluting Industries," NBER working paper #6160, September.

Berman, Eli and Linda Bui. 1999. "Environmental Regulation and Productivity: Evidence from
      Oil Refineries," mimeo, Boston University.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N., and T.N. Srinivasan. 1995. "Trade and the Environment: Does
     Environmental Diversity Detract from the Case for Free Trade?" Economic Growth
     Center Working Paper No.721, Yale University.

Blundell, Richard, Stephen Bond, and Costas Meghir. 1996. "Econometric Models of Company
       Investment" in Laszlo Matyas and Patrick Sevestre, eds. The Econometrics of Panel Data.
       Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Brainard, Lael. 1993. "A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations and Trade with a Trade-
       off between Proximity and Concentration," NBER WP # 4269, Cambridge, MA.

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). 1999. Foreign Direct Investment in the United States,
      annual series, various years, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). 1997. "U.S. Intra-firm Trade in Goods," Survey of Current
      Business, Bureau of Economic Analysis, February.


                                                27
Caves, Richard E. 1996. Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, 2nd edition,
       Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. "Analysis of covariance with qualitative data," Review of Economic
     Studies 47, 225-238.

Co, Catherine and John List. 1998. "The Effects of Environmental Regulations on Foreign
       Direct Investment," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, forthcoming.

Copeland, Brian R. 1990. "Strategic Interaction Among Nations: Negotiable and Non-
      negotiable Trade Barriers," Canadian Journal of Economics, 23: 64-108.

Crandall, Robert W. 1993. Manufacturing on the Move. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Cropper, Maureen and Wallace Oates. 1992. "Environmental Economics: A Survey," Journal of
      Economic Literature Vol. 30, pp.675-740.

Doornik, Jurgen A. 1998. Object-Oriented Matrix Programming using Ox 2.0. London:
      Timberlake Consultants Ltd and Oxford: www.nuff.ox.ac.uk/Users/Doornik.

Doornik, Jurgen A., Manuel Arellano, and Stephen Bond. 1999. "Panel Data estimation using
      DPD for Ox," mimeo.

Dunning, John H. 1981. International Production and the Multinational Enterprise. London:
      George Allen and Unwin.

Ederington, Josh, 1998, "International Trade and Domestic Policies," mimeo, University of
       Miami.

Friedman, Joseph, Daniel A. Gerlowski and Jonathan Silberman. 1992. "What Attracts Foreign
      Multinational Corporations? Evidence From Branch Plant Location in the United States,"
      Journal of Regional Science Vol. 32, No. 4, pp.403-418.

Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort and Alain Trognon. 1984. "Pseudo maximum likelihood
       methods: Theory," Econometrica 52: 681-700.

Gray, Wayne B. 1997. "Manufacturing plant location: Does state pollution regulation matter?"
       NBER Working Paper #5880.

Greene, William H. 1997. Econometric Analysis. Third Edition. Prentice Hall: New Jersey.




                                              28
Greenstone, Michael. 1998. "The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity:
       Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of
       Manufactures," mimeo, University of California at Berkeley.

Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. "Econometric Models for Count
      Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship," Econometrica 52(4) 909-
      938.

Head, Keith, John Ries, and Deborah Swenson. 1995. "Agglomeration benefits and location
       choice: Evidence from Japanese manufacturing investments in the United States." Journal
       of International Economics 38(3-4) May, 223-247.

Henderson, J. Vernon. 1996. "Effects of Air Quality Regulation," American Economic Review
      86(4), September, 789-813.

Hines, James R, Jr. 1996. "Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment
        in America," American Economic Review 86(5): 1076-1094.

Horstmann, Ignatius, and James Markusen. 1992. "Endogenous Market Structures in
      International Trade," Journal of International Economics 32: 109-129.

International Trade Administration (ITA). Foreign Direct Investment in the United States (various
        years). United States Department of Commerce. Office of Trade and Economic Analysis.

Jaffe, Adam B., Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney, and Robert N. Stavins. 1995.
        "Environmental Regulations and the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What does
        the Evidence Tell Us?" Journal of Economic Literature 33(1):132-63.

Kahn, Matthew. 1997. "Particulate Pollution Trends in the U.S." Regional Science and Urban
      Economics, 27: 87-107.

Keller, Wolfgang. 1998. "Multinational enterprises, international trade, and technology diffusion"
        , mimeo, University of Texas-Austin, August.

Kolstad, Charles, and Y. Xing. 1997. "Do Lax Environmental Regulations Attract Foreign
       Investment?" UC Santa Barbara Working Paper #6-95R, February.

Leonard, H. Jeffrey. 1988. Pollution and the Struggle for the World Product , Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

Levinson, Arik. 1996. "Environmental Regulations and Manufacturers’ Location Choices:
       Evidence from the Census of Manufactures," Journal of Public Economics, 61(1).



                                                29
Levinson, Arik. 1999. "An Industry-Adjusted Index of State Environmental Standard Stringency,"
       mimeo, University of Wisconsin Economics Department.

List, John A. 1999. "U.S. County-Level Determinants of Inbound FDI: Evidence from a Two-
        Step Modified Count Data Model," International Journal of Industrial Organization,
        forthcoming.

List, John A., and Mitch Kunce. 1999. "Environmental Protection and Economic Growth: What
        do the Residuals tell us?" Land Economics, forthcoming.

Lipsey, Robert, Magnus Blomstrom, and Erich Ramstetter. 1998. , "Internationalized
       Production in the World Economy,"in Robert Baldwin et al. (eds.), Geography and
       Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, The University of Chicago Press for the
       NBER, pp.83-135.

Low, Patrick, and Alexander Yeats. 1992. "Do ’Dirty’ Industries Migrate?" In Patrick Low, ed.,
      International Trade and the Environment. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Low, Patrick, ed. 1992. International Trade and the Environment, Washington, DC: The World
      Bank.

Mataloni, Ray. 1999. "A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational Companies," in
      International Direct Investment Studies by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S.
      Department of Commerce, pp.198-215; Table 3.

Papke, Leslie E. 1991. "Interstate business tax differentials and new firm location," Journal of
       Public Economics 45: 47-68.

Rauscher, Michael. 1997. International Trade, Factor Movements, and the Environment. Oxford
      and New York: Oxford University Press, Clarendon Press.




                                                 30
                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                     Averages 1977-1994

                                            Property, Plant & Equipment of
                                               foreign-owned affiliates           Employees of              Annual number of new
                Compliance                             ($millions)           foreign-owned affiliates        foreign-owned plants
State            cost index     Unadjusted                                                                                Polluting
                     S*          index S      Manufacturing   Chemicals    Manufacturing   Chemicals      Manufacturing  industriese
                    (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)
Alabama                  1.19          0.0219          2876           803          22747           4502            0.94           0.65
Arizona                  1.39          0.0148          1430           206          11927           2588            0.35           0.18
Arkansas                 1.17          0.0168           826           131          14152           2034            0.18           0.12
California               0.90          0.0121         10397          2026        150365           33285            5.24           2.06
Colorado                 1.01          0.0113           926           320          13612           3085            0.35           0.12
Connecticut              0.67          0.0079          1565           335          29448           4825            0.88           0.35
Delaware                 1.30          0.0344          2786          2724          25304          32300            0.65           0.59
Florida                  1.21          0.0138          2940           749          43306           6878            0.76           0.24
Georgia                  0.91          0.0127          4729           861          54975           8947            3.82           1.00
Idaho                    1.66          0.0181           210             24          3138            434            0.00           0.00
Illinois                 0.91          0.0132          6389          1331          86496          14230            2.29           1.06
Indiana                  1.14          0.0196          5088           765          53453           8609            2.18           1.41
Iowa                     0.96          0.0106          1245           262          15482           3406            0.53           0.24
Kansas                   0.76          0.0115           705           182          10828           2420            0.24           0.06
Kentucky                 0.99          0.0146          2923           561          25185           4289            1.76           1.00
Louisiana                1.51          0.0538          5094          2835          18421           6974            0.47           0.41
Maine                    1.55          0.0237          1093             42          8713            449            0.12           0.06
Maryland                 1.17          0.0185          1799           408          26491           5484            1.00           0.24
Massachusetts            0.67          0.0067          2126           506          39880           8212            1.00           0.35
Michigan                 1.01          0.0121          4129           631          55779           7827            2.12           1.18
Minnesota                0.66          0.0092          1720           168          24294           3522            0.18           0.12
Mississippi              1.47          0.0213           990           518          10585           1651            0.29           0.18
Missouri                 0.79          0.0104          2404           664          27731           7312            0.71           0.53
Montana                  1.49          0.0341           528           566           1496            554            0.00           0.00
(continued)




                                                                31
Table 1 (continued)
                                                    Property, Plant & Equipment of
                                                       foreign-owned affiliates              Employees of               Annual number of new
                       Compliance
                                                               ($millions)              foreign-owned affiliates         foreign-owned plants
                        cost index   Unadjusted
State                                                                                                                                 Polluting
                            S*        index S
                           (1)           (2)        Manufacturing    Chemicals       Manufacturing    Chemicals      Manufacturing   industriese
                                                        (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)            (8)
Nebraska                      0.83         0.0088             257              72             5226            1502             0.06           0.00
Nevada                        0.63         0.0072             270              38             2944             650             0.29           0.18
New Hampshire                 0.75         0.0072             492              35             9999             505             0.00           0.00
New Jersey                    0.82         0.0158            6972            3810            88583           43431             2.47           1.65
New Mexico                    1.64         0.0306             679                             2701             607             0.12           0.00
New York                      0.77         0.0087            5055            1084            91944           17760             4.59           1.65
N. Carolina                   0.82         0.0088            6485            2467            76700           22005             4.12           2.12
N. Dakota                     0.77         0.0105             189                             1448             417             0.00           0.00
Ohio                          0.82         0.0139            6177            1044            83174           11386             2.82           2.29
Oklahoma                      0.58         0.0103            1614            1296            13929            5106             0.24           0.18
Oregon                        1.22         0.0139             871              88             9559            1491             1.00           0.47
Pennsylvania                  0.91         0.0169            5891            1450            92059           17095             1.94           1.18
Rhode Island                  0.72         0.0075             506             151             7577            1401             0.18           0.00
S. Carolina                   0.99         0.0160            4913            2056            44540           13793             1.71           0.82
S. Dakota                     0.68         0.0056               62              4             1601             113             0.00           0.00
Tennessee                     1.10         0.0165            4554            1480            52981           12125             2.41           0.94
Texas                         1.39         0.0311           14632            7970            89008           25756             3.82           2.88
Utah                          0.93         0.0164             480             120             7117            1077             0.12           0.00
Vermont                       0.66         0.0065             215               9             2729             131             0.35           0.18
Virginia                      0.96         0.0118            3295            1637            36171           11360             2.53           1.00
Washington                    1.37         0.0196            2197             153            18107            2874             0.88           0.18
W. Virginia                   1.58         0.0433            3024            2229            16123            8772             0.18           0.18
Wisconsin                     0.89         0.0110            2161             154            38627            4142             0.47           0.24
Wyoming                       0.72         0.0259             838             992             1225            1005             0.00           0.00
Avg. for lowest 5a            0.64         0.0082            1077             293            14669            2931             0.39           0.20
Avg. for highest 5b           1.59         0.0339            2020            1314             9819            3261             0.18           0.13
Avg. for lowest 20c           0.75         0.0103            2525             803            35413            8987             1.19           0.60
Avg. for highest 20d          1.33         0.0235            2841            1229            24874            5609             0.89           0.50
Omits AK, HI, and 1987. Columns (4) and (6) omit 1992-94, and columns (7) and (8) omit 1989.
a
  OK, NV, MN, CT, MA.
b
  NM, ID, WV, ME, MT.
c
  Add to (a) VT, SD, RI, NH, KS, NY, ND, MO, NJ, NC, WY, OH, NE, WI, GA.
d
  Add to (b) LA, MS, TX, AZ, WA, DE, OR, FL, AL, MD, AR, IN, TN, MI, CO.
e
  SIC codes 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37. (See footnote 15.)


                                                                        32
                                                             Table 2
                                       Changes in Average Pollution Abatement Costs and FDI
                                                   (1977-1981) to (1990-1994)

                                           Property, plant & equipment
                Change in industry-                  change                        Employment change            Total new plants
                  adjusted index
                of abatement costs          total            chemical             total       chemical       total          polluting
                        (S*)            manufacturing        industry         manufacturing   industry   manufacturing     industriesg
                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)           (5)         (6)               (7)

Lowest 5a              !0.597                 2,495            1,311             16,698          1,306         0.32                0.00

Highest 5b             0.446                    801             209                3,658          451          0.00            !0.04
Lowest 10c             !0.370                  3660             982              20,949          2206          0.58                0.28

Highest 10d            0.310                   3007             720              19,567          2972         !0.44            !0.20
Lowest 20e             !0.230                 4,508            1,757             26,183          5,796         0.43                0.13

Highest 20f            0.190                  5,282            1,551             31,577          4,385        !0.13                0.00
a
  AZ, NM, ID, DE, FL.
b
  WY, ND, RI, CO, SD.
c
  Add to (a) IN, AL, IA, WA, OK.
d
  Add to (b) ME, CT, MA, IL, GA.
e
  Add to (c) NJ, WV, MS, OR, MI, PA, MT, MD, VA, NC.
f
  Add to (d) MN, CA, TX, SC, UT, OH, WI, NY, NH, KY.
g
  SIC codes 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37. (See footnote 15.)




                                                                         33
                                                Table 3
                         Value of Gross Property, Plant and Equipment (PP&E)
                                   As a Function of Abatement Costs
                                              1977 !1994

                                                         Pooled                   State Fixed Effects
                                   Mean
                                (std. dev.)    Manufacturing     Chemicalsa   Manufacturing   Chemicalsa
                                    (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)

Industry-adjusted index of                              500*           267             !55          !199*
abatement costs (S*)                                   (237)          (186)           (219)             (161)

Market proximity                      6631            0.207*         0.098*          0.376*         0.079*
                                     (8220)          (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.022)        (0.016)

Population (1000s)                    4940            0.175*        !0.016            1.16*         0.389*
                                     (5134)          (0.033)        (0.023)          (0.10)        (0.071)

Unemployment rate                      6.61              122*         86.0*          !24.9           33.3
                                      (2.09)             (43)        (29.1)          (36.6)         (24.8)

Unionization rate                      16.6           !108*          !84.6*          !92.7*         !86.0*
                                       (6.7)             (20)        (13.9)          (41.6)         (29.1)

Wages                                  9.10              179*         32.9             310*             211†
                                      (2.24)             (87)        (66.7)           (151)             (114

Road mileage (1000s)                   80.5            12.3*          10.8*           55.5*             53.7*
                                      (48.4)           (2.6)          (1.8)          (11.7)             (8.2)

Land prices (per acre)                  887            0.52*          0.62*          !0.31†          0.16
                                       (775)          (0.12)         (0.10)          (0.17)         (0.13)

Energy prices                          5.51           !288*          !144*           !259*          !139*
                                      (1.70)             (56)          (41)            (57)              (40)

Tax effort                             96.1           !31.0*         !11.4*           47.6              25.6*
                                      (16.1)             (5.9)        (4.1)           (8.7)             (6.2)

Year                                                     166*         32.4            !4.0          !46.0
                                                         (41)        (33.4)          (48.5)         (38.4)

Constant                                            !11602*         !1525          !13476*         !4530†
                                                      (3072)         (2516)          (3397)         (2734)

no. observations                        816               811           563             811              563
no. censored                                                5           109               5              109
R2                                                       0.70          0.47            0.77             0.52

Standard errors in parentheses.
1987 is dropped because no PACE data were collected that year.
* Statistically significant at 5 percent.
†
  Statistically significant at 10 percent.
a
  The chemical industry investment data is only for 1977-1991.




                                                    34
                                                             Table 4
                                         Alternative measures of regulatory stringency:
                                     Gross Property, Plant and Equipment and Employment
                                                as a function of abatement costs
                                                          1977 ! 1994



                                                                      Pooled                            State Fixed Effects

                                                        Manufacturing          Chemicalsa        Manufacturing         Chemicalsa
      Coefficients on Index of Abatement Costs              (1)                   (2)                (3)                  (4)

(1)   Adjusted index (S*), with employment as                    !2288                 !825                 549                !991*
      the dependent variable.                                    (1586)                (755)              (1301)                (492)

(2)   Unadjusted Index (S), with PP&E as the                     66589*              72215*               13651                !4597
      dependent variable.                                        (8803)              (6608)              (11570)              (10105)

(3)   Unadjusted index (S), with employment as                   46548              106909*             107379               !27580
      the dependent variable.                                   (61563)             (29767)             (68320)               (29301)

(4)   Five-year averages, with PP&E and                             483                 440                !187                 !669
      adjusted index (S*).b                                        (614)               (462)                (817)               (596)

(5)   Five-year averages, with PP&E and                          72750*              85282*               17658              !33695
      unadjusted index (S).b                                    (21889)             (14326)              (43455)              (36060)

(6)   Dynamic Panel Model (GMM), with PP&E                             --                   --                2.4               -338*
      and adjusted index (S*).                                                                             (92.6)               (100)
      Standard errors in parentheses.
      * Statistically significant at 5 percent.
      †
        Statistically significant at 10 percent.
      a
        The chemical industry investment data is only for 1977-1991.
      b
        Rows (4) and (5) average all dependent and independent variables for 1977-1981, 1982-1986, and 1988-1994, and treats each
      period as one observation. There are thus 48 states and three periods, for 144 total observations. The last period, 1988-1994,
      takes a seven-year average for total manufacturing in columns (1) and (3), and a 4-year average for the chemical industry, in
      columns (2) and (4).




                                                                35
                                               Table 5
                                         Count Data Models
                                    Of New Foreign-owned Plants
                                  As a Function of Abatement Costs
                                             1977 !1994
                                         Pooled Poisson                        Fixed-Effects Poisson

         Regressors                                    Polluting                                 Polluting
                              All Manufacturing       industries       All manufacturinga      industriesb,c
                                     (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)

Industry-adjusted index of             !0.049                 0.031               0.379                 0.776*
abatement costs                         (0.121)              (0.168)             (0.263)               (0.367)
                                        [0.952]              [1.032]             [1.460]               [2.173]

Market proximity (millions)               8.14                 16.2*              !76.8*                !84.6*
                                         (5.31)                (7.8)               (13.8)                (21.7)

Population (millions)                    0.077*               0.050*              0.178*                0.128†
                                        (0.008)              (0.012)             (0.046)               (0.072)

Unemployment rate                      !0.069*              !0.039               !0.194*               !0.184*
                                        (0.020)              (0.028)             (0.030)               (0.042)

Unionization rate                      !0.019†              !0.012               !0.010                !0.079†
                                        (0.010)              (0.014)             (0.034)               (0.047)

Wages                                  !0.011                 0.080               0.274*                0.120
                                        (0.042)              (0.058)             (0.133)               (0.183)

Road mileage (millions)                   2.93*                5.35*              !2.43                  6.78
                                         (0.92)               (1.25)               (8.40)                (11.5)

Land prices ($1000 per                   0.095†               0.136†             !0.592*               !0.345
acre)                                   (0.056)              (0.075)             (0.164)               (0.225)

Energy prices                            0.055*               0.040               0.145*                0.204*
                                        (0.026)              (0.037)             (0.048)               (0.070)

Tax effort                              0.0102*             0.0045               0.0155*                0.024*
                                       (0.0025)            (0.0036)             (0.0069)               (0.010)

Year                                   !0.015              !0.0484†             !0.0551                !0.043
                                        (0.020)            (0.0277)             (0.0421)               (0.059)

Constant                                 0.159*                1.58                   na                       na
                                         (1.47)               (2.10)

n                                          768                  768                 672                    608
Pseudo R2                                 0.20                 0.15

Standard errors in parentheses (). Incidence ratios [e ] in square brackets. Omits 1989.
* Statistically significant at 5 percent.
†
  Statistically significant at 10 percent.
a
  This column drops six states (ID, MT, ND, NH, SD, and WY) because no new plants located in those states
during any of the 16 years.
b
  This column drops 10 states (those in column (3) plus NE, NM, RI, and UT) because no new plants located in
those states during any of the 16 years.
c
  SIC codes 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37. (See footnote 15.)



                                                     36
                                                                    Table 6
                                                        Alternative Count Data Models
                                                         Of New Foreign-owned Plants
                                                       As a Function of Abatement Costs
                                                                  1977 !1994
                                                                       Pooled                                      Fixed-Effects

      Stringency measures                          All Manufacturing        Polluting industries    All manufacturinga        Polluting industriesb,c
                                                          (1)                        (2)                   (3)                         (4)

(1)   Industry-adjusted index (S*) using                       !0.066                    !0.029                   0.381                        0.636†
      negative binomial model.                                 (0.199)                    (0.237)                (0.281)                      (0.382)

(2)   Unadjusted index (S) of abatement                          3.53                       15.3*                  46.7*                        69.1*
      costs using Poisson.                                      (4.45)                      (5.6)                 (15.6)                       (20.1)

(3)   Unadjusted index (S) using negative                       !1.54                      11.67                   44.8*                        64.2*
      binomial model.                                           (7.10)                     (7.93)                 (16.5)                       (20.2)

(4)   Five-year averages, using industry-                      !0.577*                   !0.588*                 !0.211                        0.391
      adjusted index (S*).d                                    (0.155)                    (0.213)                (0.490)                      (0.681)

(5)   Five-year averages, using unadjusted                      !11.3*                      0.95                   42.7                         78.2*
      index (S).d                                                 (5.3)                    (6.66)                 (26.0)                       (32.7)

(6)   Zero-inflated Poisson, using industry-                   !0.171                    !0.053                          --                         --
      adjusted index (S*)                                      (0.159)                    (0.238)

(7)   Zero-inflated Poisson, using unadjusted                    3.48                     15.53*                         --                         --
      index (S).                                                (5.47)                    (7.03)

      n                                                            768                       768                    672                          608

      Standard errors in parentheses. Omits 1989, when no new plant data were collected.
      * Statistically significant at 5 percent.
      †
        Statistically significant at 10 percent.
      a
        The fixed effects models drop ID, MT, ND, NH, SD, and WY because no new plants located in those states during any of the 17 years.
      b
        This column drops 10 states (those in column (3) plus NE, NM, RI, and UT) because no new plants located in those states during any of the
      16 years.
      c
        SIC codes 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37. (See footnote 15.)
      d
        Rows (4) and (5) average all dependent and independent variables for 1977-1981, 1982-1986, and 1988-1994, and treats each period as one
      observation. There are thus 48 states and three periods, for 144 total observations. The last period, 1988-1994, takes a six- year average,
      because there are no new-plant data for 1989.




                                                                   37
Data Appendix

Gross Value of Property, Plant and Equipment (PP&E) of Foreign-Owned Manufacturers

       Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), U.S. Department of Commerce, Foreign Direct
       Investment in the United States.

Employment of Foreign-Owned Affiliates

       Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), U.S. Department of Commerce, series Foreign
       Direct Investment in the United States.

New Foreign-owned manufacturing plants

       International Trade Administration (ITA), Department of Commerce. These data were
       culled from generally available public sources, transaction participants, and a variety of
       knowledgeable contacts. The major portion of the data were derived from public
       secondary sources such as newspapers, magazines, and business and trade journals, as well
       as from the public files of Federal regulatory agencies.

       The data contain the country of origin of the investment, the name of the business
       enterprise, the 4-digit SIC code of the business enterprise, the reported value of the
       investment, the state in which the investment was made, the year, and the investment type.
       Types of foreign direct investment include acquisitions and mergers, joint ventures, real
       estate transactions, new plants, plant expansions, and equity increases. Any other
       transaction classified as foreign direct investment is collected under the heading of "other."
       The Office of Trade and Economic Analysis maintains that the monitoring program
       identifies the vast majority of significant foreign direct investment transactions in the
       United States.

       New Plant Data: Data on new plants include the state in which the plant was built, the
       country of origination, the year, the amount of the investment, and the SIC code. We
       focus on the Manufacturing sector.

Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures (PACE) Data

       All PACE data were manually entered from tables published by the US Department of
       Commerce, Bureau of the Census. The variable of interest from this source was the
       Pollution Abatement Gross Annual Cost (GAC) total across all media types. These data
       are published in Current Industrial Reports: Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures,
       MA-200, various years. The 1977 data are only for establishments with 20 or more
       employees. Although survey data was collected from all establishments for the years
       1973-1979, in order to lessen the administrative burden on small businesses, they were
       dropped from the survey, starting in 1980. The PACE Survey was not collected in 1987.
       Note: There were some censored observations for the state totals.

Gross State Product data:


                                                38
        All gross state product data were acquired via the Regional Economic Information System
        CD, 1969-1994 published by the US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
        Analysis, Regional Economic Measurement Division.

Population

        Source: Current Population Survey: www.census.gov/population/estimates. Files
        st9097t1.txt, st8090ts.txt, st7080tx.txt.

Market proximity

        This is a measure of how near each state is to potential markets in other states. It is a
        distance-weighted measure of Gross State Product:

                                                  Mit   '   j Yd
                                                            júi
                                                                  jt

                                                                  ij
        where Yjt is the GSP of state j at time t, and dij is the distance from state i to state j (miles
        between populations-weighted state centroids). Source: BEA. Distances are
        approximated as a straight line along a great-circle route.

Unionization Rates

        Union Membership as Percent of Civilian Labor Force. The Bureau of National Affairs,
        Inc., "Union Membership and Earnings Data Book: Compilations from the Current
        Population Survey." Notes: BNA’s series begins in 1983. All of the data were obtained
        through the Statistical Abstracts, except for 1985, 1988, 1990, and 1993, which were
        obtained directly from BNA. Unionization rates prior to 1983 have been extrapolated
        from the 1983-1994 trend.

Unemployment

        Total Unemployed as Percent of Civilian Labor Force. Source: US Bureau of Labor
        Statistics, "Geographic Profile of Employment and Unemployment," annual.

Wages

        Production Workers in Manufacturing Industries – Average Hourly Earnings by State.
        Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employment and Earnings," monthly. Notes:
        missing production workers average hourly wages for 1981, and for years prior to 1980.
        These numbers are interpolated and extrapolated in the data.

Road Mileage

        This is the sum of Urban Highway Mileage and Rural Highway Mileage.
        Sources: Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.
        www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/summary95/section5.html, file hm210.xlw.

Energy Prices

                                                   39
       Prices of Fuel and Electricity for Industrial Sector. Source: State Energy Price and
       Expenditure Report, U.S. Energy Information Administration,
       www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/sep/, file allprice.csv.

Land Prices

       Land Value per Acre. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service,
       www.econ.ag.gov/Prodsrvs/dp-lwc.htm#prices.

Tax effort

       Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1988, State Fiscal Capacity and
       Effort. This variable measures the extent to which a state utilizes its available tax bases.
       It is a state’s actual revenues divided by its estimated capacity to raise revenues based on a
       model tax code, multiplied by 100. The national average is 100.




                                                 40
