                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DO “HIGH PERFORMANCE” WORK PRACTICES
                      IMPROVE ESTABLISHMENT-LEVEL OUTCOMES?


                                            Peter Cappelli
                                            David Neumark


                                          Working Paper 7374
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7374

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 First Draft: February 1999
                                        October 1999




The authors thank William H. Carter for careful research assistance, Arne Reznek and colleagues at the
Center for Economic Statistics of the U.S. Bureau of the Census for their help with data issues, and
participants in the MIT Labor Seminar for helpful comments. This research is part of a program of studies
using the National Employer Surveys that is conducted by the National Center on Post-Secondary
Improvement and funded by a grant from the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Educational
Research and Improvement. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do “High Performance” Work Practices
Improve Establishment-Level Outcomes?
Peter Cappelli and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 7374
October 1999
JEL No. M11, M12, J50

                                               ABSTRACT

     Interest in the potential effects of different systems for organizing work and managing employees on
the performance of organizations has a long history in the social sciences. The interest in economics,
arguably more recent, reflects a general concern about the sources of competitiveness in organizations. A
number of methodological problems have confronted previous attempts to examine the relationship between
work practices and the performance of firms. Among the most intractable has been a concern about
establishing causation given heterogeneity biases in what have typically been cross-sectional data. The
results from prior literature are suggestive of important productivity effects but remain inconclusive.
             To address the major methodological problems we use a national probability sample of
establishments, measures of work practices and performance that are comparable across organizations,
and most importantly a unique longitudinal design incorporating data from a period prior to the advent of
high performance work practices. Our results suggest that work practices that transfer power to
employees, often described as “high performance” practices, may rise productivity, although the statistical
case is weak. However, we also find that these work practices on average raise labor costs per employee.
The net result is no apparent effect on efficiency, a measure that combines labor costs and labor
productivity. While these results do not appear to be consistent with the view that such practices are good
for employers, neither do they suggest that such practices harm employers. They are, however, consistent
with the view that these practices raise average compensation and hence may be good for employees.
Overall, then, the evidence suggests that firms can choose “high road” human resources practices that raise
employee compensation without necessarily harming their competitiveness.



Peter Cappelli                                                          David Neumark
Department of Management                                                 Department of Economics
Wharton School                                                           Michigan State University
University of Pennsylvania                                              East Lansing, MI 48824
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                                  and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu                                             neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu
I. Introduction

        Arguments suggesting that alternative systems for managing employees and organizingtheir

work might lead to superior employee performance and, in turn, superior organizational performance go

back at least to the beginnings of industrialization. The original focus was on ownership structures, with

the view that employee cooperatives and other forms of employee governance might not only be more

just but might provide superior performance as well (see, e.g., Webb and Webb 1965 in the U.K., or

Commons 1970 in the U.S.). Forceful critiques arose early in the 20th century in reaction to the mass

production factory system that was heavily influenced by industrial engineers like Frederick Taylor.

Entire academic fields like industrial psychology and industrial relations can trace their roots at least in

part to these critiques. Although they became more sophisticated and differentiated over time, the

alternative models all share the view that mass production systems sharply limit the control and decision-

making autonomy of employees, ignoring important psychological and social needs of employees in the

process. As a result, they not only fail to tap important sources of motivation and ideas from employees

but in many cases cause employees to withhold effort and compliance with management directions.

        Recent studies attempting to estimate the benefits associated with these "high performance"

work practices are suggestive of important effects but, taken as a group, remain inconclusive. In this

study, we use a national probability sample of establishments, measures of work practices and

performance that are comparable across organizations, and most importantly a unique longitudinal

design incorporating data from a period prior to the advent of high performance work practices.

 Together, these features of our study address the central methodological problems that have plagued past

 research. Our results suggest that work organization practices that expand employee involvement. often

 described as "high performance" practices, do not have an unambiguous effect on productivity (sales per

 employee), although the estimates tend to point to positive effects. There is strongerevidence that these

 work practices on average raise labor costs per employee, controlling for labor quality. Because the most
important aspect of labor costs is compensation, higher labor costs per employee would seem to benefit

workers even though they are a liability, other things equal, for employers. The final result is that there

appears to be no net effect on labor efficiency, a measure that combines the effects on labor costand

labor productivity.1 While these results do not appear to be consistent with the view that such practices

are good for employers, neither do they suggest that such practices harm employers. Overall, the

evidence suggests that firms can choose "high road" human resources practices that raise employee

compensation without necessarily affecting their competitiveness.

II. Related Research on Work Organization

        The research on work organization and the attempts at reforming it is vast, and only a cursory

review is attempted here, with an emphasis on more recent empirical research on the effects of work

practices on organizational performance.2

Early Case Studies

        Perhaps the earliest research attempting to evaluate the effects of alternative working systems

were the Western Electric studies beginning in the 1920s, inductive research that both "discovered"

many of the alternative principles for organizing work and evaluated the benefits from them

(Roethlisberger and Dickerson 1943). Although there is some debate about what these studies actually

show, most observers believe that the reforms put in place in those studies illustrated that individual and

group performance could be enhanced by systems that acknowledge the need for social interaction and

the role that group norms play in shaping work performance.

        The next important set of studies, also case studies, were conducted some 20 years later in the

U.K., originally in the mining industry (see, e.g., Trist 1981). They concluded that individual and group

performance could be improved through work systems that recognized the interplay between new

technology and work systems, hence the label "sociotechnical" for these studies. These studies were


 Note that this does not refer to technical efficiency in the economic sense of being on the production frontier, but
rather efficiency in the sense of cost minimization by minimizing unit labor costs.

                                                          2
reacting not so much to mass production systems per se but to piece rates and the individualized

incentive arrangements that were often part of such systems. The focus of the interventions was to

expand the use of teams and the authority they had over workplace decisions. The interventions

examined in these studies had the feel of experiments, although they did not necessarily meet all the

characteristics of experimental design. And while there were no systematic evaluations of the outcomes

of sociotechnical interventions, the case studies suggested substantial improvements in organizational

performance. As with most studies of work organization, they examined the effects on individual work

and workgroup productivity, not factoring in costs or examining relationships with overall firm

performance. These studies had relatively little influence on U.S. industry but considerable influence in

Scandinavia, especially Sweden.

Individual-Level Studies

        The next generation of studies were more explicitly psychological in their orientation, focusing

on the individual as the unit of analysis and psychological factors as explanations, in contrast to the prior

studies where social relationships among workers or between workers and technology were emphasized.

These new studies were motivated by the notion that the basic psychological needs that workers have

were often unfulfilled by the nature of the tasks they performed. Analysis based on this framework was

first made popular with the work of Herzberg (1966) and became a common research model by the late

1970s (e.g., Hackman and Oldham 1980). The interventions considered in this research were at the level

of specific tasks that individual workers performed in theirjobs. As with earlier research, the focus of

attention was production work, and the main theories represented a counterpoint to the systems of work

organization associated with scientific management. There were two broad types of studies in this

literature. The first focused explicitly on employee involvement in decisions affecting their jobs. The

second focused on the specific tasks that employees performed, with an important aspect typically being


2
 There are many good reviews of the work reform literature. Among recent ones are Cotton (1993) and Appelbaum
and Batt (1994).
                                                       3
the extent to which they had control over how tasks were performed. But other aspects ofjobs also

played a role in these studies, such as the extent of variety in the tasks workers performed or the

understanding of the end product that their tasks served.

        The majority of these studies used employee attitudes as the dependent variable, especially job

satisfaction. Cotton (1993) summarized the hundreds of studies examining work organization issues

from the psychological perspective, most of which related innovations in work organization to job

satisfaction or related concepts such as employee commitment. Few studies attempted to examine

relationships with outcomes at the organizational level. Despite the incredible volume of research in this

tradition, it is relatively easy to summarize its conclusions. Systems of work organization that

empowered employees in decision making and jobs whose tasks enriched employees by meeting more of

their needs were generally associated with more positive job-related attitudes such assatisfaction.

Evidence that these innovations improved individual-level performance on measures such asabsenteeism

and turnover is somewhat more modest but still reasonably strong. As Cotton's review (1993) and others

conclude, however, that there were few studies that examined relationships between these innovations

and organizational performance as measured by productivity, efficiency, or financial performance atthe

organizational level, and little evidence of positive relationships in thosefew studies.3

 Organization-Level Studies

         The psychological research on work organization continues to pursue studies of work practices

 and individual outcomes. The more important innovation in the study of work systems during the 1990s

 has been research specifically designed to examine relationships with organizational performance. Some

 of the motivation for this research came from studies in the industrial organization economics tradition

 attempting to understand the components of profitability. Hansen and Wernerfelt (1989), for example,


  Some industrial psychologists have made considerable efforts to assess the costsand benefits of specific human
 resource practices (e.g., Cascio 1991). These assessments are primarily accounting calculations that do not attempt
 to estimate relationships with organization-level performance measures (e.g., theytotal the administrative costs of
 replacing employees to assess turnover costs but do not necessarily conduct empirical estimates of how turnover
 affects organizational performance).
                                                           4
found that internal characteristics of firms explained almost twice as much of the variance in profitability

between firms as did characteristics of the industry and the firm's position in it, the traditional

explanations for differences in profits. Rumelt (1991) found that only four percent of the variation in

profitability across business units could be accounted for by factors associated with the unit's industry.

Studies like these pointed to characteristics within the firm as the most likely source of differences in

performance, and a great many of the potential differentiating within-firm characteristics relate at least

indirectly to work practices or the way work is organized.

        The primary motivation for research examining the effects of workplace practices on

organizational performance, however, was the growing interest in Japanese management practices (see

below), driven by concern about the inadequacies of U.S. manufacturing in general (e.g., Dertouzos, et

al. 1988). The initial interest in Japanese management focused on employee management and concepts

such as job rotation, teamwork, and practices that supported greater employee involvement (especially

training and employment security). The first wave of the new research on work practices and

organizational performance examined Japanese-influenced practices such as quality circles and found

them associated with increased productivity (Katz, et al. 1983; Katz, et al. 1985). Perhaps the most

influential research stemming from this interest was the International Motor Vehicle Project at MIT.

which provided evidence of the superiority of Japanese assembly plant operations, in terms of quality

and productivity, as compared with other producers (Womack, et al. 1990). Later, MacDuffie (1995)

examined the same cross-sectional data more rigorously and found that work practices including teams

and contingent compensation in combination with flexible production techniques led to higher quality

and lower hours of labor per unit of output.

        The approach of concentrating on a single industry and examining productivity has the decided

advantage of ensuring that the performance measures are more comparable across observations. It also

allows observations to be taken from units of analysis closer to where work practices occur, unlike



                                                      5
financial measures, such as shareholder value, which can only be obtained at the corporate level.

Financial measures can more easily be swamped by unrelated factors; the stock price of a huge

conglomerate like General Electric, for example, is likely to be driven by a wide range of factors in

addition to work practices. In addition, it is very difficult to measure work practices accurately across an

entire corporation. The downside of focusing on productivity is that it leaves open the question as to the

costs of those productivity gains and whether, on balance, they increase firm efficiency or performance;

this problem has been addressed in some, but not all, of the existing studies (see below). And the

downside of focusing on a single industry, of course, is that it limits the ability to generalize the results to

other settings.

        A number of more recent studies followed the first wave of research on work practices and

organizational performance, focusing in large part on productivity-related performance measures.

Ichniowski, et al. (1997), for example, study steel finishing lines. They found that the introduction of

"innovative work practices," among which are included teams and incentive pay, were associated with

higher worker productivity, and that combinations of these practices yielded additional productivity

improvements. A follow-up study by Ichniowski and Shaw (1998), using data for Japanese plants as

well, reinforces the assertion in the prior study that there are synergies from introducing more of these

practices. Delery and Doty (1996) attempt to examine the same relationships in the banking industry,

albeit with cross-sectional data and a response rate of only 11 percent, and conclude that banks with

more formalized employment systems (including formal training and appraisal systems and internal

career opportunities) have higher returns on assets. Delery, et al. (1997) essentially repeat the study with

a sample of trucking companies, again with cross-sectional data but this time with a 36 percent response

rate. In this case, few of the much larger set of practices showed relationships either to cost ratios or

returns on earnings. Cappelli and Rogovsky (1998) find that employee performance in a sample of

public utilities is higher where employees are involved in decisions affecting work and individual tasks



                                                       6
but is no higher where they are involved in decisions governing the terms and conditions of employment.

Ball (1999) compares the sales of call center employees within a telecommunications company operating

under traditional, mass production work systems to those using total quality management (TQM) systems

and self-directed teams. She finds higher performance associated with self-directed teams but no

performance effects associated with TQM systems.

        Another set of relatively recent studies has attempted to examine the relationships between work

practices and overall firm-level performance using measures of financial outcomes. Ichniowski (1990)

was the first of these, attempting the conceptually difficult task of relating sets of employment practices

to firm-level financial performance. The low response rate (under seven percent) and small sample made

it difficult to draw robust conclusions from his cross-sectional data, but the results seemed to suggest that

a cluster of practices that included enriched job design was associated with higher financial performance

as compared to other clusters of practices. The fact that somewhat similar sets of practices were

associated with significantly worse performance could imply that there was a benefit to having just the

right combination of practices. However, this sensitivity also highlights the usual caveat about the

arbitrary nature of the clusters chosen to examine—given the large number of permutations possible

among the practices, the a priori argument for choosing any particular cluster must be compelling.

        Cooke (1994) examines the effects of employee participation and group incentive compensation

plans (profit sharing and gain sharing) on value added per employee for a sample of manufacturing firms

in Michigan. He reports that employee participation plans have significant positive effects that are

bigger in union than in nonunion firms; positive effects of group-based incentives that are bigger in the

nonunion sector when implemented in the absence of employee participation; and larger effects ofjointly

implementing both sets of practices in the union sector. However, statistical tests of the differences

between union and nonunion firms were not reported, and only the difference with respect to

implementing employee participation appears large enough to be statistically significant. Cooke also


                                                     7
finds that these work practices tend to increase wages, but by less than the effect on value added, so that

performance—as measured by the effect on value added minus the effect on wages—appears to be

enhanced by the same practices that boost value added. (Unfortunately, though, the statistical

significance of these effects is not reported.)

        Huselid (1995) follows Ichniowski's (1990) approach with cross-sectional data from a sample of

publicly held companies with more than 100 employees. The data included 13 measures of employment

practices (some of which were taken from the Ichniowski study), including questions about work

practices and employee involvement. He uses factor analysis to construct two variables measuring the

extent of various work practices, some of which could be considered part of high performance practices,

and finds that greater use of such practices is associated with lower turnover and higher productivity per

employee. The results were somewhat less successful at explaining overall firm financial performance.

The factor capturing practices aimed at employee incentives was not significantly related to return on

assets, and the factor measuring work systems was weakly related to Tobin's q. He also examines the

question of synergies, mainly examining whether the practices were applied consistently across the

organization, and finds little evidence of such synergies. Data limitations apparently prevented

examining possible synergies between individual practices, the type of synergies that Milgrom and

Roberts (1985) and others saw as potentially most important.

        Huselid and Becker (1996) conducted a panel study of the relationship between work practices

and organizational performance based on a 1994 follow-up survey (covering 1993) to Huselid's 1991

data. The study examines the same relationships as in the 1995 paper but uses the panel data to control

for unmeasured firm-level heterogeneity via firm fixed effects. When this is done, the cross-sectional

relationships become small and insignificant. As they note, the nature of their panel may have

contributed to the absence of an apparent relationship. First, firms that adopt practices early on may do

so because such practices are especially useful for them, while those that adopt them later on may have



                                                      8
waited in part because the practices do not make as much sense for them. The latter group may, for

example, adopt them simply to follow trends or fads in their community, or after the costs of their

implementation falls. Situations where the incidence of a practice is already high in the first wave of a

panel imply that those who adopt the practice late in the sample period covered by the panel are late

adopters. To the extent that this is the case, fixed-effects estimates based on longitudinal data are likely

to focus more on the late adopters in the more recent period so that the estimates are based on firms for

whom the effects may not be as strong (see also Freeman and Kleiner 1998). (Longitudinal data

identifying when practices were introduced can help to address this problem as can data including the

earliest adopters, such as we use in this paper.)

        The second potential problem that may have contributed to the absence of a relationship

concerns the exacerbation of measurement error that can occur in panel observations. The advantage of

panel data is that they provide information on changes in practices that is necessary for estimating fixed-

effects models. But such information is typically based on responses from more than one survey, which

can compound measurement error. The Huselid and Becker surveys are only two years apart, and the

work practices they study were already prevalent in 1991 with little difference in their use in 1991 and

1993 (Huselid and Becker 1996 p. 411). In such a case, the proportion of true changers relative to total

reported changers is likely to be much lower than the proportion of the true incidence relative to reported

incidence in a cross-section, because random misclassification of practices—if uncorrelated across years

of the panel—will generally contribute a higher proportion of the "changers" than it does of those using a

particular practice in a cross-section.4 The problem should be less severe the farther apart the

observations, as the rate of misclassification should remain the same, while the number of true changers

increases. Thus, estimates that rely on the difference in values for observations over a short panel

increase the role of measurement error and hence are likely to bias the estimated effects considerably



 Freeman (1984) demonstrates that this is true as long as the rate of misclassification is moderate, and provides a
numerical example.
                                                         9
more towards zero. The extent to which this is the case, and whether it negates the advantages of

addressing heterogeneity, depends on the extent of measurement error, its correlation over time, and the

magnitude of the heterogeneity bias. Regardless, though, when panel data estimates of the effects of

work practices are smaller (in absolute value) than cross-section estimates, we cannot tell whether this

result is due to a reduction of bias from heterogeneity or an exacerbation of bias from measurement

error, without additional information.5

        Black and Lynch (1997) is perhaps most similar to the study we perform here, in part because

they use some of the same data from the 1994 National Employers Survey (NES) that we use (described

below). The authors examine some work organization practices, as well as other work-related or

management practices such as computer use, benchmarking, and recruiting strategies. Theirs is the only

study thus far to control for whether the quality of the workforce, as measured by education, changes

with these practices. This may well be a crucial confounding factor in analyses like these; a work

practice or management strategy associated with higher productivity may also be accompanied by a shift

to a more-skilled workforce. In that case, some of the gains in performance otherwise attributed to the

work practices might in fact be due to the more-skilled employees. Further, because the workforce

changes are likely to raise labor costs, it would be difficult to assess the true net effect of work practices

on profitability or efficiency unless changes in the workforce could be controlled. In other words,

measures of the relationship between particular work practices and organizational performance are more

likely to be accurate if they are estimated conditional on changes in workforce composition or quality

that might accompany the change in work practices. In addition, Black and Lynch attempt to control for

the problem of heterogeneity by using repeated observations over the 1988-1993 period taken from

matched data in the Bureau of the Census's Longitudinal Research Database (LRD). They construct a

within estimator in an attempt to generate more accurate estimates of the coefficients of the time-varying


 Huselid and Becker (1996) propose a method of addressing this measurement error bias in the panel estimates,
which we discuss below. In using this method, results more consistent with the cross-sectional evidence were found

                                                        10
variables (capital, labor, and materials). They then estimate the effects of work practices in a second

stage using the estimates from the first stage to form average residuals for each establishment, which

they regress on the work practices (and other) variables from the NES. Because they have no

information on work practices other than in 1993, the study effectively assumes that these practices and

other variables are fixed over the 1988-1993 period. This approach has two limitations, however. First,

as they acknowledge (p. 19), it does not correct for a correlation between unobserved establishment-

specific effects and work practices which is the heart of the heterogeneity problem and, as explained

below, is an issue that our approach addresses directly. Second, other evidence (see below) suggests that

the work practices under consideration have expanded considerably in the 1988-1993 period, which

makes it difficult to sustain the assumption necessary for their analysis that the incidence of work

practices was constant over this period.6

        Black and Lynch conclude that work practices per se have little relationship to labor productivity

at the establishment level unless introduced in particular combinations with other work practices. For

example, TQM only appears to affect performance when a large proportion of employees is involved in

employee participation programs. Their results look only at productivity, and it would be important to

know what the effects are on other dimensions of performance such as costs and the efficiency with

which labor is used. As an example, Appelbaum, et al. (forthcoming) study the effects of work practices

within several manufacturing industries on both performance and labor costs, although using cross-

sectional data. They report that innovative work practices have little effect on establishment

performance, but are associated with higher compensation for employees.

        Easton and Jarrell (1998) examine the effects of introducing one particular practice—TQM

programs—on the subsequent financial performance of publicly-held firms. Rather than relying on a

random sample, their technique compared a sample of firms that introduced these practices to a matched


only for one of the two performance measures they study.


                                                       11
set of otherwise similar firms that did not introduce them. (Of course, whether this matched sample

eliminates bias from firm-level heterogeneity better than does a more conventional cross-section sample

depends on how well the match controls for unobservables potentially associated with these work

practices.) They find that firms that introduced TQM did better both in terms of traditional accounting

measures of financial performance and stock prices.

Summary

        A summary of the research on work practices and organizational performance might go as

follows. Some innovative work practices seem to show positive relationships with organizational

performance. The results tend to be stronger for studies within industries than for studies across

industries, perhaps because measures of performance within industries are less contaminated by

extraneous factors, and hence more accurately measure true performance differences across firms. But

the measures used in industry studies, typically productivity, do not consider costs and therefore measure

only productivity and not overall performance or competitiveness. In addition, the results from industry

studies cannot be easily generalized. Some of the financial measures used in the other studies implicitly

assess costs and benefits and therefore set a higher threshold for judging performance. Only one

representative, national-level study found strong relationships between practices and financial

performance (Huselid 1995), although those results could not be replicated using conventional methods

with panel data (Huselid and Becker 1996). The other studies using financial outcomes found mixed

results with some finding positive effects associated with some practices.

        Our reading from all of the prior research is that the relationships that have been examined

between work practices and performance outcomes show somewhat greater empirical support at the

individual level than at the organizational level. The stronger evidence at the organizational level

concerns productivity effects, whereas evidence on efficiency or overall performance effects, which


6
 Given that they are averaging productivity measures over years when, for some establishments, these work
practices were not in effect, we would expect any estimated effects to reflect some average of the effects of having

                                                         12
factor in costs as well, is weaker and more sporadic. In addition, one might view the accumulated

evidence as somewhat weakened by the fact that the variables showing significant relationships often

differ across studies. Why apparently strong relationships between practices and performance at the

individual level might not aggregate up to the organizational level is an issue for speculation. The

relationships at the individual level may be so small that they are easily swamped by other factors, or

they may ultimately have little power to explain organizational performance. In addition, most of the

psychological studies that generated positive relationships at the individual level had few control

variables, and it is possible that the results in these studies are not very robust with respect to omitted

variables. Finally, few of these studies attempted to control for potential costs associated with these

outcomes. It might be, for example, that the practices raise individual performance but also costs,

perhaps in the manner that a wage premium might, which is why relationships with efficiency or

profitability are harder to find.

        In addition to these concerns, organizational-level studies have also been limited by some

important methodological problems that may constrain finding stronger or at least more consistent

empirical relationships between work practices and performance. The next section summarizes these

methodological problems before outlining how we address them in our analyses.

III. Methodological Issues

        Some of the problems facing existing studies relating work practices to organizational

performance are common to all efforts to examine organizational performance. There is a paucity of

representative samples because of the relative absence of surveys at the organizational level. Many of

the studies to date use samples from specific industries, which limits their size and generalizability,

while others use samples of convenience. Low response rates to surveys of organizations raise concerns

about selection biases. Problems in generating measures of organizational performance are also

common. As noted above, measures of productivity have the advantage of being meaningful and


implemented these practices (at different points in the past and no effect.
comparable across organizations, especially when they are used within industries, but because they

ignore costs, it is difficult to tell much about efficiency or overall performance from them. Financial

measures are preferred in this regard, but many of these, such as shareholder value, are only available for

publicly-held companies. Also, shareholder value or profit and loss is only available for companies as a

whole, whereas the independent variables of interest are typically only in effect or measured for smaller

sub-units of the organization.

        Other problems are more unique to the study of work practices. One important problem is the

basic issue of what dimensions of work practices to study and what proxies to use for these practices.

Becker and Gerhart (1996) note, for example, that many of the studies attempting to examine the effects

of work practices on organizational performance describe themselves as examining "high performance

work systems," but the set of practices that they use as proxies for those systems differ considerably.

More generally, there is often little overlap between studies in the practices examined and the proxies

used. In most cases, there is no common theory suggesting how the practices relate to performance. The

most glaring theoretical gap is in the analyses of synergies among practices. Although most studies

assert that there are positive interactions between practices, few present arguments as to how particular

practices should interact with each other, instead simply assuming that more practices are better.

Unfortunately, when researchers are presented with a wide array of possible work practices with little

theoretical guidance as to how they interact, data mining possibilities abound, perhaps leading

researchers to discover combinations of practices that appear to affect performance significantly in their

data sets but are not relationships likely to be robust across data sets. This is not an issue of data but

rather one of research design and strategy.

        A more difficult problem to address in these studies is the issue of establishing causation, a

particular challenge because in most cases the data are cross-sectional. The possibility that firms or

establishments already performing well might have a greater ability and interest in adopting practices


                                                      14
that have come to be labeled "best practices" implies that the apparent positive effect of work practices

on productivity or performance is not causal but rather may simply reflect firm- or establishment-level

heterogeneity.7 The issue of addressing heterogeneity to establish causation is, in our view, a central

problem plaguing prior research.

         To summarize, a persuasive test of the effects of work practices on organizational performance

requires data that meet the following criteria. First, the sample should be representative of the

population of employers, and the data should ideally be drawn at a level of analysis sufficiently close to

where practices are established to expect relationships between practices and performance to hold.

Second, the outcomes studied should include not only productivity but also some performance measure

related to efficiency in order to assess whether productivity improvements are offset by cost increases.8

Third, the data (and research design) should make it possible to establish whether a causal relationship

exists between work practices and performance, accounting for the possibility that employers using

particular work practices are different in other ways that are correlated with performance. Prior research

has sometimes made advances along subsets of these criteria but has yet to address them all.

         The analyses outlined below are similar to the organization-level studies reviewed in Section II

in that they examine work practices and their relationship with organization-level performance. They

differ from prior studies, and in our view represent an advance over them, because the characteristics of

the data used allow us to overcome the methodological problems outlined above. The surveys from

which the data are taken provide nationally representative samples of establishments and measures of

performance that are comparable across establishments, addressing the first two methodological

challenges noted above.



 While this scenario is consistent with positive bias in regressions of performance measures on work practices, the
opposite is also possible, if firms in dire straits tend to adopt new work practices (Huselid and Becker, 1996, p. 403).
Related problems are the possibility of reverse causation, or that firms that adopt "best practices" in organizing
work also adopt such practices in other areas, with the latter leading to improved organizational performance.
8
 There is something of a trade-off here in that units of analysis where such performance data—typically financial
data—are available may be at higher levels than the units where work practices are implemented.
                                                          15
         We are also able to match surveys to create panel data that allow us to address the issue of

heterogeneity/causation. In particular, we are able to form panels in which one of the waves was

conducted before the work organization practices under consideration were introduced. The ability to

identifS' performance before these work practices were introduced offers important advantages over

shorter panels of the type used by Huselid and Becker (996) to address the heterogeneity issue. First,

because we are not identifying the effects of work practices from "late adopters," we get closer to a true

"average" effect of these practices, at least on those establishments that have adopted them thus far.9

Second, and much more important, we avoid the issue of exacerbating measurement error that arises in

panels. If none of the work practices was in place as of the first wave of the panel, then the sample of

"changers" who statistically identify the effects of work practices when we difference the data consists of

the entire set of establishments using these practices in the later panel. This is in contrast to the small

subset of respondents who report changes in practices in short panels. That is, the work practices

"treatment" variables are exactly the same in the cross-section specification and the specification

incorporating fixed establishment effects, so there is no exacerbation of measurement error. Of course,

this strategy hinges crucially on the absence of these work practices in the period covered by the earlier

wave of the panel data set. A thorough discussion of this issue appears in Section VI, where we present

research- and survey-based evidence, and in the Appendix, where we document the earliest anecdotal

evidence and media reports of these work practices.

IV. Data and Measurement

         Establishment-level surveys of employment practices conducted by the U.S. Bureau of the

Census for the National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce provide data that allow us to

address the methodological challenges outlined above that face analyses of the relationships between

work practices and organizational performance. The original National Employers Survey (NES I) was



 In addition, if the effects of work practices take some time to emerge (or, in principle, to fade away), a long panel
makes it more likely that enough time has elapsed to reveal these effects.
                                                          16
administered by the Bureau of the Census as a telephone survey in August and September of 1994 to a

nationally representative sample of private establishments with 20 or more employees. It is structured to

provide information about establishment performance and characteristics in 1993, although the questions

regarding work practices refer to the time of the survey (i.e., in 1994), possibly introducing slight

measurement error if there were some very recent introductions of these practices.'°

           The survey over-sampled establishments in the manufacturing sector and establishments with

more than 100 employees. Public-sector employers, non-profit institutions, and corporate headquarters

were excluded from the sample, as were establishments with fewer than 20 employees. Establishments

with fewer than 20 employees represent approximately 85 percent of all establishments in the U.S., but

those with more than 20 employees account for approximately 75 percent of all workers (Lynch and

Black 1998). In addition, very small establishments are unlikely to be appropriate for or amenable to

studying work practices because their working arrangements are often so informal and variable

(changing day-to-day in response to even routine developments such as absenteeism) as to make it

difficult to respond in a meaningful way to questions about work systems.

           In administering the NES, the target respondent was the plant manager in the manufacturing

sector and the local business site manager in the non-manufacturing sector. Other surveys have targeted

the human resource manager. But in surveying establishments, what we want to measure is how work is

actually done in the facility, not the policies that might exist in employee handbooks, and the best person

to ask about actual operating practices is the person in charge of the establishment, not the manager in

charge of personnel policies. The questionnaire was designed to allow for multiple respondents so that

information could be obtained from establishments that kept financial information, for example, in a

separate office—typically at corporate headquarters for multi-establishment enterprises. Computer

Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CAll) was used to administer each survey, which took approximately

28 minutes to complete.


10
     The 1997 NES described below has the same structure.
                                                            17
        The sampling frame for the survey was the Bureau of the Census's Standard Statistical

Establishment List (SSEL), a comprehensive and up-to-date listing of establishments in the United

States. Of the 4,633 eligible establishments that were contacted by Census, only 1,275 refused to

participate in the survey. This represents a 72 percent response rate, which is substantially higher than

any of the other surveys used in the studies summarized above. The usual reason given by employers

about why they would not participate in the survey was that they did not participate in voluntary surveys

or were too busy to participate. Analysis of the characteristics of respondents and non-respondents

indicates that there was no significant pattern of differences at the two-digit industry level in the

likelihood of participating in the survey (Lynch and Black 1998). The only differentiating characteristic

of establishments less likely to participate was that manufacturing establishments with more than 1000

employees, constituting 0.1 percent of the sample, were less likely to do so. Of the 3,358 establishments

participating in the survey, not all respondents completed all parts of the survey by the interview cutoff

date of October 1, 1994, in which case they were excluded from the sample used below. The final

numbers of surveys in which all parts of the survey were completed were 1,621 establishments in the

manufacturing sector and 1,324 establishments in the non-manufacturing sector. This represents a 64

percent overall "completed" survey response rate.

        The survey was repeated in August of 1997 (NES II), again administered by the U.S. Bureau of

the Census via CAT!. This survey covers 1996. The sampling frame was again drawn from the SSEL,

targeting business establishments throughout the United States, excluding those with fewer than 20

employees and the other types of employers mentioned earlier, and oversampling the nation's largest

establishments and those in the manufacturing sector. The sample for the NES II has three additional

components, including: an oversampling of states involved in particular educational reform efforts

(2,000 completed interviews in California, Kentucky, Michigan, Maryland, and Pennsylvania);

approximately 2,500 completed interviews that comprise a representative sample of the rest of the United



                                                     18
States (45 states plus the District of Columbia); and a longitudinal component of about 900 completed

interviews with business establishments that had participated in the NES I. A total of 5,465

establishments responded to NES II for a response rate of 78 percent.1 1 The NES II data became

available for use at the Bureau of the Census in January 1998.

        Finally, labor costs per worker is a crucial performance measure in our analysis and is available

in NES II but not NES j12 We therefore matched establishments in NES Ito data from the 1993 LRD

(or the 1992 LRD, if 1993 did not yield a match), to extract labor costs per worker.13 To maintain

consistency with the denominator of this variable, we also took total employment from the same

observation.14 The need to obtain labor cost data from the 1992 or 1993 LRD in using NES 1, and the

match to much earlier LRD observations in constructing our panels (discussed in the next section), limit

the analysis to manufacturing establishments, which constitutes the sampling frame of the LRD.

        Figure 1 outlines the construction of the data sets we analyze, along with their sample sizes. For

completeness, we also present descriptive information on the short longitudinal panel based on the two

NES files even though we report no analyses with that short panel. Appendix Table Al provides further

details on the construction of the samples, in particular how the sample sizes change from the original

NES's as the various sample selection rules are imposed. The final products that we analyze are long

panels with 433 complete observations (i.e., after accounting for item non-response, data errors, etc.) for

the 1977-1993 panel, and 660 observations for the 1977-1996 panel. We also analyze a full 1993 cross-




" There were 915 respondents to the longitudinal component for a response rate of 88 percent. Excluding partial
responses brought the longitudinal sample down to 766 and a completed response rate of 74 percent.
12
   We experimented with estimating labor costs in NES I based on data on the proportion of costs accounted for by
labor (LC/TC) and other input costs, using the formula labor costs =((LC/TC) x other input costs)/(1 — (LC/TC)).
But these estimates were very noisy and did not replicate patterns expected and found in NES II, such as a negative
association with the percent female.
   Although the sampling frame for NES I is the SSEL, the establishment size restrictions in the NES's and
oversampling or certainty sampling of large establishments lead to considerable overlap between NES I and the
 1993 LRD. Thus, we obtain approximately 40 percent of matches from the 1993 LRD, and 60 percent from the
 1992 LRD (which includes the entire Census of Manufacturers).
 " Further details appear in the notes to Table 2.
                                                         19
section with 663 observations, to incorporate information on workforce and plant-level controls not

available in the LRD.

        Table 1 outlines the work practice variables used in the analyses, their definitions in the survey,

and descriptive statistics about them across surveys. The surveys asked a number of questions about

work practices, with a particular focus on those that rely on employee involvement and related aspects of

transformed work systems. As Table I indicates, some of these work practice variables are available

only in NES I while the others are asked in both surveys. Rather than focusing only on NES I, though,

we have chosen to construct and analyze two long panels (1977-1993 and 1977-1996, the latter using

NES II) because of the importance of trying to establish robust results in this literature where, as noted

earlier, such robust results are lacking. The work practice variables available in at least one of the two

NES's are as follows:

        TQM—Formal TQM programs include employee involvement as an explicit component of their
        operations.

        SELFMNG—Self-managed or autonomous teams give their members authority over decisions
        that in other contexts are made by supervisors, such as how to perform their tasks or, in more
        advanced situations, which tasks to perform.

        MEET—Regularly scheduled meetings to discuss work-related problems include low-levels of
        employee involvement, such as quality circles run by supervisors, as well as higher levels where
        the employees manage the meetings and take decisions themselves.

        TRNTEAM—Teamwork training is a proxy for how seriously the organization takes teamwork.
        The argument is that, other things equal, establishments that invest in training teams are ones
        that allow teams to handle more important tasks.

        JOBROT—Job rotation is an aspect of job design that increases variety and employee
        understanding of other aspects of the operation. It is also a central aspect of cross-functional
        teams.

        TRNCROS—Cross-training is a proxy for how seriously the establishment takes job rotation, and
        teamwork generally to the extent that responsibilities are shared within teams. As above,
        establishments that invest in training employees for other jobs should be much more likely to
        make use of those skills by rotating employees across those jobs.

        PAYSKIL—Pay-for-skill programs specify certain skills that are important for the organization
        and then reward employees with increased compensation when they have acquired those skills.

                                                     20
        Pay-for-skill is typically viewed as an important complement to teamwork and especially job
        rotation in that it supports learning the skills needed in such situations.

        PSHR—Gainsharing, profit sharing, and related programs that provide employees a share in
        improved performance of the establishment are typically seen as a strong complement to
        employee involvement programs that give them the mechanism to contribute to greater
        performance. (In fact, observers suggest that gainsharing without involvement is largely
        ineffective.)


        We also examine three other, different workplace practices that are sometimes associated with

innovative work systems, in order to provide some comparisons with the relationships above:


        BENCH—Benchmarking is a formal system of learning about practices at other organizations. It
        may also be a proxy for establishments that are in general more progressive about their practices.

        COMPMNG and COMPWKR—The percentages of managerial and non-managerial employees
        who use computers on their job capture two potentially different dimensions of computer use,
        which has been the subject of considerable investigation in several other studies; the inclusion of
        these variables here provides a point of comparison with those other studies. Further, many
        observers believe that computer use is a signal or proxy for organizations that are more advanced
        in their operations.


V. Empirical Approach
        The longitudinal component of the NES can provide panel data, much like the data used by

Huselid and Becker (1996). The main drawback to this panel, as with their data, is that it covers a very

short period and one in which the overall use of the work practices surveyed was already high in the first

wave. This makes it likely that a high fraction of reported "changers" in use of work practices are

spurious, in which case fixed-effects estimates will be severely contaminated by measurement error and

likely to be more biased towards zero than the cross-section estimates.'5 In addition, the number of

changers is small, likely rendering the data uninformative. This latter suspicion was confirmed in

estimations using the short panel for many of the specifications discussed below. Estimated effects of




' Huselid and Becker (1996) provide a straightforward exposition of this well-known point for the case of
continuous variables. The extension to indicator variables (such as those measuring work practices) is more
complex (Freeman, 1984).
                                                        21
work practices in fixed-effects (first difference) specifications were extremely imprecise. Hence, these

analyses are not reported in the paper.

        Instead, we provide more informative fixed-effects analyses by constructing much longer panels

based on matching establishments in the 1994 and 1997 NES cross-sections to data on these

establishments prior to the introduction of the work practices we consider. In particular, we use the LRD

for the year 1977. The LRD does not offer information about work practices but does contain

information about establishment performance, productive inputs, and other plant- level characteristics and

variables. The LRD is a panel of establishments including all establishments in years in which a Census

of Manufacturers (CM) is carried out (years ending in a two or seven), and many fewer establishments in

intervening years (from the Annual Survey of Manufactures). Among CM years—for which the most data

are available—1977 is arguably the most recent period for which it is reasonable to assume that the work

practices under consideration in this study had not yet been introduced.

        Indeed, the central assumption on which our empirical approach is based is that the relevant

work practices observed in the 1994 and 1997 NES's were introduced sometime after 1977. Under this

assumption, changes in establishment performance between 1977 and 1993/1996 that are associated with

the introduction of these practices (holding constant establishment-level characteristics, input use, and

other relevant controls) can be ascribed to the introduction of these work practices. This design

addresses the issue of causation that is otherwise confounded in cross-section estimates by heterogeneity

across establishments that is potentially correlated with both use of innovative work practices and

measures of organizational outcomes. Our "long panel" approach has the advantage of minimizing the

concern about panel data noted by Huselid and Becker (1996)—that measured changes in work practices

in a short panel beginning when these practices were already widespread are likely to be dominated by

measurement error. Here, we avoid that problem. We have one survey-based observation on the

establishment's work practices, and the other, implicit observation comes not from prior surveys but



                                                    22
from outside evidence indicating strongly that the practices did not exist in 1977. Measurement error

may still exist in the 1993 or 1996 data. But because the "changers" that identify the effects of work

practices in the fixed-effects estimations consist of all establishments implementing such practices,

rather than those for whom reported use changed over a short period, the ratio of spurious to real changes

is almost surely radically lowered, and the estimates are therefore much less likely to be biased.'6

Finally, this research design has the additional advantage of not relying in any way on respondents who

discontinue use of work practices to identify the effects of these practices, which is advantageous given

that adopting and discarding such practices may not have symmetric effects (although in principle this

can be tested). A potential pitfall of the "long panel" analysis, however, is that establishment-level

unobservables may be less likely to be fixed over a long than a short period, in which case the fixed-

effects estimation is less likely to fully remove such unobservables.

         Because the assumption that the relevant work practices were not in place before 1977 is crucial

to our empirical approach, we describe in detail the evidence for it in the next section and in the

Appendix.

VI. The Emergence of "High Performance" Work Systems

         The common theme among the specific work practice variables considered in our study is an

underlying management strategy that attempts to tap into employee knowledge and motivation through

practices that permit greater employee involvement in workplace and job-related decisions. These

practices are sometimes referred to with the potentially confusing term "high performance" work




  Huselid and Becker (1996) attempt to solve this problem in a different manner using their short panel. They use
factor analysis of a number of work practices to construct a single proxy for "high performance" work practices.
They then use estimates of Cronbach's "alpha" from their factor analysis as estimates of the reliability of readings
on this proxy over time. This strikes us as a controversial approach, however, because the authors do not really
have any information on the accuracy of the reports about these work practices. That is, they can evaluate the
statistical reliability of the factor(s) identified from their analysis but not of the underlying data used to construct the
factor(s). Thus, only if we accept the underlying data as accurate is their approach convincing; but, of course, the
accuracy of the data is the fundamental problem. Another potential problem is that they are unable to implement
their methods on regressions with any control variables.
                                                            23
systems.'7 While a wide range of practices are sometimes included under that heading, they tend to

share this common theme.

       Despite the incredible outpouring of research over time on the topic of transformed or "high

performance" work systems, there is little evidence that the concept had much influence on industry

through the 1970s. Several studies have attempted to understand why this academic interest did not

translate into practice (see, especially Bailey 1992; but also Pfeffer 1994 and 1998)i8 The human

relations movement underway following the Western Electric studies in practice never embraced

employee involvement or fundamental reform of scientific management principles, focusing instead on

paternalism and corporate communications in what many saw as cynical attempts to create a facade of

corporate interest in employee welfare (see, e.g., Dubin (1958) for a description of the human relations

approach). This movement died with the widespread institutionalization of industrial unionism in the

1950s. The sociotechnical studies had considerable influence in Swedish industry but essentially none in

U.S. industry.

        The psychology-based studies ofjob design that began to be popular in the 1970s were virtually

all researcher-led experiments done on small subgroups of workers. One of the few examples where an

entire facility adopted some of these job design concepts was the Gaines Dog Food plant in Topeka,

Kansas, an experiment in the late I 970s that was studied so often that the researchers threatened to

overwhelm the facility (see Walton (1982) for a review of the plant's experience). Interest in quality-of-

worklife programs—essentially employee involvement in decisions concerning the conditions of the

workplace that affect them (but not job tasks or work systems)—developed in the 1970s in response to

concerns about poor morale that, in turn, may have contributed to declining productivity. The first

widely published material examining whether poor work practices were contributing to low morale was


  The highly influential America's Choice (1989) report appears to have made the phrase "high performance work
practices" popular. The confusion comes from assumptions about the etymology of the name—whether these
practices have been already identified as associated empirically with superior performance on some dimension
(either of employees or of the organization), as many assume and some assert, or whether it is Just a name.

                                                      24
in 1974 (O'Toole 1974), and the first arguments for redesigning work through employee involvement to

improve productivity came about three years later (see, e.g., Cumming and Malloy 1977). With the

exception of a few well-publicized cases in the union sector (where involvement tended to be through

union institutions rather than through individuals or teams), interest in reforming work practices along

these lines made little headway as employers confronted the more immediate problems of recessions in

1973-75 and in 1980.

        The interest among employers in high performance work systems and employee involvement

more generally in the U.S. began in earnest following the rise of Japanese imports in manufacturing and

the conclusions that U.S. manufacturers eventually drew about the apparent superiority of Japanese

management practices. The most important concepts in Japanese manufacturing management as they

relate to work organization are TQM, quality circles, and job rotation. Quality circles were meetings of

production workers off-line to think of ways to improve quality. Quality circles were not teams,

however, in that they had no collective tasks to perform. They were directed by management and had no

autonomy in decision making (see Hill 1991). TQM involved having quality circles or other employee

groups use statistical process control to measure and improve quality. Job rotation meant moving

employees across different tasks in part to reduce fatigue, in part to create some variety to combat

boredom, and in part to create some sense of how their tasks fit into the overall project.

        Interest in Japanese management practices in the U.S. lagged the rise of Japanese import

penetration by almost a decade. The popular books exposing the apparent advantages of Japanese

practices did not appear until the 1980s (see, e.g., Ouchi 1982; Pascal and Amos 1982). In the

automobile industry where Japanese success was most immediate, evidence indicates that U.S.

companies did not begin any serious attempts to learn from Japanese practices until well into the 1980s.

Indeed, it was not until Toyota began operating the New United Motors Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI)



 One simple hypothesis as to why employers were not embracing these practices that occurs to us is just that there
 8

was not much evidence that they benefited employers, especially at the time.
                                                       25
facility with General Motors in 1985 that U.S. auto makers began to believe that Japanese practices

would work in the U.S. (see Womack, et al. 1990). Most observers see Japanese-inspired work practices

then spreading from autos to other manufacturing and then to other industries (see, e.g., Kenny and

Florida 1993).

        Survey data on the introduction of these innovative practices might be more persuasive than a

narrative account of their rise. But there are important caveats to the survey evidence. First, surveys

typically do not even take place until there is already enough awareness of practices to make the results

of interest. In this case, the first survey examining the incidence of transformed work practices in the

economy took place in 1982. Second, the early surveys in particular rarely had representative samples

(see below). Third, because the surveys sampled firms, rather than workplaces or establishments, and

asked about whether practices existed, rather than their coverage, it is difficult to gauge the true extent of

these practices. In such surveys, as noted below, a company like General Motors with 500,000

employees would be asked whether they had pay-for-skill, and the company would have to give a yes-or-

no answer about the company as a whole. Having the work practice anywhere in the company could lead

to a "yes" response even if coverage was extremely low. Bearing these caveats in mind, a review of

survey data on the introduction of these practices follows.

        The first survey that asks employers about transformed work practices appears to be in 1982,

sponsored by the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE Office of Research 1992). It sampled firms with

more than 100 employees with a response rate of 26 percent. The survey asked about approximately 17

categories of practices including such general ones as having formal training programs, with the response

choices being "yes" or "no." Of the firms surveyed, 85 percent had none of the 17 practices being

considered, including the very general items like formal training. With respect to specific practices

relating to transformed work systems, approximately two percent had job rotation, two percent had

production teams, and less than one percent had group productivity payments (although roughly four


                                                     26
percent had profit sharing).'9 Again, these figures simply mean that the firm had the practice

somewhere in its organization.

        A 1986 survey of 7,765 business units (albeit with a response rate of only 6.5 percent) sponsored

by the U.S. Department of Labor found roughly two percent of these units had work groups that were

allowed to manage themselves, about two percent had gainsharing (nearly three percent had profit

sharing), and roughly three percent had some form of employee involvement in decision making

someplace in their operations (Delaney, et al. 1989). Surveys conducted for the U.S. General Accounting

Office (GAO) of the 1000 largest firms in the U.S. in terms of sales (The Fortune 1000) in 1987 and

1990 show something about the diffusion of these practices both over time and within firms. With

respect to self-managed work teams, for example, the percentage of companies with these teams at least

somewhere in their very large organizations rose from 28 percent to 47 percent over this period. The

higher incidence in these surveys compared to the earlier ones may simply reflect the enormous scale of

these large firms compared to the smaller average size in the previous surveys.20 In neither period did

more than one percent of these companies have 40 percent or more of their employees in such teams.

These surveys also appear to be the first to ask about pay-for-skill. The percentage of these firms with

pay-for-skill somewhere in their organization was 60 percent in 1987, but then appears to have declined

to 51 percent in 1990 (Lawler, et al. 1992).

        There are a number of other employer surveys examining various work practices since the late

l980s, and there is considerable variance in their reports of the incidence of these practices (see, e.g.,

Appelbaum and Batt 1994, Appendix A). Overall, however, the surveys seem to suggest considerable

expansion of these practices during the early 1990s. Osterman's 1992 national probability sample of


'  The survey reports the percentage of firms with given practices as a percentage of those firms reporting any
practices (that is, using the latter as the denominator). So in the text estimates of the percentage of firms in the
entire sample with a given practice are calculated by multiplying the reported percentage (in the study) by the
proportion with any practices.
   If, for example, one assumes that the average firm surveyed in the GAO study is many times larger than the
20

average firm or business unit surveyed in the earlier studies, then even with the sameincidence per employee, the
incidence of practices per employer would be many times greater in the GAO surveys.
                                                            27
manufacturing establishments (with approximately a 50percent response rate), for example, found that

one-third of the establishments had TQM programs, 40 percent had self-directed teams, and 26 percent

had job rotation (Osterman 1994). Our data for 1993, in Table 1, indicate slightly higher levels of TQM.

Our job rotation and self-managed team questions ask about the percentage of employees covered, rather

than simply whether the establishment has them. Comparison of our 1993 and 1996 data suggests

growth in these practices across all of the work organization variables. This is true whether we compare

the 1994 and 1997 data available in our two long panels (columns 3 and 4), or simply use the maximum

number of observations on each work practice variable from the two cross-sections (columns I and 2); in

both cases, though, the samples of establishments in 1994 and 1997 are different.

        To summarize the narrative and the survey evidence, the incidence of transformational work

practices based on principles of employee involvement appears to have been essentially nonexistent as of

the late 1970s and very low as of the early 1980s. Through the mid-1980s, innovations such as job

rotation, gainsharing, and teamwork of various kinds existed in only a small handful of firms with no

evidence that they were at all widespread within those firms. The introduction of these practices

expanded considerably in the early 1990s, however. One way to conceptualize the growth in these

practices is that, by 1992, survey results indicated that these practices were more common within

individual establishments than they were five years earlier anywhere within entire corporations.

        Skeptics might argue that establishments might have had practices in place before 1977 that

looked like some of these practices even before the terms for them became common. The evidence

presented in the Appendix, which surveys the business press about examples of these practices and the

first mention of the terms, suggests otherwise. Firms with such practices would have had a strong

incentive to let the business community know about their practices and secure a reputation for

themselves as innovators, and the business press at the same time was seeking out examples of

innovative practices. And if such situations had been at all common, it is difficult to imagine that the



                                                    28
concepts would have received much subsequent attention as "new," when in fact they were seen as quite

revolutionary after they appeared. Finally, recall that even when surveys first asked about the incidence

of these practices, well after the concepts were introduced, they were quite rare.

        Thus, based on this array of evidence, we are comfortable using establishment observations from

the late 1970s to measure performance in the absence of "high performance" work practices.

Correspondingly, we believe that the high incidence of these practices in 1994 and 1997 using the NES

data generally indicates the true incidence of these practices. The following section describes our

empirical analysis that attempts to uncover the causal effects of these work practices on organizational

performance.

VII. Analyses and Results

         The dependent variables we study as outcomes of the implementation of innovative work

practices are establishment sales per worker, total labor costs per worker, and the ratio of these, which is

a measure of the efficiency with which expenditures on labor are used. (This is the inverse of unit labor

costs.)21 Because the unit of analysis is the establishment, and most establishments are in multi-unit

firms, profitability calculations are potentially problematic.22 Most establishments in multi-

establishment firms are simply cost centers, and those that calculate profit-and-loss estimates do so based

on their own internal accounting principles, which implies that such estimates may not be comparable

across observations. In contrast, sales, receipts, or the value of shipments are comparable measures of

overall performance across establishments when controlling for industry.

         One way to think about sales per worker and labor costs per worker is that they represent the

potential benefits of these work practices to employers and employees, respectively; other things equal,


21
   All dependent variables are expressed in natural logs. With sales per worker and labor costs per worker expressed
in logs, the regression of the log of the ratio of these variables (equivalent to the difference of logs) produces
precisely the difference between the coefficients in the separate regressions, for each independent variable.
However, running the regression for this difference in logs permits us to easily read off the statistical significance of
the differential effects on productivity and labor costs, or equivalently on labor efficiency.
22
   Nonetheless, estimates of profitability have been used for establishment data such as these (Hellerstein, et al.
1998).
                                                             29
employers are better off with higher sales per employee, and employees are betteroff with higher labor

costs per employee assuming that these costs are compensation-related as they are in thiscase.23'24

Alternatively, we can think of these two variables as representing benefits and costs to employers.

Higher sales per worker, ceteris paribus, benefit the employer. But to say anything about net benefits, we

also need to know the effects of work practices on labor costs. Either way, combining information on

productivity and labor costs, as we do by using our labor efficiency measure, lets us assessthe extent to

which higher costs associated with these work practices might offset the higher productivity/sales they

may produce.
         Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for these dependent variables in nominal terms.25 As

"background" information, Appendix Tables A2 and A3 report descriptive statistics for the establishment

and workforce characteristics used as control variables, as well as explaining the definition and

construction of these variables based on the NES's and additional calculations. Finally, Appendix Table

A4 reports estimates of the baseline specifications including all of the controls used, without the work

practice variables, for the various specifications we consider. These estimates replicate broad features of

findings from the LRD, as well as data sets based on matches of workers to the LRD (Hellerstein, etal.

 1 999).26

         In the results that follow, for each comparison of pairs of samples (i.e., cross-sectional and

 longitudinal), or of specifications with different dependent or independent variables, we restrict the


 23
    The labor cost measure has three components: wages and salaries; "Required Supplemental Labor Costs," which
 are government mandated payroll taxes; and "Voluntary Supplemental Labor Costs," which are employee benefits.
 Other costs associated with labor, such as training, recruiting expenses, etc., are not included in this measure.
 24
    If work effort is also higher, then of course workers could be no better off. However, although this is theoretically
 possible, it seems to us a position worth considering seriously only in the face of evidence that workers are actually
 not better off. It is clear to us that policy makers, at least, look favorably on workplace changes that raiseworkers
 earnings. As another example, we would probably view increased earnings as a result of more training tobe a
 positive development, even if the higher earnings ultimately only compensate for training costs (including distortion
 of the time path of earnings).
 25Natural logs are used in all of the regressions, eliminating any role for purely nominal influences.
 26
    One perhaps surprising result is the absence of an effect of education on productivity, in Appendix
                                                                                                        Table A4.
 This appears to contradict findings in Black and Lynch (1997) using these same data. However, they alsofind no


                                                           30
sample to the same set of observations across all regressions in order to ensure that any differences in

results across specifications or across analyses of different variables cannot be attributed to changes in

the sample. We also estimated median regressions to assess the influence of potential outliers in the

data; the results, available on request, were very similar to those presented here.

        We report three sets of results: first, for the 1977-1993 panel; second, for the 1977-1996 panel;

and third, for the full 1993 cross-section with additional controls added for workforce characteristics,

which are not available in the 1977 LRD (or other years of the LRD). Although this latter specification

cannot be used to address the issue of establishment-level heterogeneity, and hence does not embody our

main methodological approach, it does give us independent information about the potential role of

workforce characteristics in influencing relationships with establishment outcomes. As noted earlier,

this information is potentially important because of the possibility that establishments implementing

various work practices also change the composition of their workforce in the process. We do this

additional analysis using the 1994 NES because it contains a larger set of questions on work practices, as

shown in Table 1.

Productivity

        Table 3 presents regression results relating work practices to sales per worker. Especially

because most of the work practices have a common theme of employee involvement, they may tend to

occur together in the same establishments and present collinearity problems in the empirical analysis.

Therefore, Panel A reports results entering a single work practice separately, or in conjunction with

closely-related practices (i.e., COMPMNG and COMPWKR), along with the control variables but

without any other work practice variables. (In fact, the estimates tended not to be very different, albeit

with somewhat higher standard errors, when the practices were entered jointly. These results are

available on request.) The results for each work practice variable(s) are reported in separate rows



effect of education when they break it up by occupation, which is similar to what we do in constructing an
occupation-weighted average of education to come up with an overall measure.
                                                        31
(labeled 1, 2, 3, etc.). Columns 1 and 3 report cross-section estimates for the 1993 (column 1) and 1996

(column 3) data that could be successfully matched to the 1977 LRD. Columns 2 and 4 report the first-

difference estimates using the 1977 data as well; recall that while the dependent variable and all of the

control variables are differenced, the work practice variables effectively are not, given the assumption

that these work practices were non-existent in 1977.

           Many of the estimated effects appear positive across the alternative estimations. These include

the effects of computer use by workers, meetings to discuss work-related problems, TQM, cross-training

and teamwork training, and pay-for-skill. However, the statistical evidence is weak, as the only work

practice variables showing a relationship with sales per worker at conventional levels of significance are

computer use by workers and job rotation, and unlike all of the other work practice effects, the estimated

effect ofjob rotation is negative. Looking across the set of work practice variables, in most cases

(COMPWKR, MEET, SELFMNG, TQM, TRNTEAM, and PSHR, as well as JOBROT in the 1977-1996

panel), the estimated effect in the differenced equation is less positive than the estimated effect in the

cross-section. This is consistent with unobservables that are positively related to productivity and are

also positively correlated with the adoption of these work practices, a scenario we might expect.

           Overall, then, although many of the estimates are consistent with positive productivity effects,

the evidence is weak statistically. The evidence is weakened further by its inconsistency across

specifications and samples. While the estimated effect of job rotation in the 1993 cross-section (column

1) is similar to that for the 1996 cross-section, the first-difference estimate in column 2 is near zero, as is

the cross-section estimate in column 527 Computer use among workers is also positively associated

with sales per worker. The estimates are similar in the two panels, when we difference the data, and

when we do not, although the results are significant only for the 1996 cross-section and the 1977-1996

panel. Here, as well, there is no evidence of an effect in the full 1993 cross-section, perhaps because



27
     The difference in the estimates between columns 1 and 5 is largely attributable to the additional control variables,
rather than the additional observations.
                                                            32
computer use is also associated with changes in workforce composition. Thus, while we do not want to

rule out positive effects of many of these individual work practices on productivity, we do want to

emphasize that there is—in these data—at best a weak case for such an interpretation.

            The second half of the table (Panel B) examines potential synergies among the work practice

variables. The set of possible combinations of practices that might provide synergies is very large and,

as noted above, prior research is not consistent in the choice of synergies to explore. To avoid data

mining, all of the synergies in the "bundles" we explore were specified a priori, and results are reported

for all of these whether significant or not. To keep the list of bundles manageable, we chose to examine

first those practices that are intentionally designed to reinforce each other. Teamwork training, for

example, is designed to improve performance in teams and should produce greater performance when

used in combination with the employee meeting and self-managed team variables (specification 13).

Cross-training by definition is designed to help teach other job skills used in the workplace and should

therefore reinforce job rotation, which rotates employees into other tasks (specification 12).

             The other synergies we examine are based on arguments from existing literature about the role

that compensation mechanisms can play in supporting other practices. Profit and gainsharing plans that

give employees a financial stake in improved performance help create incentives for them to use the

opportunities that employee involvement creates to act in the interests of the organization.28 Therefore

we might expect to see positive synergies between these plans and employee-involvement

practices—TQM, employee meetings, and self-managed work teams (specification 15). Similar

arguments apply to pay-for-knowledge plans which support learning new workplace skills, which should

be especially useful in situations where jobs are broader—job rotation, self-managed teams, and employee

meetings in general (specification 14). The final synergy we examine is between job rotation and self-

managed teams (specification 11), reflecting the hypotheses that self-managed teams can work more




28
     See,   e.g., Levine and Tyson (1990) for one of many examples of this argument.
                                                            33
effectively when employees are able to rotate to the tasks that need doing and that job rotation is more

useful when employees can control, through self-management, when and where to move.29

        Including the interactions between the above variables leads to more significant relationships

with the main effects. In specification 11,job rotation is negatively related to sales in both of the 1977-

1996 specifications. Its interaction with self-managed teams, however, is positive, although only

significant in the cross-sectional estimates, suggesting that these practices must be used in tandem to

reap productivity benefits. Again, though, we do not get consistent evidence from the other panel or the

full 1993 cross-section, so it is difficult to draw strong conclusions from these results. Specifications 14

and 15 yield more consistent results, most notably negative effects of self-managed teams in isolation but

positive effects when combined with profit sharing or pay-for-skill. In specification 15, in particular,

these results are robust across the alternative cross-section and fixed-effects estimates. However, to

assess the total effects of these work practices, we have to take account of both the main and the

interactive effects. Because these results generally go in opposite directions (e.g., self-managed teams,

and its interaction with profit sharing, in specification 15), the interactive effects likely overstate the

gains. We treat the issue of main and interactive effects more formally below when we discuss the more

central issue of the effects of work practices on labor efficiency.

        Summarizing the results for productivity suggests that, aside from these results on possible

synergies between profit-sharing or pay-for-skill and self-managed teams, there is relatively little

consistent, statistically significant evidence of beneficial productivity effects of these work practices

based on employee involvement. Many of the estimated main effects in Panel A are positive, suggesting

beneficial effects, but with the exception of computer use by workers,3° none are statistically significant.

This indicates a weak empirical case for productivity gains, although we do not rule out such gains based

on our findings. Further emphasizing the fragility of the statistical evidence, a number of the stronger


29
  No doubt, of course, readers will think of other plausible interactions, including three, four, and other multiple
interactions.

                                                          34
effects that do emerge in a particular specification are not robust across years of the NES nor when a

more complete set of controls is included. Interestingly, though, first differencing the data to remove

biases from heterogeneity has relative little influence on the estimates; although statistical significance is

sometimes affected, point estimates change by less. If this result is generalizable—and, as noted below, it

tends to hold for labor costs as well—it suggests that heterogeneity bias is not a major factor in the

estimation of effects of work practices, which in turn would imply that cross-sectional data sets are

informative.

Labor Costs

          Table 4 presents exactly the same analyses, except this time using log labor costs per worker as

the dependent variable. In Panel A, many more of the variables have significant relationships with the

dependent variable. The significant main effects (for computer use by workers, benchmarking, meetings,

TQM, team training, and profit sharing) are positive, suggesting that these practices raise labor costs.

Moreover, these estimates are generally quite consistent across samples and estimators. In Panel B. in

contrast to the results for specifications 14 and 15 for productivity, the interaction terms are relatively

small and insignificant. However, the pattern of coefficients for specification 11 (in terms of both sign

and significance) is very similar to that in the results for productivity. Again, though, we note that the

estimates with this latter specification are quite different across samples (but not across estimators).

These results might indicate either some gains or no costs from implementing these bundles of work

practices, as productivity appears to be boosted with no effects on costs (specifications 14 and 15) or that

productivity and labor costs move together. We report results that address this question more directly

below.

           An overall conclusion from Table 4 might be that many of these high performance work

practices seem to raise labor costs per worker. Because compensation accounts for virtually all labor

costs and the control variables in column 5 include some measures of worker quality (average education


30
     This is also the one consistent finding in Black and Lynch (1997).
and tenure, union status, percentage of women and minorities), these relationships appear to raise the

average compensation of otherwise equivalent employees, rather than just resulting in a shift to higher

quality workers. Finally, there are few apparent synergies between practices in their effects on labor

costs per worker.

Labor Efficiency

         Table 5 repeats the above analyses using the log of the ratio of sales per worker to labor costs per

worker as the dependent variable. This table effectively combines the two previous analyses, or perhaps

more accurately, examines the effects of work practices on labor efficiency. For example, a positive

effect in this equation implies that productivity rises more than labor costs per worker, which is what we

call an increase in efficiency.31 To aid in interpreting the table, the variables identified in bold italics

are those that had significant relationships with either sales per worker or labor costs per worker in

Tables 3 or 4. When this was the case, the sign of the effects on sales per worker (SW) and labor costs

per worker (LC) are also indicated, whenever possible; these sign "determinations" are based on whether

t-statistics exceeded one with consistent signs of the estimates.32 Note that in the majority of cases, the

signs are in the same direction—both positive—suggesting that where these practices raise labor costs per

worker, they also raise sales per worker, although we know that the latter effects were generally not

statistically significant. Thus, the two should tend to offset each other in their effect on labor efficiency,

although the extent to which there remains evidence of net benefits or net costs of course is an empirical

question, and the evidence is not always in the same direction for sales and labor costs. What we see in

Panel A of Table 5 are, by and large, empirical results consistent with offsetting relationships. There are

essentially no significant main effect relationships, with the possible exception of benchmarking, which

has a negative effect.




    Recall that the coefficients are identical to the difference between the results in Tables 3 and 4 but with the
 advantage of a simple statistical test of their significance.
 32
    The notes to the table provide more details.
                                                              36
        In Panel B, however, there are a number of interactive effects that are statistically significant and

robust across samples and estimators. These include some of the interactive variables already

highlighted in earlier tables, such as the interaction between profit-sharing and self-managed teams,

which in specification 15 has a positive and significant effect on labor efficiency. In addition, some

other interactions appear to have significant effects on labor efficiency in some specifications although

they are generally negative (e.g., the interaction between pay-for-skill and job rotation in specification

14).

        One might be tempted, based on these results, to conclude that there appear to be bundles of

work practices that do increase labor efficiency, raising sales per worker by significantly more than labor

costs per worker. In particular, this appears to be true for the implementation of self-managed teams

along with either pay-for-skill or profit sharing. But the net effect of implementing a pair (or more) of

work practices must include the main effects as well. Table 6 therefore reports the effect on labor

efficiency of implementing pairs of practices, for the specifications where there was significant evidence

of positive effects of bundles of work practices—including both the main effects and the interactive

effects. These include the interactions of pay-for-skill with self-managed teams in specification 14 and

the interaction between profit sharing and self-managed teams in specification 15. The more meaningful

numbers are those evaluated at sample means, conditional on use of both practices considered, as these

best represent how practices are typically implemented. These results are reported iii the first row in

each case, although for completeness we also report effects implied by 100-percent implementation.

Because the signs of the interactive coefficients are generally opposite to the signs of the coefficients of

the main effects, there turns out to be no statistically significant evidence that jointly implementing pay-

 for-skill or profit sharing along with self-managed teams increases labor efficiency; indeed, the point

 estimates are near zero. Even the implied effects of 100-percent implementation are not statistically

 significant.


                                                      37
VIII. Conclusions

        How work might be organized so as to benefit employees and employers has been one of the

central questions in social science throughout the past century. Despite the large body of research on this

topic, empirical evidence of relationships between different work practices and outcomes affecting

employers and employees has been extremely limited and has not yielded consistent results. The interest

in measuring these effects has grown considerably during the 1 990s but has been hampered by a series of

difficult methodological challenges largely driven by data limitations.

        The analyses presented in this paper offer several advantages over prior efforts to examine the

relationships between work practices and outcomes. First, we are able to examine not only productivity

but also labor costs in order to assess potential benefits to employees as well as the net gain to

employers—captured in increases in labor efficiency—from implementing these practices. Our results,

therefore, can also suggest something about the distribution of benefits between employers and

employees. Second, the fact that the data are from a national probability sample of establishments makes

our results easier to generalize to the economy as a whole. Third, and perhaps most important, the

longitudinal nature of our data and its ability to measure performance before practices could reasonably

be expected to have been introduced—in some cases before the practices were even known—offers a

superior approach to controlling for heterogeneity as compared with prior studies.

        Prior research on the effects of work practices presents a more mixed and less complete picture

than is sometimes assumed. Earlier work focusing on psychological models found that practices

associated with employee involvement, broadly defined, showed important benefits for employees but

little evidence of benefits to employers. The more recent research on the productivity effects associated

with work practices offers greater evidence of benefits to employers. The number of studies is relatively

small, however, and many look only at productivity, as opposed to net effects that include some

assessment of cost effects. Huselid (1995) offers perhaps the strongest evidence of net financial benefits



                                                     38
to employers that is associated with work practices, albeit not necessarily with employee involvement

practices. But the cross-sectional nature of his data and the fact that the resultsdid not hold up with the

longitudinal extension of the data suggests the need to revisit the question. The special design of our

longitudinal analysis makes it especially suited to address the Huselid and Becker (1996) critiquethat

panel data may offer no improvement over cross-sectional data in testing for these relationships.

        The results of our analyses, as noted above, suggest that the effects of these work practices on

productivity appear to be positive, consistent with other recent research, although in our data little or

none of this evidence is statistically significant. At the same time, there arebenefits to employees from

innovative work practices based on employee involvement in the form of higher labor costs/higher

compensation. The fact that our analyses provide some controls for labor quality makes it clearer that

the relationship is driven by the practices themselves and not by the related effect of using higher-

quality, more expensive labor. Finally, there is no evidence of net benefits to employers associated with

these practices, as labor cost increases tend to offset any productivity increases that may occur. On the

other hand, neither is there evidence of net costs to employers associated with using these practices. Our

results, then, parallel those of the earlier studies of work practices based at the individual level,

suggesting gains to workers but providing little evidence of effects on organizational performance. And

they replicate the findings of at least one contemporary industry study using organizational-leveldata

 (Appelbaum, et al., forthcoming). If one party to the employment relationship benefits from these

 practices without necessarily imposing costs on the other, there may be a Pareto improvementfrom

 innovative work practices, although of course our data cannot definitively address this welfare

 calculation.

         Where our results may appear to be most at odds with the prior literature concerns the hypothesis

 about positive synergies between individual work practices. To be fair to the prior literature, however,

 the evidence for synergies comes only from productivity studies done in the context of particular



                                                       39
production processes and work practices, and the synergies are not identical across studies. The studies

by Huselid (1995) and Black and Lynch (1997) that examine synergies among a representative

population of employers find little evidence of these relationships. The latter, for example, find only one

significant interaction and that only with the additional contingency of unionization.33 Supporters of the

notion that there are synergies between practices might well argue that different combinations of

practices might reveal evidence of synergies. Short of testing every possible combination of work

practices (at least nine such practices in our data) and every contingency (by industry, by union status,

etc.) this theoretical possibility will always remain. But the fact that we find no evidence of synergies

even among the most obvious and theoretically-grounded interactions is surely among the strongest

evidence that is practical to bring to bear on this question.

        Finally, it is constructive to think about our evidence from the perspective of employers

contemplating the implementation of "high performance" work practices. While it is important to keep

in mind the caveat that—statistically—a failure to find significant effects does not establish that there are

no effects, our evidence suggests that such work practices do not affect labor efficiency (output per

dollar of labor costs). Thus, despite raising labor costs/compensation, implementing such work practices

should not hurt competitiveness, Indeed, it is possible that "high performance" work practices have

other beneficial consequences (higher morale, greater adaptability, lower waste, etc.) that either do not

affect firm performance measurably or do so in ways not captured by our performance measures. But the

case for such assertions remains speculative.




  In addition, the estimated main effect of unionization is strongly negative, emphasizing the point made in the
previous section that combined main and interactive effects may be much smaller than suggested by a large
interactive effect.
                                                         40
                                       Bibliography


America's Choice. High Skills or Low Wages! 1989. Rochester, NY: National Commission on the Skills
of the Workplace.

Appelbaum, Eileen and Rosemary Batt. 1994. The New American Workplace: Transforming Work
Systems in the United States. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne Kalleberg. Forthcoming. Manufacturing
Advantage: Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Bailey, Thomas. 1992. "Discretionary Effort and the Organization of Work: Employee Participation and
Work Reform Since Hawthorne." New York: Teachers College Institute for Education and the Econom\
Working Paper.

Batt, Rosemary. 1999. "Work Organization, Technology, and Performance in Customer Service and
Sales." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(4): 539-56 1.

Becker, Brian and Barry Gerhart. 1996. "The Impact of Human Resource Management on Organizational
Performance: Progress and Prospects." Academy of Management Journal, 39(4), pp. 779-801.

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch. 1997. "How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
Information Technology on Productivity." Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 6120.

Cappelli, Peter and Nikolai Rogovsky. 1998. "Employee Involvement and Organizational Citizenship:
Implications for Labor Law Reform and 'Lean Production'." Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
5 1(4), July: 633-653.

Cascio, Wayne F. 1991. Costing Human Resources: The Financial Impact of Behavior in Organizations.
Boston, MA: PWS-Kent Publishers.

Commons, John Rogers. 1964. Labor andAdministration. New York, NY: A.M. Kelley, 1964.

Cooke, William N. 1994. "Employee Participation Programs, Group-Based Incentives, and Company
Performance: A Union-Nonunion Comparison." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47(4), July: 594-
609.

Cotton, John L. 1993. Employee Involvement: Methods for Improving Performance and WorkAttitudes.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Cummings, Thomas G. and Edward S. Malloy. 1977. Improving Productivity and the Quality of
Worklfe. New York, NY: Praeger.

Delery, John E. and D. Harold Doty. 1996. "Modes of Theorizing in Strategic Human Resource
Management: Tests of Universalistic, Contingency, and Configurational Performance Predictions."
Academy of Management Journal, 39(4): 802-83 5.

Delery, John E., Nina Gupta, and Jason D. Shaw. 1997. "Human Resource Management and Firm
Performance: A Systems Perspective." University of Arkansas, mimeograph.
Dertouzos, Michael, Richard Lester, and Robert Solow. 1988. Made in America. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Dubin, Robert. 1958. The World of Work: Industrial Society and Human Relations. Engelwood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Easton, George S. and Sherry L. Jarrell. 1998. "The Effects of Total Quality Management on Corporate
Performance: An Empirical Investigation." The Journal of Business, 71(2): 253-305.

Freeman, Richard B. 1984. "Longitudinal Analyses of the Effects of Trade Unions." Journal of Labor
Economics, 2(1), January: 1-26.

Freeman, Richard B. and Morris M. Kleiner. 1998. "From Piece Rates to Time Rates: An Exploratory
Study." Proceedings for the Fiftieth Annual Meeting, Volume 1. Madison, WI: Industrial Relations
Research Association, pp. 50-59.

Hackman, J. Richard and Greg R. Oldham. 1980. Work Redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1999. "Wages, Productivity, and Worker
Characteristics: Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions and Wage Equations." Journal of
Labor Economics, 17(3), July: 409-446.

Herzberg, Frederick. 1966. Work and the Nature of Man. Cleveland: World Publishing Co.

Hill, Stephen. 1991. "Why Quality Circles Failed but Total Quality Management Might Succeed."
British Journal of Industrial Relations, 29(4): 54 1-568.

Huselid, Mark A. 1995. "The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover,
Productivity, and Corporate Financial Performance." Academy of Management Journal, 3 8(3): 63 5-672.

Huselid, Mark A. and Brian E. Becker. 1996. "Methodological Issues in Cross-Sectional and Panel
Estimates of the Human Resource-Firm Performance Link." Industrial Relations, 35(3), July: 400-422.

Ichniowski, Casey. 1990. "Human Resource Management Systems and the Performance of U.S.
Manufacturing Businesses." Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 3349.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Premushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human Resources
Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines." American Economic Review,
87(3), June: 291-3 13.

Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw. 1998. "The Effects of Human Resources Management Systems on
Economic Performance: An International Comparison of U.S. and Japanese Plants." Columbia
University, mimeograph.

Katz, Harry C., Thomas A. Kochan, and Kenneth R. Gobeille. 1983. "Industrial Relations Performance,
Economic Performance, and QWL Programs: An Interplant Analysis." Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 37: 3-17.
Katz, Harry C., Thomas A. Kochan, and Mark A. Weber. 1985. "Assessing the Effects of Industrial
Relations Systems and Efforts to Improve the Quality of Working Life on Organizational Effectiveness."
Academy of Manage nient Journal, 28: 509-526.

Kenny, Martin and Richard Florida. 1993. Beyond Mass Production: The Japanese System and its
Transfer to the US. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Lawler, Edward E. III and Susan Morhman. 1992. Employee Involvement and TQM Practice and
Results in Fortune 5000 Companies. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Levine, David I. and Laura D'Andrea Tyson. 1990. "Participation, Productivity, and the Firm's
Environment." In Alan Blinder (ed.). Paying for Performance. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
183-243.

Lynch, Lisa M. and Sandra E. Black. 1998. "Beyond the Incidence of Employer-Provided Training."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(1), October: 64-81.

MacDuffie, John Paul. 1995. "Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance:
Organizational Logic and Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto Industry." Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 48(2), January: 197-221.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. 1995. "Complementarities and Fit: Strategy, Structure, and
Organizational Change in Manufacturing." Journal ofAccounting and Economics, 19: 179-208.

New York Stock Exchange Office of Economic Research. 1982. People and Productivity: A Challenge
to Corporate America. New York, NY.

Hansen, Gary S. and Birger Wernerfelt. 1989. "Determinants of Firm Performance: Relative Importance
of Economic and Organizational Factors." Strategic Management Journal, 10: 399-411.

Osterman, Paul. 1994. "How Common Is Workplace Transformation, and How Can We Explain Who
Adopts It? Results from a National Survey." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47: 173-188.

O'Toole, James, ed. 1974. Work and the Quality of Life: Research Papers for Work in America.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ouchi, William. 1982. Theory Z: How American Business Can Meet the Japanese Challenge. New York,
NY: Avon.

Pascal, Richard T. and Anthony G. Amos. 1982. The Art of Japanese Management: Applications for
American Executives. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1994. Competitive Advantage Through People. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1998. The Human Equation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Roethlisberger, Fritz Jules and William J. Dickson, with the assistance and collaboration of Harold A.
Wright. 1943. Management and the Worker; An Account of a Research Program Conducted by the
Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works, Chicago. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rumelt, Richard P. 1991. "How Much Does Industry Matter?" Strategic Management Journal, 12: 167-
185.

Trist, Eric. L. 1981. "The Sociotechnical Perspective." In Andrew H. Van de Ven and William F. Joyce,
eds., Perspectives on Organizational Design and Behavior. New York, NY: John Wiley, pp. 19-75.

Walton, Richard. 1982. "The Topeka Work System: Optimistic Visions, Pessimistic Hypotheses, and
Reality." In Robert Zanger and Michael Rosow, eds., The Innovative Organization: Productivity
Programs in Action. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press, pp.260-287.

Webb, Sidney, and Beatrice Webb. 1965. Industrial Democracy. New York, NY: A.M. Kelley.

Womack, James P., David T. Jones, and Daniel Roos. 1990. The Machine That Changed the World. New
York, NY: Rawson Associates.
              Appendix: Anecdotal Evidence and Initial Reports on the Introduction of

                                       Innovative Work Practices



        Our approach to estimating the causal effects of work practices on establishment performance

relies on the assertion that such practices were not present in U.S. establishments to any measurable

extent as of 1977. Evidence for this assertion, in addition to the material presented in the main text, is

presented below, separately for each aspect of work organization analyzed in the text.



TQM: Total quality management is a concept based on Japanese manufacturing practices and articulated

by a series of authors, most notably Edwards Deming, whose first publication in English for a mass

audience on the subject was in 1984 (Deming 1984). In terms of practice in the West, it appears to have

evolved from the quality circle movement in the early l980s and was first recognized as a movement in

companies in the late 1980s. (See, e.g., Hill 1991, and Harris 1995, for evidence on the rise of TQM as a

movement.) The first account of a TQM program in the U.S. that we found in the popular press was at

the Allen-Bradley company in 1987 where it was referred to as TQMS, for "total quality management

system" (PR NEWSWIRE 1987). The first survey of firms that asks about the incidence of TQM was in

1990 (Grant Thorton 1991).



Pay-for-Skill: This concept was first presented in 1985 as part of a more general critique by Edward

Lawler of U.S. compensation practices. It was originally known as "skill-based pay" (Lawler 1985).

The first account of a company using pay-for-skill is General Mills in 1991 (Ledford and Bergel 1991).



Job Rotation: This term has one of the longer legacies among work practice innovations. Academic

interest in job rotation appears to begin in the late l960s with the argument that job rotation may reduce

boredom among employees performing simple tasks. The first academic reference we find to the
concept is in a very short note in 1968 in the context of implications for expanding shift work, which

argues that job rotation may equally have negative affects on individual performance depending on the

circumstances (Wilkerson and Edwards 1968). In the mid-1970s there were some experiments with job

rotation as part of more general experiments in job enrichment, but they also seemed rare enough to

merit articles about individual experiments (e.g., King 1974)J These experiments in job design were

essentially abandoned by the late 1970s because employers found that they did not translate into gains

for the organization.2 The improvements observed were mainly in the attitudes of individual employees

and, to a lesser extent, in performance measures at the individual level, such as turnover and absenteeism

(see main text). The revival of interest in job rotation came with the interest in Japanese management

practices in the late 1980s, in which job rotation was a part of a set of practices that included teamwork

and continuous improvement, or Kaizan.



Cross-Training: The notion of cross-training would seem to be driven primarily by the interest in moving

employees across different jobs, and to be closely related to job rotation. Job rotation when initially

introduced referred to assembly line and other low-skill jobs where no additional skills were needed to

perform in the other positions. Cross-training was initially introduced to refer specifically to situations

where different jobs could not be performed without new skills. The first mention that we can find of an

instance of cross-training is at Delta Airlines in 1980, where cross-training is presented as an

intervention in helping employees understand how their individual jobs contribute to the overall goals of




  During the 1970s, the business press sometimes referred to executive development programs where managers were
moved through different areas of the corporation in order to get experience as "job rotation," but this is a very
different notion from the modern definition that refers to a regular movement across discrete job tasks, typically for
production work, on a long-term or permanent basis.
  During the 973-75 recession, some companies (particularly those with unions) went to a four-day week in an
2

effort to avoid more severe layoffs. In the process of shortening the workweek, work assignments were often
changed, and workers sometimes had to rotate across jobs in order to get the work done. Job rotation was an
unintended consequence of this process and was frequently discussed in the business press (e.g., Feron 1974). But it
was not the design of company policies nor was it conducted in ways that were designed to produce the effects
associated with modern job rotation. Virtually all companies soon dropped their experiments with shortened
workweeks and the job rotation that resulted from them.
                                                         ii
the company (Dow Jones New Service 1980). The first academic mention of cross-training appears to be

in 1986 (Gotz and Stanton 1986).



Benchmarking: No doubt the informal process of making comparisons with practices at other

organizations is as old as time. But the systematic attempt to learn and copy individual practices from

organizations that are seen as leaders in those areas (irrespective of whether they are competitors), and

the term "benchmarking," is generally acknowledged to have begun in the corporate world in 1981 with

the Xerox Corporation's efforts to improve its sliding competitive position against Japanese competitors

(Jacobson and Hillkirk 1986). By the end of the 1980s, benchmarking was widespread and seen as an

integral part of efforts to improve organizational performance (Fray 1988).



Self-Managed Teams: A subset of teamwork is self-managed teams, where the members of the team go

beyond working together to manage themselves, taking on most of the responsibilities of supervision and

directing their own work. The first mention of self-managed teams we can find is in 1989 (Luthans and

Fox 1989), in an article about pay-for-skill. The article generally credited with bringing the concept to

popular attention came in 1990 (Dumaine 1990), where self-managed teams are described as a "still

controversial innovation" that only a few companies had experimented with during the 1980s.



Meetings: The concept of employees organized in regularly scheduled meetings to discuss workplace

problems is obviously broad in its scope. But there is still little evidence that such arrangements existed

before the 1980s. Quality circles seem to be the best-known common practice that fits this definition.

Cotton (1993) indicates that two U.S. companies experimented with quality circle principles in the mid-

1970s. Otherwise, the practice began to spread with the interest in Japanese management beginning in

the mid-1980s. Stronger examples of scheduled meetings in the form of teams seem equally rare. One




                                                     Ill
estimate suggests that there were no more than 24 plants in the U.S. that had team work principles in

1976 (Hoerr 1986).



Gainsharing/Profit Sharing: The notion of sharing performance improvements with employees certainly

has the longest academic history of any of the innovative workplace practices. Some gainsharing plans

clearly were in operation before 1977, although the number of employers with such plans appears to have

been very small. Perhaps the most popular incarnation of gainsharing ideas were those put forward by

Joseph Scanlon in the 1950s and subsequently continued and adapted by his followers. Scanlon plans

were almost entirely in unionized facilities. Cotton (1993) estimates that perhaps 500 companies have at

one time adopted Scanlon plans, although it is difficult to know how many of those were in place before

1977. Reviews of specific gainsharing plans come up with reasonably small numbers—44 Scanlon plans

in 1975 (National Commission on Productivity and Work Quality 1975), 72 examples of Improshare in

1982 (Fein 1982)—although these studies were not necessarily designed to establish the incidence in the

population. The New York Stock Exchange survey figure noted above found roughly 4 percent of firms

with some profit sharing in 1982. It is quite possible that some of the establishments in the 1977 LRD

data may   have had profit or gainsharing plans. But it also seems likely that the percentage with such

plans was very small, especially as compared to the percentage that had them in 1994 (approximately 60

percent of establishments).




                                                     iv
                                      Appendix Bibliography



Anonymous. 1995. "Nontraditional Pay Practices on the Rise." Employee Benefit Plan Review, 50(4): 51.

Cotton, John L. 1993. Employee Involvement: Methods for Improving Performance and Work Attitudes.
Newbury Park, Ca: Sage Publications.

Deming, W. Edwards. 1984. Out of the Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dow Jones News Service. July 7, 1980. "Delta's 'Family' Keeps Loyal Workers, Union Enmity."

Dumaine, Brian. May 7, 1990. "Who Needs a Boss?" Fortune: 52-60.

Fray, Earl N. 1988. "The Evolution of Performance Measurement." Industrial Management, 30(5): 9-12.

Feiri, M. "Improved Productivity through Worker Involvement." Cited in Cotton (1993).

Feron, James. October 6, 1974. "Chrysler Workers Vote to End Four-Day Work Week." New York
Times: 57.

Gotz, Glenn A. and Richard E. Stanton. 1986. "Modeling the Contribution of Maintenance Manpower to
Readiness and Sustainability." Santa Monica: Rand Corporation, Rand Report R-3200-FMP.

Grant Thorton Accountants and Management Consultants. 1991. Grant Thorton Survey ofAmerican
Manufacturers. New York, NY.

Harris, C.R. 1995. "The Evolution of Quality Management: An Overview of the TQM Literature."
Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 12(2): 95-105.

Hill, Stephen. 1991. "Why Quality Circles Failed but Total Quality Management Might Succeed."
British Journal of Industrial Relations, 29(4): 54 1-568.

Hoerr, John. 1986. "Management Discovers the Human Side of Automation." Business Week, September
29: 70-75.

Jacobson, Gary and John Hillkirk. 1986. Xerox: American Samurai. New York, NY: Macmillan.

King, Albert S. 1974. "Expectation Effects in Organizational Change." Administrative Science Quarterly,
19(2): 22 1-230.

Lawler, Edward E. 1985. "The New Pay." New Management, 3(1): 52-59.

Ledford, Gerald E., Jr. and Gary Bergel. March 1, 1991. "Skill-Based Pay Case Number 1: General
Mills." Compensation and Benefits Review: 24.

Luthans, Fred and Marilyn L. Fox. March 1, 1989. "Update on Skill-Based Pay." HR Focus: 26.
National Commission on Productivity and Work Quality. 1975. A Plant-Wide Productivity Plan in
Action. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

PR NEWS WIRE. June 25, 1987. "Quality Management Saves Allen-Bradley $82 Million."

Wilkerson, Robert T. and Robert S. Edwards. 1968. "Stable Hours and Varied Work as Aids to
Efficiency." Psychonomic Science, 13(4): 205-206.
                                           FIGURE        1
                               Constructed Manufacturing Data Sets



                                             1977 LRD

         1994 NES
 work practices, workforce                                           1977-1993
  and plant characteristics,                                          Panel
some performance measures                                             N= 433
                                          1993 Full Sample
                                               N=663



      1992, 1993 LRD                                                 1993-1996
    labor costs/worker                                                 Panel
       (1993 dollars)                                                 N=201
                                             1997 NES
                                          1996 Full Sample
                               /              N=1 142


                                                                     1977-1996
                                                                       Panel
                                                                      N=660
                                             1977 LRD
                                                             El
                                            Table I: Descriptive Statistics and VariableDescriptions for Work Practice Variables in 1994 and 1997 NES, ManufacturingPlants


                                                              1977-1993 panel          1977-1996 panel
        1993, maximumobs.            1996, maximumobs.             1993                      1996                        Variable description
                (1)                           (2)                    (3)                      (4)                                (5)
COMPMNG        66.35                         74.25                  67.26                    72.68                       What percentage ofyour managers and supervisors use
                     (37.37)                (34.55)                (35.55)                  (34.46)                      computers in their jobs?

COMPWKR               25.13                  28.16                  26.45                    27.28                       What percentage ofyour production and non-supervisory
                     (3 1.28)               (32.08)                (30.83)                  (30.64)                      employees use computers in their jobs 1997: Substitute percent
                                                                                                                         for percentage.

BENCH                  .24                    .22                    .27                      .21                        Has your establishent participatedin any benchmarking programs
                                                                                                                         that compare practices and performances with other
                                                                                                                         organizations?

MEET                  40.43                  49.43                  35.87                    43.71                       What percentage of non-managerial and non-supervisory
                     (42.48)                (49.70)                (40.56)                  (43.59)                      workers arc involved in regularly scheduled meetings to discuss
                                                                                                                         work-related problems? 1997: What percent of, or how many,


JOBROT                17.22                  24.74                  14.70                    21.12                       What percentage of non-managerial and non-supervisory
                     (30.69)                (34.58)                (27.36)                  (31.55)                      employees are currently involved in job rotation?
                                                                                                                         1997: What percent of, or how many,

SELFMNG               12.10                  16.52                   8.40                    12.32                       What percentage of non-managerial and non-supervisory
                     (25.83)                (31.35)                (22.83)                  (26.66)                      employees are currently involved in self-managed teams?
                                                                                                                         1997: What percent, or how many,

                       .42                                           .41                                                 1-las your establishment adopted a   formal Total Quality
TQM
                                                                                                                         Management program?

                                                                                                                         Does your establishment pay for or provide:
TRNCROS                .69                                           .64                                                 Cross-training?

TRNTEAM                .52                                           .44                                                 Teamwork or problem-solvingtraining?

PAYSKIL               21.88                                         22.29                                                What percentage of your employees receive pay for skill or pay
                     (34.44)                                       (35.33)                                               for knowledge?

                                                                                                                         Does your company have a profit sharing, bonus, or gain-sharing
                                                                                                                         plan for any of the following categories or workers (yes/no)?
PS11R                   .59                                          .61                                                 Technical/technicalsupport, office/clerical/sales/customer
                                                                                                                         service, or production? Constructed variable: plan for at least one of these three
                                                                                                                         non-management, non-supervisory occupational groups.

N                   1529-1717             2152-2379                  433                      660

For continuous variables, standard deviationsare shown in parentheses in columns(l)-(4). in columns (3) and (4), samples arc restrictedto observations with all data used in regressions available in corresponding year
All estimates are weighted.  The language in the 1994 and 1997 NES's is identical unless otherwise noted 'Yes" responses are coded as ones, and "No' responses as zeroes.
                                                        Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Variable Descriptions for Measures ofPerformance. Manufacturing Plants


                                 1977-1993 panel                        1977-l996 panel
                               1977           1993                    1977             1996                          Variable descriøtion
                               (1)              (2)                    (3)            (4)                                    (9)
SAI.ESWKR                     60.64            137.44                57.18          177.07                           What was your establishment's total valueof sales, receipts, or shipments (gross
                             (77.34)         (139.98)               (77.20)        (627.41)                          revenues, sales, or receipts, in l000s) for calendar
                                                                                                                                                                       year?        Constructed
                                                                                                                     variable SALESWKR= sales/TOTEMP.
Median                         43              104                    41             l09
Interquartilerange              28               85                    29             83

LCWKR                         14.37            33.54                  13.54          28.41                           What was the total labor cost (l000s) used in the production ofyour
                              (4.32)          (12.49)                (3.85)         (21.12)                               sales? (1993 or 1992 data substituted from LRD) Constructed variable:
                                                                                                                     LCWKR = total labor costs / TOTEMP
 Median                        -l4              33                    13              24
 lnterquartilerange              6               18                     5              16


LABEFF                         1.23             1.25                  1.22            1.58                           Log(SALESWKR) - Log(LCWKR)
                               (.52)            (.54)                 (.57)          (.91)

 Median                       —1.18            —1.22                  -1.12          -1.41

                                .61              .62                   .66            .83
 Interquartilerange

N                              433              433                   660             660

See notes to Table 1. The 1994 NES does not include a total labor cost variable; all that is available is the percentage ofthe establishment's total cost ofproduction that is accounted for by labor costs. Consequently, data
on labor costs were taken from the 1993 LRDfor the same establishments(which covers the same period as the 1994 NES), or from the 1992 Census ofManufacturers           if   the establishment did not appear in the 1993 LRD.
For datadrawn from 1992, the labor cost figure was adjusted upward by the ECI. The demoninator (TOTEMP) was drawn from the corresponding data source. Because the 1994 NES survey has limited information on
off-payroll workers (e.g., temporaries or contractemployees) not covered in the other data sources, for cases where it was possible to establish that a fraction of workers in the 1994 NES were off-payroll, TOTEMP from
the LRDor Census ofManufacturers was adjusted upward by the same fraction. In computingLABEFF, we always used SALES WKR from the NES data. Medians reported in this and other tables are "fuzzy" medians
because of confidentiality requirements. The fuzzy medians are means of the true weighted median and a set of 9-14 closest observations on either side, where the true median is given extra weight while the weights of the
surroundingobservations are reduced linearly in proportionto their rankeddifferences from the median.
                     Table 3: Work Practice OLS Regressions for Log of Sales/Worker, Manufacturing Plants


                                                       A. Individual Work Practices

                                1977-1993 ianel                                              1977-1996 panel           Full 1993 cross Section.
                        i22                 Differenced                                                  Differenced   with additional controls
                         (1)                    (2)                                      (3)                  (4)                 (5)
I. COMPMNG/100         -.076                  -.067                                     .059                 .002               -.003
                       (.085)                 (.083)                                   (.076)               (.080)              (.066)

      COMPWKRJI 00      .133                   .085                                    .179"               .124"                -.001
                       (.086)                 (.084)                                   (.073)              (.074)               (.074)

2. BENCH                .053                  -.032                                     .008               -.041                 .035
                       (.048)                 (.048)                                   (.042)              (.043)               (.04 1)

3. MEET/100             .070                   .046                                     .075                .074                 .051
                       (.057)                 (.056)                                   (.047)              (.049)               (.047)

4.    JOBROT/100       -.095                      -.000                                 -.096              -.127"                .005
                       (.086)                 (.086)                                   (.062)              (.065)               (.067)

5.    SELFMNG/100       .026                  -.051                                     .027                .005                -.015
                       (.097)                 (.098)                                   (.071)              (.075)               (.077)

6.    TQM               .035                   .030                                                                              .043
                       (.050)                 (.048)                                                                            (.040)

7.    TRNCROS           .034                   .038                                                                              .010
                       (.056)                 (.056)                                                                            (.044)

8.    TRNTEAM           .080                    .027                                                                             .029
                       (.057)                 (.054)                                                                            (.044)

9.    PAYSKIL/l00       .064                   .067                                                                             -.039
                       (.08 1)                (.080)                                                                            (.062)

10. PSHR                .072                      -.016                                                                          .058
                       (.047)                     (.048)                                                                        (.038)

                                                            B. Work Practice Bundles

11.   JOBROT            -.068                      .051                                -.194"              -.187"                .019
                       (.098)                     (.098)                               (.074)              (.078)               (.079)

      SELFMNG           .097                       .022                                -.097                -.057               -.000
                       (.123)                     (.123)                               (.094)              (.099)               (.102)

      JOBROTX           -.200                     -.273                                .463"                .286                -.053
      SELFMNG          (.269)                     (.272)                               (.197)              (.210)               (.199)

12. TRNCROS              .000                      .024                                                                         -.009
                       (.062)                     (.062)                                                                        (.049)

      JOBROT            -.290                     -.078                                                                         -.099
                       (.161)                     (.165)                                                                        (.138)

      TRNCROS>          .269                       .104                                                                           134
      JOBROT           (.190)                     (.194)                                                                        (.156)

13. TRNTEAM              .091                      .029                                                                          .023
                        (.072)                    (.07 I)                                                                       (.057)

      MEET               .067                      .029                                                                          .047
                        (.123)                    (.123)                                                                        (.086)

      SELFMNG            .205                      .145                                                                          .000
                        (.210)                    (.216)                                                                        (.179)

      TRNTEAMx          -.017                      .030                                                                          .003
      MEET              (.140)                    (.142)                                                                        (.102)

      TRNTEAMX           -.270                     -.280                                                                        -.040
      SELFMNG           (.239)                    (.244)                                                                        (.198)
                                                                            Table 3 (continued)

                                                               B.    Work Practices Bundled (continued)

                                                 1977-1993 panel                                          1977-1996 panel              Full 1993 cross section.
                                         1993                Differenced                          1996                Differenced      with additional controls
                                         (I)                         (2)                           (3)                     (4)                    (5)
14. PAYSKIL                             -.056                      -.103                                                                        -.096
                                        (.125)                 (.122)                                                                           (.100)

      MEET                               .037                  -.007                                                                             .035
                                        (.067)                 (.066)                                                                           (.054)

      JOBROT                            -.059                      .029                                                                          .048
                                        (.101)                 (.101)                                                                           (.079)

      SELFMNG                           -.113                  -.171                                                                             -.150
                                        (.122)                 (.123)                                                                           (.099)

      PAYSKILX                           .159                      .334'                                                                         .054
      MEET                              (.198)                 (.199)                                                                           (.149)

      PAYSKILX                          -.264                      -.133                                                                         -.268
      JOBROT                            (.328)                 (.328)                                                                           (.221)

      PAYSKILx                           .436                   .236                                                                            .489'
      SELFMNG                           (.295)                 (.300)                                                                           (.227)

15.   PSHR                               .099                   -.034                                                                            .073
                                        (.064)                 (.065)                                                                           (.051)

      TQM                                .091                      .017                                                                         .l31
                                        (.073)                 (.073)                                                                           (.059)

      MEET                               .058                      .092                                                                          -.000
                                        (.089)                     (.089)                                                                       (.074)

      SELFMNG                            -.282                 -.467'                                                                           -.259
                                        (.181)                     (.182)                                                                       (.126)

      PSHRX                              -.134                     .018                                                                         - 188'
      TQM                               (.098)                     (.099)                                                                       (.079)

      PSHR><                              .007                     -.091                                                                         .069
      MEET                              (.122)                     (.124)                                                                       (.098)

      PSHRX                              .417'                     .615'                                                                        .381"
      SELFMNG                           (.237)                     (.239)                                                                       (.172)

N                                        433                        433                            660                      660                   663

Each numbered set of work practice variables was entered separately. In columns (1)-(4), the other control variables included are production function inputs.
establishment age (for 1993 only), and dummy variables for two-digit industries, whether the plant belongs to a multi-plant firm, and whether in the 1993 data the
labor cost and employment data came from the 1992 LRD. In column (5) additional controls for age of the capital stock and numerous workforcc charactcristics are
added. Descriptive statistics for these variables are reported in Appendix Tables A2 and A3, and estimated coefficients of these variables for the specifications
corresponding to those in this table and Tables 4 and 5, but excluding the work practice variables, are reported in Appendix Table A4. In Panel B, the /1 00's
omitted from the variable name, although these variables (MEET, JOBROT, SELFMING, and PAYSKIL) are always divided by 100. '*' indicates statistical
significance at the ten-percent level, and '**' statistical significance at the five-percent level, in two-sided tests.
                     Table 4: Work Practice OLS Regressions for Log of Labor Costs/Worker, Manufacturing Plants


                                                            A. Individual Work Practices

                                    1977-1993 panel                                                1977-1996 panel           Full 1993 cross section.
                           i22                  Differenced                               .i.22                Differenced   with additional controls
                             (1)                      (2)                                  (3)                       (4)                (5)
1     COMPMNG/100           .019                   .040                                   -.010                      .002              .027
                           (.051)                 (.043)                                  (.104)                 (.099)               (.03 6)

      COMPWKRII 00         .183"                   .020                                    .147                      .154             .114**
                           (.051)                 (.043)                                  (.099)                 (.092)               (.04 1)

2. BENCH                   .103"                   .067"                                   .038                      .041             .076
                           (.029)                 (.024)                                  (.056)                 (.053)               (.022)

3. MEET/100                 .044                   .014                                   .108*                  .137"                 .001
                           (.034)                 (.029)                                  (.063)                 (.060)               (.026)

4.    JOBROT/100           -.060                   .018                                   -.092                  -.107                -.044
                           (.052)                 (.044)                                  (.085)                 (.08 1)              (.037)

5. SELFM'NG/IOO             .070                   -.033                                   -.007                 -.034                 .024
                           (.05 8)                (.050)                                  (.096)                 (.093)               (.043)

6. TQM                     .094"                  .064                                                                                .086**
                           (.03 0)                (.024)                                                                              (.022)

7. TRNCROS                  .005                   -.008                                                                               .015
                           (.034)                  (.028)                                                                             (.02 5)

8. TRNTEAM                 .092* *                    .048*                                                                            .046

                           (.034)                  (.028)                                                                             (.024)

9. PAYSKIL/100              .005                      -.033                                                                           -.015

                           (.049)                  (.041)                                                                             (.034)


10. PSHR                   .063"                      .021                                                                            .063**
                           (.029)                  (.024)                                                                             (.021)

                                                               B. Work Practice Bundles

II.   JOBROT               -.021                      .071                                -.153                  -.196"               -.035
                           (.059)                  (.050)                                 (.101)                 (.097)               (.044)

      SELFMNG              .167**                   .044                                   -.082                  -.158                .064
                           (.074)                  (.063)                                 (.127)                 (.123)               (.057)

      JOBROT>              .307*                  -.297"                                   .299                      .471*            -.086
      SELFMNG              (.162)                  (.139)                                 (.267)                 (.261)               (.111)

12. TRNCROS                -.013                      -.014                                                                            .001
                           (.037)                  (.032)                                                                             (.027)

      JOBROT               -.094                    -.009                                                                             .133*
                           (.098)                  (.084)                                                                             (.077)

      TRNCROS<              .047                      .038                                                                             .113

      JOBROT               (.115)                  (.099)                                                                             (.087)


13.   TRNTEAM               .055                      .043                                                                             .003
                           (.043)                  (.036)                                                                             (.032)

      MEET                  -.040                      .004                                                                           -.045
                           (.073)                     (.063)                                                                          (.048)

      SELFM'NG              -.063                     -.138                                                                            -.160

                           (.126)                     (.110)                                                                          (.099)


      TRNTEAMX              .068                      -.003                                                                            .050
      MEET                 (.084)                     (.072)                                                                          (.057)

      TRNTEAMx              .145                      .118                                                                             ,2l7

      SELFM'NG             (.143)                     (.125)                                                                          (.110)
                                                         Table 4 (continued)

                                             B. Work Practices Bundled (continued)

                               1977-1993 panel                                       1977-1996 panel           Full 1993 cross section.
                        1993               Differenced                         i22               Differenced   with additional controls
                          (1)                    (2)                           (3)                   (4)                  (5)
14. PAYSKIL              -.020                 -.054                                                                     .007
                        (.075)                (.063)                                                                   (.056)

    MEET                .049                  .015                                                                      .025
                        (.041)               (.034)                                                                     (.030)

    JOBROT              -.118                -.014                                                                      -.080•
                        (.061)               (.052)                                                                     (.044)

    SELFMNG              .095                -.010                                                                       .029
                        (.074)               (.063)                                                                     (.055)

    PAYSK1L             -.016                 .041                                                                      -.124
    MEET                (.120)               (.103)                                                                     (.083)

    PAYSKILX             .259                 .222                                                                       .147
    JOBROT              (.198)               (.169)                                                                     (.123)

    PAYSKILX            -.114                 -.143                                                                      .052
    SELFMNG             (.178)               (.154)                                                                     (.127)

15. PSHR                 .044                 .019                                                                      .048
                        (.038)               (.033)                                                                     (.028)

    TQM                 .112"                .100"                                                                      .103"
                        (.044)               (.037)                                                                     (.033)

    MEET                -.044                 -.026                                                                     -.062
                        (.053)               (.045)                                                                     (.041)

    SELFMNG              .086                -.161                                                                      -.030
                        (.108)               (.093)                                                                     (.070)

    PSHR<                -.050                -.059                                                                     -.036
    TQM                 (.059)               (.05 1)                                                                    (.044)

    PSHR                  .117                .049                                                                       .065
    MEET                (.073)               (.063)                                                                     (.054)

    PSHR><               -.099                .152                                                                       .056
    SELFMNG             (.142)               (.122)                                                                     (.095)

N                        433                   433                             660                   660                 663

See notes to Table 3.
                  Table 5 Work Practice OLS Regressions for (Log of Sales/Worker - Log Labor Costs/Worker), Manufacturing Plants


                                                           A. Individual Work Practices
                                                                                                                 Full 1993 cross section.
                            1977-1993 panel                                   1977-1996 panel                    with additional controls
                       SW/LC    1993    IJifferenced                      SW/LC    1996 Differenced                SW/LC        1993
                        (1)        (2)        (3)                           (4)           (5)       (6)               (7)        (8)
I. COMPMNGIIOO                   -.095      -.106                                        .069      -.000                        -.030
                                 (.081)     (.083)                                      (.110)    (.108)                       (.065)

   COMPWKR/100                    -.050      .065                           +1+          .032      -.030              ?/?       -.115
                                  (.082)    (.084)                                      (.104)    (.100)                       (.074)

2. BENCH                 +1+      -.050     -.098                                        -.030    -.082               21±       -.041
                                  (.046)    (.048)                                      (.060)    (.058)                        (.040)

3. MEET/100                        .026      .033                           +1+         -.033     -.063                            .051
                                  (.055)    (.056)                                      (.067)    (.066)                        (.047)

4. JOBROT/100                     -.035      -.018                          -7-         -.003     -.020                          .050
                                  (.083)    (.086)                                      (.090)    (.089)                        (.067)

5. SELFMINGI100                   -.045      -.018                                       .034      .039                         -.039
                                  (.093)    (.098)                                      (.102)    (.101)                        (.077)

6. TQM                   71+      -.059      -.035                                                                    +7+       -.044
                                  (.048)    (.048)                                                                              (.040)

7. TRNCROS                         .029       .046                                                                              -.005
                                  (.053)     (.056)                                                                             (.044)

8. TRNTEAM               +7+       -.012     -.022                                                                    ?I+       -.017
                                  (.054)     (.055)                                                                             (.043)

9. PAYSKIL/100                      .060      .100                                                                              -.024
                                  (.077)     (.080)                                                                             (.062)

10. PSHR                 +1+       .010      -.037                                                                    +1+       -.006
                                  (.045)     (.048)                                                                             (.038)

                                                             B. Work Practice Bundles

11. JOBROT                         -.047     -.020                          -I-         -.041      .010                          .053
                                  (.093)     (.098)                                     (.107)    (.105)                        (.079)

   SELFMNG               ?/±       -.069     -.022                                        -.015    .101               ?/±       -.064
                                  (.1 18)    (.124)                                     (.135)    (.134)                        (.102)

   JOBROTX               -I-       .107       .024                          +7+          .164      -.186              ?/2        .033
   SELFMNG                        (.258)     (.274)                                     (.283)    (.284)                        (.198)

12. TRNCROS                        .000       .037                                                                               -.010
                                  (.059)     (.062)                                                                             (.049)

   JOBROT                         -.196      -.069                                                                                 .034
                                  (.154)     (.165)                                                                             (.138)

   TRNCROSX                        .222       .066                                                                                 .021
   JOBROT                         (.182)     (.195)                                                                             (.156)

13. TRNTEAM                        .036       -.014                                                                                .020
                                  (.068)     (.071)                                                                             (.057)

   MEET                            .107       .026                                                                                 .092
                                  (.117)     (.124)                                                                             (.085)

   SELFMNG                         .268       .283                                                                               .160
                                  (.200)     (.217)                                                                             (.178)

   TRNTEAM<                        -.085      .033                                                                              -.047
   MEET                            (.133)    (.142)                                                                             (.102)

   TRNTEAMX                        -.415     -.398                                                                    77+          -.257
   SELFMNG                         (.228)    (.245)                                                                             (.197)
                                                                           Table 5 (continued)

                                                                 B. Work Practices Bundled (continued)

                                                                                                                                   Full 1993 cross section.
                                  1977-1993 panel                                               1977-1996 panel                    with additional controls
                              SW/LC 1993      Differenced                              SW/LC         1996 Differenced                 SW/LC        1993
                                (1)         (2)        (3)                                (4)         (5)       (6)                      (7)        (8)
14. PAYSKIL                               -.036       -.049                                                                                        -.104
                                          (.119)      (.123)                                                                                       (.100)

    MEET                                   -.012      -.022                                                                                        .011
                                          (.064)      (.066)                                                                                       (.054)

    JOBROT                      ?I-        .059        .043                                                                              2/—         128
                                          (.096)      (.101)                                                                                       (.079)

    SELFMNG                               -.209       -.161                                                                                        -.179
                                          (.116)      (.123)                                                                                       (.098)

    PAYSKILx                    +1?        .175        .293                                                                              ?/—        .178
    MEET                                  (.189)      (.200)                                                                                       (.149)

    PAYSKILX                              -.523       -.355                                                                                        -.415
    JOBROT                                (.3 12)     (.329)                                                                                       (.220)

    PAYSKILx                               .550        .379                                                                              +12        437*
    SELFMNG                               (.281)      (.301)                                                                                       (.226)

15. PSHR                                   .055        -.053                                                                                        .025
                                          (.061)      (.065)                                                                                       (.051)

    TQM                         +1+       -.021       -.083                                                                              +1+        .028
                                          (.070)      (.073)                                                                                       (.059)

    MEET                                   .102        .119                                                                                         .062
                                          (.084)      (.089)                                                                                       (.074)

    SELFMNG                               -.368"      .306*                                                                              /?        -.230
                                          (.172)      (.183)                                                                                       (.126)

    PSI-IRX                                -.084       .077                                                                              -I?       -.151
    TQM                                   (.094)      (.100)                                                                                       (.079)

    PSHR'<                                 -.110      -.140                                                                                         .004
    MEET                                  (.117)      (.125)                                                                                       (.098)

    PSHRx                       +1+        .516**     .463*                                                                              +1?       .325
    SELFMNG                               (.227)      (.241)                                                                                       (.172)

N                                          433         433                                            660         660                               663

See notes to Table 3. Variables for which there were significant effects of work practices (at the ten-percent level or better) in Tables 3 and 4 are highlighted In
columns (I) and (4), for these highlighted variables the signs of the effects on sales/worker (SW) or labor costs/worker (LC) from the cross-section and difhrenced
estimates are indicated if they can be established based on t-statistics exceeding one; a '2' is reported if either the sign cannot be established or there are both positive
and negative estimates with t-values exceeding one (otherwise the sign of the coefficient estimate with the t-value exceeding one is reported). In column (7) the same
is done, based only on the cross-sectional estimates in column (5) of Tables 3 and 4.
                Table 6: Statistical Tests for Effects of Work Practice Bundles on (Log of Sales/Worker - Log Labor Costs/Worker), Manufacturing Plants


                                                               1977-1993 panel                                              Full 1993 cross section
                                                                                P-value                                                           P-value
                                                Estimated effect            (null: effect = 0)                       Estimated effect        (null: effect = 0)
                                              j Differenced               1993       Differenced                          1993                      1993
                                               (I)           (2)           (3)            (4)                               (5)                       (6)

Specification   14:

PAYSKIL and SELFMNG

 Evaluated at sample means,                    015          -.009          .86            .91                              -.032                         .66
 conditional on use of both practices

 Evaluated at 100% implementation             .306          .169           .25            .55                               .154                         .47

Specification IS:

PSHR and SELFMNG

 Evaluatedatsamplemeans,                      .123          .019           .14            .83                               .064                            .33
 conditional on use of both practices

 Evaluated at 100% implementation             .203          .104           .15            .49                               .121                            .30

Tests are based on estimates reported in Table 5. Specification numbers refer to that table. For the first entry for each interaction, the estimated effect is the suns of
level and interaction effects, evaluated at sample means of work practice variables conditional on these being greater than zero, with means treated as fixed, Eor
example, in the first row, the estimated effect is (bPAYSKs:PAYSKIL' + bSIIFMN&SELEMNG' + bpAysKa.sny('PAYSKlL"SELEMNG'), where the b's arc thc
regression estimates, and a prime indicates a conditional sample mean. The p-value is from the Wald statistic of the null hypothesis that this linear combination of
the regression coefficients equals zero. In the second row, 100% implementation is assumed.
                                            Appendix Table Al: NES Manufacturing Analysis Samples


                                                        1994 NES               1997 NES
                                                            (1)                   (2)
Full NES sample of interviews                              3165                  4397
Manufacturing subsample of NES                             1727                  2536

Delete bad/missing data:
 Workforce characteristics                                 1342                  1956

 Establishment characteristics and                          748                  1229
 performance

 Computer use work practices                                738                  1216

 Benchmark, job rotation, and self-                         725                  1160
 managed teams work practices

 Meeting work practices                                     719                  1142

     1994 NES only:
      Pay for skill or knowledge and                        703
      profit/gain-sharing work practices

      Team and cross training and TQM                       701
      work practices

Obtain labor costs from 1992/1993 LRDs                      663

Match to 1977 LRD                                           433                   660

Table shows sample sizes available after imposing sample restrictions or deleting observations with bad or missing data.
                                                      Appendix Table A2: Descriptive Statistics and Variable Descriptions for Establishment Characteristics. Manufacturing Plants


                                    1977-1993 panel                          1977-1996 panel
                             1977                     1993            1977                     1996                   Variable description
                             (1)                       (2)            (3)                      (4)                             (5)
ES1AGE                        ...                     33.28            ...                      ...                   In whatyear did you start operationsin this location (1994 NES only)?
                                                  (22.79)                                                             Constructed variable: ESTACJE = establishment age.


MULTI                        .35                       .40            .31                      .37                    Is this the only establishment in your enterprise, or are there others?

MATER                       5137                   18713             5014                   15078                     During calendar year 1993,what was the cost of goods and services (I000s)
                           (25153)                (67310)           (29189)                (59376)                    used in the production ofyour 1993 sales (for example, energy costs, raw
                                                                                                                      materials, and intermediate goods)? 1997: What was the total costsofgoods
Median                       88l                  5000               749                   3000                       and services (bOOs) used in the production ofyour 1996 sales? (... this
                                                                                                                      excludes labor costs from the last question.)

BKCAP                        4036                  10326             2146                   11698                     At the end of calendar year        , what was the total book value (l000s)   of the
                           (19395)               (107591)           (12574)                (76347)                    fixed capital stock in your establishment?

 Median                      618                  2000                30l                  2000

CAPINV                        444                     935              245                   1520                     During calendar year 1993, how much did our establishment spend (bOOs)
                            (3583)                (5277)             (1445)                (11222)                    on new equipment and machinery? 1997: In 1997, how much

 Median                      33                       200             -25                      170
                                                                                                                      Approximately what percentage of your machinery or equipment used in
                                                                                                                      production is: 1997: What percent
CAPLTI                                              8.23                                       7.41                   Less than 1-year old?
                                                  (14.41)                                  (11.38)

CAP14                                              20.14                                    22.96                     Between I and 4 years old?
                                                  (17.46)                                  (18.32)

CAP5IO                                             31.71                                    30.66                     Between Sand bOyearsold?
                                                  (22.18)                                  (20.93)

CAPGTIO                                               39.93                                 38.98                     More than 10 years old?
                                                  (30.61)                                  (30.32)

N                            433                       433            660                      660

See notes to Tables   I   and 2.
                                                    Appendix Table A3: Descriptive Statistics and Variable Descriptions for Workforce Characteristics, Manufacturing Plants


                                1977-1993 panel                          1977-1996 panel
                         1977                     1993            1977                     1996                   Variable description
                          (1)                     (2)              (3)                      (4)                            (5)

UNION                                              .26                                      .21                   Is your establishment represented by a union or unions? 1997: Are any   ofyour
                                                                                                                  employees represented by a union or unions?

TOTEMP                  140.41                152.56             122.89                154.86                     How many employees were on your payroll at the end of 1993? 1997: Please
                       (451.54)              (328.80)           (480.88)              (334.69)                    tell me the number ofemployees on your payroll at the end of 1996. (Exclude
                                                                                                                     agency workers ....) Permanent full-time? Permanent part-time? Temporary
Median                                            67               34                      55                     or seasonal workers on your payroll? How many contract, leased, or
                                                                                                                  temporary agency workers did you have in 1996? Constructed variable:
                                                                                                                  TOTEMP for 1996 = sum.
                                                                                                                  Of your total workforce at this location at the end of 1993, what percentage
                                                                                                                  were: 1997: Of the permanent employees at this location at the end of 1996,
                                                                                                                  how many, or what percent were in each ofthese categories:
OCCM                                           10.01                                    11.56                     Managers/professionals?
                                              (8.87)                                   (10.11)

OCCS                                           8.13                                        6.76                   Supervisors?
                                              (5.17)                                       (4.43)

OCCT                                               5.93                                    5.91                   Technical/technical support?
                                                  (7.87)                                   (9.73)

OCCO                                           12.36                                    12.74                     Office/clerical/sales/customer service?
                                              (11.83)                                  (10.61)

OCCP                                           63.57                                    63.03                     Production?
                                              (19.30)                                  (19.10)

EDUC                                              12.52                                    12.41                  What is the average number of years of completed schooling for the following
                                                  (1.01)                                   (.83)                  categories ofemployees in your establishment? 1997: Excludes "in your
                                                                                                                  establishment." Managers/professionals? Supervisors? Technical/technical
                                                                                                                  support? Office/clerical/sales/customer service? Production? Constructed
                                                                                                                  variable: EDUC = occupation-weighted average.

                                                                                                                  What percentage of full-time employees are: 1997: What percent. or how many,
                                                                                                                  or your permanent employees are:
PWOMEN                                         29.34                                    27.38                     Women?
                                              (23.89)                                  (21.18)

PMIN                                           22.94                                    25.09                     Minorities'?
                                              (25.21)                                  (26.43)

PLOWTEN                                        10.83                                    12.17                     What percentage ofyour currently employed
                                              (11.41)                                  (12.62)                    workers have been with the firm for less than one year?
                                                                                                                  1997: What percent of or how many, current
                                                                                                                  permanent employees have been with you for less than
                                                                                                                  one year?
N                         433                      433             660                      660

See notes to 'lahics I and 2.
                                                Appendix Table A4: Selected Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates of Coefficients of Control Variables. Manufacturing Plants


                                     Loe of Sales/Worker                                               Log ofLabor Costs/Worker                                   (Log of Sales/Worker Log 1,abor Costs/Worker)
                   1977-1993 panel      1977-1996 panel       1993 cross section,       1977-1993 panel      1977-1996 panel  1993 cross section,            1977-1993 panel       1977-1996 panel  1993 cross section,
                  1993 Differenced     1996 Differenced         with controls          1993 Differenced 1996 Differenced        with controls               1993 Differenced 1996 Differenced          with controls
                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)                (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)            (10)                  (11)       (12)        (13)      (14)          (15)
                  .235       .196      .446        .373               .268             .052      .020       .172      .127           .050                   .182      .176        .274      .246           .218
Log(MATER/
 TOTEMP)         (.022)     (.020)    (.021)      (.020)             (.018)           (.013)    (.010)     (.029)    (.025)         (.010)                 (.021)    (.020)      (.030)    (.027)         (.018)

                  .037       .021       .028        .024              .017             .022       .014        018       .013              .013              .015       .007        010       .011              .004
Log(CAPINV/
 TOTEMP)         (.013)     (.011)     (.010)      (.009)            (.010)           (.008)     (.005)     (.014)     (.011)            (.005)            (.013)     (.011)     (.015)     (.012)            (.010)

                  .126       .045       .128        .046              .139             .064       .007       .129       .064              .056              .062       .039       -.000     -.017              .083
Log(BKCAP/
 TOTEMP)         (.021)     (.017)     (.016)      (.013)            (.0 17)          (.013)     (.009)     (.022)     (.016)            (.010)            (.020)     (.017)     (.023)     (.018)            (.0 17)

EDUC                                                                  .013                                                                .059                                                                -.046
                                                                     (.028)                                                              (.016)                                                               (.028)

PWOMEN/I 00                                                          -.304                                                               -.349                                                                 .045
                                                                     (.101)                                                              (.056)                                                               (.10 1)

PMIN/1 00                                                            -.005                                                                .050                                                                -.05 5
                                                                     (.079)                                                              (.044)                                                               (.078)


PLOWTEN/l 00                                                         -.505                                                               -.466                                                                 -.039
                                                                     (.156)                                                              (.087)                                                               (.156)

UNION                                                                 .067                                                                .128                                                                -.060
                                                                     (.045)                                                              (.025)                                                               (.045)

ESTAGE/I00       -.132                                               -.205             .158                                               .073             -.290                                              -.278

                 (.09 1)                                             (.081)           (.055)                                             (.045)            (.087)                                             (.08 1)



MULTI             .098       .043       .160        .055              .145             .012       .001       .170      -.059              .038              .086       .042      -.011       .114              .107
                 (.053)     (.046)     (.044)      (.058)            (.042)           (.032)     (.024)     (.060)     (.072)            (.023)            (.050)     (.047)     (.064)     (.078)            (.042)

                  .528       .240       .636        .392              .586             .429       .049       .213       .073              .554              .371        183        239       .117              .398
Adjusted-R2
N                 433        433         660         660              663              433         433        660        660              663               433        433        660        660                663

Estimates are reported for specifications including the variables in the table, but no work practice variables. Samples correspond to Tables 3-5. Other variables included but not listed in this table include occupation
controls (OCCM, OCCS, etc.), age of capital controls (CAPI,T1. CAP 14, etc.), two-digit industry controls, and a dummy variable for whether the data on labor costs and employment came from the 1992 LRD. See Table
2 and Appendix Tables A2 and A3 for details. These same controls are included in the main tables for work practices. In the full cross section for 1996. an additional year of education boosts both sales/worker and labor
costs/worker by about five percent.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title

7321            Jagadeesh Gokhale                  Comparing the Economic and Conventional Approaches 8/99
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff              to Financial Planning
                Mark J. Warshawsky

7322             Stacy Berg Dale                   Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective     8/99
                 Alan B. Krueger                   College: An Application of Selection on Observables
                                                   and Unobservables

7323            Harry Hoizer                       Assessing Affirmative Action                            8/99
                David Neumark

7324             Mark McClellan                    Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit and Not-for-   8/99
                 Douglas Staiger                   Profit Hospitals

7325             David Ikenberry                   Stock Repurchases in Canada: Performance and Strategic 8/99
                 Josef Lakonishok                  Trading
                 Theo Vermaelen

7326             Thomas C. Kinnaman                The Economics of Residential Solid Waste Management 8/99
                 Don Fullerton

7327             Mark McClellan                    The Quality of Health Care Providers                    8/99
                 Douglas Staiger

7328             John DiNardo                      The Phillips Curve is Back? Using Panel Data to   8/99
                 Mark P. Moore                     Analyze the Relationship Between Unemployment and
                                                   Inflation in an Open Economy

7329             Austan Goolsbee                   Evidence on Learning and Network Externalities in the 9/99
                 Peter J. Klenow                   Diffusion of Home Computers

7330             Young-Hye Cho                     Time-Varying Betas and Asymmetric Effect of News:       9/99
                 Robert F. Engle                   Empirical Analysis of Blue Chip Stocks

7331             Young-Hye Cho                     Modeling the Impacts of Market Activity on Bid-Ask       9/99
                 Robert F. Engle                   Spreads in the Option Market

7332             Daniel S. Hamermesh               The Changing Distribution of Job Satisfaction            9/99

7333             James L. Heckman                  Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics:      9/99
                                                   A Twentieth Century Retrospective

7334             Rajesh K. Aggarwal                Performance Incentives Within Firms: The Effect of       9/99
                 Andrew A. Samwick                 Managerial Responsibility

                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title

7335            Rajesh K. Aggarwal                 Empire-Builders and Shirkers: Investment, Firm         9/99
                Andrew A. Samwick                  Performance, and Managerial Incentives

7336            Richard Portes                     The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows          9/99
                Hélène Rey

7337             Kathryn M. Dominguez              The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention 9/99

7338             Jeffrey A. Frankel                No Single Currency Regime is Right for all Countries   9/99
                                                   or at All Times

7339             Axel Borsch-Supan                 Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain 9/99
                                                   Disability Option

7340             Hylke Vandenbussche               Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy     9/99
                 Jozef Konings
                 Linda Springael

7341             Robert F. Engle                   CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile          9/99
                 Simone Manganelli                 Regression

7342             David C. King                     Congressional Vote Options                             9/99
                 Richard J. Zeckhauser

7343             Christina Paxson                  Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment                  9/99
                 Jane Waldfogel

7344             Michael Hout                      Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race           9/99
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7345             Jean 0. Lanjouw                   The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with         9/99
                 Mark Schankerman                  Multiple Indicators

7346             Geert Bekaert                     Stock and Bond Pricing in an Affine Economy             9/99
                 Steven R. Grenadier

7347             Thomas N. Hubbard                 How Wide Is the Scope of Hold—Up-Based Theories?        9/99
                                                   Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking
7348             Jonathan Gruber                   The Wealth of the Unemployed: Adequacy and              9/99
                                                   Implications for Unemployment Insurance

7349             Edward P. Lazear                  Educational Production                                  9/99

7350             Tamim Bayoumi                     The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in           9/99


                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                         Title

                                                  Japanese Growth in the 1990s

7351            Taizo Motonishi                    Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the        9/99
                Hiroshi Yoshikawa                  1990's: Financial or Real?

                                                   Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance           9/99
7352             Daron Acemoglu
                 Robert Shimer

7353             Jeff Grogger                      Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits                       9/99
                 Charles Michalopoulos

7354             Roberto Rigobon                   On the Measurement of the International Propagation      9/99
                                                   of Shocks
7355             Ricardo J. Caballero              The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-             9/99
                 Mohamad L. Hammour                Liquidationist View

7356             Alec Ian Gershberg                Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special   9/99
                 Michael Grossman                  Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                 Fred Goldman                      exempt Hospital Bonds

7357             Robert E. Lipsey                  Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm         9/99
                                                   Employment

7358             Vernon Henderson                  Marshall's Economies                                     9/99

7359             lain Cockburn                     The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:          9/99
                 Rebecca Henderson                 Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                 Scott Stern

7360             Douglas Holtz-Eakin               Estate Taxes. Life Insurance, and Small Business         9/99
                 John W. Phillips
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7361             Bong-Chan Kho                     Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                      9/99
                 René M. Stulz

7362             Jagadeesh Gokhale                 Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans:        9/99
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff             How Bad Can It Get?

 7363            Bruce D. Meyer                    Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the           9/99
                 Dan T. Rosenbaum                  Labor Supply of Single Mothers

 7364            Dani Rodrik                        Short-Term Capital Flows                                9/99
                 Andrés Velasco

                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number           Author(s)                           Title


7365             Michael D. Bordo                    The Future of EMU: What Does the History of                9/99
                 Lars Jonung                         Monetary Unions Tell Us?

7366             Emmanuel Saez                       Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                         9/99

7367             Emmanuel Saez                       The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel 9/99
                                                     Study of 'Bracket Creep'

7368              Alan L. Gustman                    What People Don't Know About Their Pensions                9/99
                  Thomas L. Steinmeier               and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                     From The Health and Retirement Study

7369              Wolfgang Keller                    Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct          9/99
                  Arik Levinson                      Investment Inflows to U.S. States

7370              Michael Baker                      Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian            9/99
                  Gary Solon                         Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                     Tax Records

7371              Michael Baker                      Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                  Nicole M. Fortin                   1987-1988

7372              B. Douglas Bernheim                The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the          10/99
                  Lorenzo Forni                      Health and Retirement Survey
                  Jagadeesh Gokhale
                  Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373              Paul A. David                      Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private      10/99
                  Bronwyn H. Hall                    R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                  Andrew A. Toole

7374              Peter Cappelli                     Do "High Performance" Work Practices Improve              10/99
                  David Neumark                      Established-Level Outcomes?



Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02 138-5398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax                  (617-868-2742), or email
(orders(ãnber. org).

                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                                www.nber.org
                             Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
