1
1. Introduction
Economists in both international economics and industrial organization have committed substantial
work to understanding the pricing behavior of exporting firms in the presence of variations in the
exchange rate. The research has important implications ranging from understanding international
adjustment under flexible exchange rates to firm behavior under price uncertainty. Much of this research
has focused on the concept of exchange rate pass-through – how a firm alters the price of an exported
good, denoted in the currency of the importing country, to a change in the exchange rate. A one-to-one
response is defined as complete pass-through, and a less than one-to-one response is partial or incomplete
pass-through. 1
Research on exchange rate pass-through can be divided into two sets -- studies that explore
cross-sectional variation in pass-through, and those that focus on time series variation. Both sets find that
pass-through tends to be incomplete, with the fraction averaging about 60 percent (Goldberg and Knetter,
1997, p. 1250), and highly variable. Cross-sectional variation is primarily explained by industry
characteristics, e.g., market power. Time series variation is usually explained by shifts in exchange rate
expectations, e.g., whether exchange rate movements are expected to be permanent or transitory, and
hysteresis effects.2
Curiously, there has been little research on trade protection policies in connection with exchange
rate pass-through or even the pass-through of trade protection instruments. One exception is Feenstra

1

As surveyed in Goldberg and Knetter (1997), pass-through studies are closely related to two
other literatures: research on pricing-to-market, i.e., how an exporting firm price discriminates across
destination countries given changes in exchange rates, and research into the law-of-one-price on
international markets.
2

See Knetter (1993), Feenstra, Gagnon, and Knetter (1996), Gron and Swenson (1996), and
Yang (1996) for studies of industry effects on pass-through; and Baldwin (1988) and Froot and
Klemperer (1989) for research on the effect of exchange rate expectations.

2
(1989), which proposes and tests the hypothesis that ad valorem tariffs and exchange rate changes lead
to symmetrically identical pass-through to prices. Interestingly, Feenstra(1989) examines the pass-through
of tariffs and exchange rates individually, but not the potential impact of the trade policy on exchange rate
pass-through. Harrison (1992)and Knetter (1994) examine this latter issue in the context of quantitative
restrictions. Both Harrison and Knetter argue that pass-through of exchange rates (or pricing-to-market)
depends on whether or not quantitative restrictions are binding. Knetter finds little evidence of pricing-tomarket for various Japanese and German exported products, including autos and certain steel products,
while Harrison finds binding VERs substantially reduce exchange rate pass-through for U.S. imports of
European steel, but not for Japanese steel.
In this paper we explore for the first time the impact of antidumping (AD) investigations on passthrough of both exchange rates and the AD duties. Arguably the most heavily-used trade restriction in
recent years, AD protection policies lead to AD duties when a foreign firm is found to sell a good in a
domestic market at “less than fair value,” i.e., dumping, and causing “material injury” to domestic firms.
Like quantitative restrictions, we show that this form of protection (and the administration procedures that
accompany them) theoretically affects firms’ exchange rate pass-through decisions, even though most
economists typically view AD duties as standard ad valorem tariffs. An important difference relative to
standard tariffs is that AD duties are potentially recalculated each year by the U.S. Department of
Commerce (USDOC) based on the firm’s previous-year pricing decisions in what are known as
administrative reviews. This review process implies that AD duties are endogenously determined over
time by the firms’ pricing decisions in both its export market and own home market. The endogeneity has
important implications for both exchange rate pass-through and the pass-through of the AD duty. In our
model, we first show that AD duties and the resulting administrative review process may substantially
alter exchange rate pass-through elasticities. Second, we demonstrate that optimal behavior by the firm

3
may imply pass-through of up to 200 percent of the initial AD duty.
To test the effect of AD investigations on pass-through of exchange rates and AD duties, we
examine monthly panel data of 345 iron and steel imports from Canada to the U.S. over the period 1989 to
1995. Our panel includes products that were involved in U.S. AD iron and steel cases filed in 1992, as
well as other closely-related products that were not involved or received negative determinations. The
period from 1989 to 1995 is judicious because it includes the timeline of events during the AD
investigations. We choose U.S. iron and steel imports from Canada because many U.S. AD
investigations involved iron and steel, and more iron and steel is imported into the U.S. from Canada than
any other country except Japan. 3 Canada was also one of the few significant import sources not subject
to U.S. steel VRAs leading into the time period of our data (USITC, 1994, p. 90), which substantially
eases concerns that these quantitative restrictions could confound our estimates of the effect of AD
investigations on pass-through of exchange rates and AD duties.
Our estimates show significant differences in pass-through behavior between those products that
received an AD duty and those that did not. Consistent with our model, we find that exchange rate passthrough rises dramatically for products once they become subject to final AD duties. In contrast,
exchange rate pass-through for products that did not receive an AD duty remains constant over our entire
sample. Also consistent with our model, we find that pass-through of the final AD duty is more than
complete, as our estimates indicate pass-through of 160% of the initial duty.
Thus, our analysis shows that estimates of pass-through from incorrectly pooling affirmative and
nonaffirmative products and/or ignoring structural breaks from AD final determinations leads to
substantially biased coefficients. In fact, pass-through estimates for both exchange rates and the AD

3

In 1992, 24 percent of total U.S. iron and steel imports (SIC 3312) came from Japan and 23
percent came from Canada. The next largest import source was Germany with about 8 percent import
market share.

4
duties for affirmative products after the AD final determination are double those from the pooled sample
estimates. This has important implications for many previous studies of exchange rate pass-through or
pricing-to-market in U.S. manufacturing industries, which ignore AD investigations involving the products
or industries of interest.4 Indeed, since 1980 there have been over 800 AD investigations with
approximately half of these cases ruled affirmative against foreign imports, leading to significant duties.
In addition to steel and steel-related products, these AD cases have spanned important manufacturing
sectors including chemicals, semiconductors, computers, communications equipment, ball bearings, and
other industrial machinery. In fact, Gallaway, Blonigen, and Flynn (forthcoming) concludes that duties
from U.S. AD investigations (in combination with countervailing duties) are second only to the Multifiber
Arrangement quotas in terms of net welfare costs to the U.S. economy. They also note that, while
successive GATT rounds have substantially reduced tariffs and quantitative restrictions, AD procedures
have not been substantially addressed by the WTO-member countries, and many countries are currently
implementing their own AD programs that are patterned after the U.S. and EU. This suggests that AD
protection will continue to grow in importance relative to other forms of protection.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the
administration of U.S. AD investigations. Section 3 develops a model to explain how AD investigations
and determinations may generally affect exchange rate pass-through. The rest of the paper tests the

4

While this paper is the first to examine pass-through issues connected with AD investigations
and duties, the tenor of our results is consistent with other previous studies that have shown that AD
protection leads to many consequences beyond the standard effects of an ad valorem tariff. These
studies include Staiger and Wolak (1994) and Krupp and Pollard (1996), which demonstrate the
substantial effects that “investigation events” alone have on import and pricing behavior by investigated
firms; Prusa (1997), which details trade diversion effects; Anderson (1992; 1993) and Rosendorff (1996),
which model the political economy interactions with voluntary export restraints; and Feinberg (1989)
which argues that the filings of complaints by U.S. companies alleging sales of imports at “less than fair
value” is inversely related to the real external value of the U.S. dollar, suggesting that filings cannot be
viewed as exogenous in equations like those estimated in this study.

5
hypotheses from section 3 using the case of the 1992 U.S. AD investigations of Canadian iron and steel
products. Thus, section 4 presents a brief history of these U.S. AD investigations, section 5 presents our
empirical methodology, including discussion of the data, and section 6 presents and evaluates our empirical
results. The final section summarizes our conclusions.

2. Overview of U.S. antidumping investigation procedures
The U.S. antidumping laws are administered by the U.S. Department of Commerce (USDOC)
and the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC), each with distinct roles in the process. When a
petition is filed, the USDOC’s role is to determine whether the subject product is being sold at “less than
fair value” in the U. S. Specifically, they calculate whether firms exporting to the U. S. are selling the
product in the U. S. at less than “normal” or “fair” value, which is generally defined as the foreign firm’s
own home market price for the same good. 5 For each case, the USDOC calculates an ad valorem
dumping margin equal to the percentage difference between the U.S. transaction prices they observe and
“fair value”. The USITC concurrently determines whether the relevant U.S. domestic industry has been
materially injured, or is threatened with material injury, by reason of the imports subject to its investigation.
The USDOC and USITC each make preliminary and final determinations for each case. If an
affirmative preliminary determination is made by both the USDOC and the USITC, then the importer
must post a cash deposit, a bond or other security for each entry equal to the preliminary margin
determined by the USDOC. This requirement stays in effect until either the USDOC or the USITC
makes a negative final determination. If an affirmative final determination is made by both the USITC

5

If home market sales are inadequate, then normal value is based on sale prices in third country
markets. If third country sales are inadequate, then normal value is based on a constructed value for the
foreign like product using manufacturing costs, selling, general and administrative costs, profits and
packaging costs.

6
and USDOC, then the USDOC issues an AD order to levy a duty equal to the estimated dumping margin
on the subject product. When a subject foreign product enters the U. S., the importer must pay U.S.
Customs a cash deposit equal to the margin times the value of the subject product. However, these cash
deposits do not necessarily represent the final amount of duties to be assessed on the subject imports.
Rather, the margin determined in the USDOC's final investigation is only used as a basis for estimating
the duty liability of the importer. The actual liability of the importer may be determined in subsequent
years by the USDOC. Before 1984, this was accomplished by automatic yearly administrative reviews
by the USDOC. However, since 1984, such reviews have become voluntary; that is, unless an interested
party requests a review, the duties assessed are those found in USDOC's final determination (or most
recent administrative review). Every year, on the anniversary of the date the final AD duties were
assessed, the USDOC asks for any requests by interested parties for an administrative review of a firm’s
AD duty. A request may come from a foreign firm which faces the duty or an interested U.S. firm or
organization. The purpose of an administrative review is to adjust the margin on subject imports to reflect
changes in the difference between the foreign firm’s U.S. price and their normal value. The USDOC
typically recalculates the dumping margin for the previous 12 months immediately preceding the
administrative review request. Once USDOC calculates a dumping margin over this period, a duty equal
to the newly calculated dumping margin replaces any previously-existing duty. If a subsequent review
determines that the margin during the review period is different from the previous margin used as a basis
for the importer's cash deposit, a bill (or refund) in the amount of the difference plus interest is assessed
(or rebated). The administrative review process thus allows foreign firms to discontinue any dumping into
the U. S. and subsequently have the duty removed. This process is crucial to understanding why AD
duties are quite distinct from standard ad valorem tariffs.
Given our paper’s focus on exchange rate pass-through, it is important to note that in

7
determination of dumping margins the USDOC uses (when available) the daily bilateral exchange rate of
the subject country at the time of the U.S. transactions it is using for calculating the dumping margin.
However, when a daily rate represents a sizeable fluctuation, defined as 2.25% different from a rolling
average of rates for the past 40 business days (referred to as the “benchmark rate”), the USDOC then
uses the “benchmark rate”.6

3. Model
Feenstra (1989) presents a model that derives the optimal pricing decision for a monopolist
exporting firm and examines pass-through of ad valorem tariffs and exchange rates. Consideration of
AD duties requires an extension of Feenstra’s model because AD duties are endogenous to the firm’s
pricing decisions in both its own home market and its export market through the administrative review
process. Thus, we begin by introducing a model with demand for the firm from two markets, the home
and foreign (export) markets. After examining a benchmark model with no AD duty, we examine the
case where the firm faces an AD duty in which the foreign country defines “fair value” as the price
charged by the firm in its own home market. We first compare pass-through of exchange rates with and
without AD duties and find that these exchange rate pass-through effects may be quite different. The
theory is ambiguous on the difference in magnitude of these two effects, leaving the question open for our
empirical analysis. Second, we show that the change in the foreign market price with respect to an AD
duty is necessarily different than an equivalent ad valorem tariff. In fact, we show that pass-through of
the AD duty may be as large as 200 percent of the initial duty.

6

In the 1992-93 U.S. steel cases this adjustment to a benchmark rate was not used. For smaller
and less-developed countries, daily rates are often not readily available. In those cases the USDOC uses
average monthly averages, as reported by the International Monetary Fund.

8

3.1. The benchmark model - no AD duty
To begin, we set up a simple model of a discriminating monopolist in two markets: its home (H)
market and the foreign (F) market to which it exports.7 We assume that the firm faces demand of
xH (pH ,IH ) in its home market and xF (pF , IF , qF ) in the U.S. market. Both functions are assumed continuous
and twice differentiable. IH and IF represent income (or equivalently, expenditure on all goods) by
consumers in each market. Inclusion in the demand functions in this manner assumes that for both
markets demand is weakly separable from other goods in the consumer’s utility function. Demand in the
U.S. market, xF (.), is an import demand function, where we assume the foreign firm faces a domestic
substitute product, qF . Assuming the exporting firm and domestic producers in the foreign market play a
Bertrand game, we can treat qF as an exogenous parameter.8 Demand is downward-sloping in the good’s
own price in both markets. All production occurs in the firm’s home market with a twice differentiable
and continuous cost function, ö(xH + xF , w), where w represents home factor prices. As in Feenstra
(1989), we assume the firm sets its export price in the foreign currency, but maximizes profits in its own
currency.
Given these assumptions, the firm’s problem in this benchmark model is the following:

Max ÐB '
p F,p H

1 F F
p x ( .) % p H x H (. ) & ö x F ( . )% x H(. ) ;w
e

(1)

7

This model follows Boltuck (1987) closely, though we employ many of Feenstra’s (1989)
assumptions and notation.
8

We assume there is only one firm producing in the foreign firm’s home market and thus do not
include a qH term in the xH (.) demand function. This assumption is due to data constraints in our empirical
work below in that we only have data on product prices, not firm-level prices.

9
where e is the expected bilateral exchange rate expressed as foreign market currency to home market
currency. 9 First-order conditions for this problem can be expressed as:
p F : (1/e) (p F % p F ç F) & ö ) ç F / 0
p H : p H % p H çH & ö)çH / 0

(2)

where ç F and ç H are the firm’s own-price elasticities of demand in the foreign and its home markets,
respectively. Assuming second-order conditions are satisfied, we can solve for optimal prices,
p F ' p( F (w,e,q F,I F,I H) and p H ' p( H (w,e,q F,I F,I H) . Feenstra (1989) shows in that paper’s model
that the response of the price of the export to changes in the exchange rate, factor costs, price of the
domestic good, and income depends on the nature of costs and demand. As with Feenstra, the presence
of increasing marginal costs and a price elasticity of demand that declines in price is sufficient in our
model to generate what the literature considers “normal” comparative static results. In summary, given
these conditions, our model implies that the price of the export to the foreign market increases in factor
costs, income in the foreign country, the price of the domestic substitute good, and an appreciation of the
exporting firm’s home currency. 10
However, because of our model’s additional consideration of the exporting firm’s home market,
the magnitudes of the comparative static results may differ from those of the Feenstra model. Changes in
parameters that directly affect only one market (such as, IF ) will affect optimal prices for the firm in both

9

Following Feenstra (1989), we assume that all other variables are non-random. This
assumption, in conjunction with our assumption that the firm sets price in the foreign market currency,
allows us to set up the profit maximization in the certainty-equivalent fashion in (1) where e denotes the
expected exchange rate.
10

These conditions are also sufficient to satisfy the second-order conditions. The comparative
static result with respect to income requires the additional condition that the income elasticity of demand
for the good in the foreign market is constant for all prices. These conditions also mean an increase in the
income of the home country will increase the price charged in the foreign country. These comparative
static results are available from the authors upon request.

10
markets through the cost function, provided marginal costs are not constant. Given this paper’s focus, the
effect of exchange rate changes on the optimal price in the foreign market (i.e., pass-through) is of most
interest. Using the implicit function theorem, we first derive the effect of the exchange rate on the
exporting firm’s prices:
(1/e 2) (1% ç F) ( M2ÐB / Mp H
Mp F
*B '
>0
Me
DB

(3a)

& (1/e 2) (1% ç F)( M2ÐB /Mp FMp H
Mp H
*B '
Me
DB

(3b)

2

where DB is the determinant of the Hessian for this benchmark model and positive by the second-order
condition. Equation (3a) shows that the pass-through of the exchange rate on the foreign price is positive.
To see this, note that from the first-order conditions in (2), (1/e 2 )(1 + ç F ) must be negative in sign. Also,
the second term in the numerator must be negative, provided the firm would face a well-behaved
maximization problem if it sold to only the home market.11
Equation (3b) implies that the exchange rate change can impact the price charged by the
exporting firm in its home market as well. The sign of the effect of an exchange rate change on the
firm’s home price depends on the second term in the numerator, MÐ/ Mp FMp H ' & ö )) Mx H / Mp H ç F . This
term is obviously negative if marginal costs are increasing in output, zero if marginal costs are constant,
and positive if marginal costs are decreasing. Thus, the optimal home price for the firm decreases with an
exchange rate appreciation of the home currency when marginal costs are increasing in output, is
unchanged when marginal costs are constant, and increases if marginal costs are decreasing. 12

11

In other words, this term would need to be negative in order to satisfy second-order sufficient
conditions were the firm to only sell in its own market.
12

This result has important implications for pass-through studies that examine only movements in
the price in the export market and wish to relate those back to the law of one price. For example, if

11

3.2. Model of firm pricing decision in the presence of an AD duty
Given the benchmark model of a price discriminating firm above, we now examine this firm’s
optimal pricing decisions when it becomes subject to an AD duty and the administrative review process.
After laying out the firm’s new objective function, we compare exchange rate pass-through for the firm
facing the AD duty versus our benchmark model above, where the firm faces no such AD duty.
AD
Assume the firm has just been found to be dumping and receives an initial AD duty, t0 . As

mentioned in section 2, this initial AD duty is only an “estimate” of the duty the firm must pay over the
coming period until an administrative review recalculates a dumping margin. The actual AD duty paid by
the firm will be the dumping margin calculated by the USDOC at the end of the period and applied ex
post. That is, an administrative review by the USDOC evaluates the previous year’s prices in both
markets to determine an ex post AD duty for the previous one-year period. If the ex post AD duty is
less than the AD duty charged to the firm during the previous year, the firm receives a refund. 13 If the ex
AD
post AD duty is greater than t0 , then the firm must pay the difference on the past year’s sales. We

examine the case where the USDOC defines the firm’s home price as “fair value” in its calculation of the
dumping
margin, both at the time of the case and in subsequent administrative reviews.14 More specifically, “fair

marginal costs are increasing, one may observe only partial pass-through in the export market even
though the law of one price may hold because the exporting firm’s home price declined by the requisite
amount! This is a simple, but interesting, result that comes out of this model that considers both of the
firm’s markets.
13

We assume a discount factor of one. This simplifies the model and is potentially consistent
with reality because additional payments or refunds by firms of AD duties includes interest.
14

This is the USDOC’s most preferred method for determining “fair value”, unless there is
insufficient sales by the investigated firm in the foreign market or the foreign market is not a market
economy. Also, this was the proxy measure used by the USDOC in the Canadian steel cases and

12
value” is defined as the price observed in the foreign market once it is converted into the exporting firm’s
AD
own currency and net of any original estimated AD duty, t0 , in place at the beginning of the period.

Given this definition of fair value and the method of determining the AD duty ex post, it is easy to see that
AD

the effective AD duty ( tE ) is endogenous with the firm’s pricing decisions over the period and takes the
following form:

tEAD / p H & p F /[ e(1% t0AD)] ,

(4)

whenever the expression in (4) is positive and zero otherwise. Thus, the firm’s maximization problem
immediately after a final determination, which takes into account the administrative review process, is

the following:
MAX Ð
'
p F,p H

pF F
pF
x (.) % p H x H(.) & ö x F (.) % x H (.); w & ä p H &
x F(.)
AD
e
e(1% t0 )
where ä '

1

if p H > p F / e (1% t0AD)

0

if p H #p F / e (1% t0AD)

(5)

Assuming second-order conditions are satisfied, we can solve for optimal prices in the presence of an AD
duty:
p F ' p( F( e,w,t0AD,q f,I F,I H )
p

H

'

p( H( e,w,t0AD,q f,I F,I H )

The firm’s problem then divides into three possible cases in equilibrium:

subsequent administrative reviews, as well as the steel cases and reviews involving firms from other
developed countries.

(6a)
(6b)

13

Case 1: p H > p F / e (1% t0AD)
Case 2: p H ' p F / e (1% t0AD)
Case 3: p

H

<p

F / e (1%

(7)

t0AD)

Since we are examining the problem from the perspective of a firm that has been found in the previous
period to be dumping by the definition in (4), it is unlikely that case 3 will be relevant unless the market
environment has changed drastically. Therefore, we concentrate on case 1 and 2.

3.2.1. Model with AD duty - case 1.
In case 1, the firm does not change its prices in a way to completely eliminate the effective AD
duty. This means ä = 1 in equation (5). Rearranging, we can write the firm’s maximization problem as
MAX Ð1
'
p F,p H

k F
p & p H x F(.) % p H x H(.) & ö x F (.) % x H(.); w
e

(8)

AD
AD
where k ' (2% t0 )/ (1% t0 ) > 1 . First-order conditions for this maximization problem can be written

as
p F : (k/e) p F % (k/e) p F ç F & ö ) ç F & p H ç F/ 0
xF
pH : &p H
% p H % p Hç H & ö ) ç H / 0
H
x

Using the implicit function theorem, the effects of the exchange rate on the exporting firm’s prices in
case 1 are

(9)

14
(k/e 2) (1% ç F) ( M2Ð1 / Mp H
Mp F
*1 '
>0
Me
D1

(10a)

& (k/e 2) (1% ç F)( M2Ð1 /Mp FMp H
Mp H
*1 '
Me
D1

(10b)

2

As with the benchmark model, an exchange rate appreciation of the home currency to the foreign
currency increases the firm’s optimal price in the foreign market and a change in the home price that
depends on the second derivative of the cost function.
While both the benchmark and case 1 models show that the foreign price increases with an
exchange rate appreciation, one focus of our paper is to examine the difference between exchange rate
pass-through before an AD duty is in place (benchmark model) to after it is imposed (case 1 model). To
examine this difference, one can compare the comparative static results in equations (10a) and (10b) to
equations (3a) and (3b), scaled into elasticities by the ratio of the exchange rate to the equilibrium price.
Intuition might suggest that exchange rate pass-through would increase with the AD duty in place: If the
exchange rate appreciates and the firm does not fully pass-through the change to foreign prices, the firm
will appear to be dumping to an even greater extent. However, the dumping margin calculation also
includes the firm’s home price. Thus, relative demand conditions across the two markets (home and
foreign) become more important for comparative static effects in the case 1 model than in the benchmark
model, where the only potential interdependence is through the cost function. These relative demand
conditions can mitigate and even reverse the standard intuitive incentive for the firm to more fully passthrough exchange rate changes when facing an AD duty. In general, the exchange rate pass-through
elasticity in case 1 may be either smaller or larger than in the benchmark case, and we show in the
appendix that this is true even for the simple case of linear demand and constant marginal costs. Thus,
imposition of an AD duty may cause a change in the exchange rate pass-through, but we must turn to the

15
data to understand both the direction and magnitude of the exchange rate pass-through elasticity.
A second issue we explore with both the model and our data is the pass-through of the AD duty.
AD
It is easy to see from first-order conditions that an AD duty, with an original ad valorem duty of t0 and

an administrative review process connected with it, will impact the foreign price in a different manner
AD
than a standard ad valorem tariff of t0 . The first-order conditions of the benchmark model with a
AD
standard ad valorem tariff of t0 are:

p F : [1/e(1% t0AD)] (p F % p F ç F) & ö ) ç F / 0
p H : p H % p Hç H & ö ) ç H / 0

(11a)
(11b)

whereas the first-order conditions in (9) can be rewritten as:
p F : p F /e % [ (p F / e) & p H] ç F % [1/e(1% t0AD)] (p F % p F ç F) & ö ) ç F / 0
p H : & p F (x H / x F) % p H % p H ç H & ö ) ç H / 0

(12a)
(12b)

Equality (12a) differs from (11a) by the first two terms in (12a), both of which are positive. And (12b)
includes an additional first term compared to (11b), which is negative. Thus, it can be shown that, for the
“standard” case of constant or increasing marginal costs and a price elasticity of demand that declines in
price, the increase in the equilibrium foreign price from the benchmark model (and the decrease in the
AD
equilibrium home price) will be greater in the case of an initial AD duty of t0 than a standard ad
AD
valorem tariff of t0 . The intuition behind this result is straightforward. The administrative review

process gives the firm added incentive to raise the foreign price and lower the home price to effectively
lower the duty it faces, which go beyond the normal pass-through effects on the firm’s revenues and
operating costs. In fact, it is easy to see that the firm may optimally choose to pass-through the AD duty
by more than 100 percent onto the foreign price because the AD duty is calculated as the difference

16
between the home price and the foreign price net of the AD duty. Thus, if the firm does not change its
home price, the firm would have to raise its foreign price by 200 percent to eliminate the duty. Of course,
the firm is likely to reduce its home price to help eliminate the duty, in which case pass-through to the
export price will be less than 200 percent even if we observe elimination of the duty. Our empirical
analysis below of AD duty pass-through with firms that virtually eliminated their AD duty will allow us to
estimate the magnitude of this pass-through to the export market for these cases.15

3.2.2. Model with AD duty - case 2.
We next consider case 2, where the firm is essentially at a corner solution of charging a price in
the foreign market, such that it equals the USDOC definition of “fair value”. In this case, ä = 0 in
equation (5) and we can substitute the following equality into our firm’s profit maximization function:
p H ' p F /e (1% t0AD) . Thus, the firm’s maximization problem becomes:
MAX Ð2
'
pF

pF F
pF
x (.) %
x H(.) & ö x F (.) % x H(.) ; w
e
e (1% t0AD)

(13)

First-order conditions for this maximization problem can be written as

p F : (1/e) p F % (1/e) p F ç F & ö ) ç F %

k̂ F x H
k̂ Mx H p F
Mx H
p
%
& ö)
/ 0
e
e Mp F x F
xF
Mp F

(14)

AD
where k̂ ' 1/ (1% t0 ) < 1 . Assuming the second-order sufficient conditions hold, we can solve for the

15

See Boltuck (1987) and Gallaway, Blonigen, and Flynn (forthcoming) for a more detailed
discussion of the market conditions that determine the magnitude of pass-through of the AD duty to the
foreign market and the magnitude of the decline in the home market price.

17
optimal foreign price and, by definition, the optimal home price. By the implicit function theorem, the case
2 effects of the exchange rate on the exporting firm’s foreign price (and the home price by the equality
constraint) are
2

Mp F
1/e 2 [p F % p F ç F % k̂p F x H /x F % (k̂ /e) (Mx H /Mp F) (p F / x F) & k̂ö ) Mx H / Mp F]
*2 '
2
Me
M2Ð2 / Mp F

(15a)

Mp H
Mp F
k̂p F
*2 '
*2 &
Me
Me
e2

(15b)

These comparative static results hold provided a small change in the exchange rate does not cause the
AD
firm to alter its prices, such that the equality p H ' p F /e (1% t0 ) no longer holds. It is possible that the

parameters of the model are such that for the given exchange rate, e, the equality just holds. In this case,
AD
an appreciation of the exchange rate (i.e., a higher e) will lead to p H > p F /e (1% t0 ) and, thus, the

relevant comparative statics are those in equations (10a) and (10b). In contrast, a depreciation of the
exchange rate in this case will mean the relevant comparative static results are those in equations (15a)
and (15b). In this particular case, there is an asymmetric response provided (15a) and (15b) differ from
(10a) and (10b).16
Our main focus again is whether these optimal price responses to exchange rate changes in case
2 differ in magnitude from those with the benchmark case of no AD duty in place. As with case 1, the
change in the exchange rate pass-through effect may be larger or smaller in case 2 compared to the
benchmark of no AD duty process. As with the comparison between case 1 and the benchmark model,
we show in the appendix that the difference in exchange rate pass-through elasticities between case 2

16

In our data, we found no evidence of asymmetric responses with respect to exchange rate
appreciation versus depreciation, so we do not think this case is relevant for our data.

18
and the benchmark model is ambiguous even for the case of linear demand and constant marginal costs.
In summary, we have shown that the presence of an AD duty substantially alters the objective
function for a firm beyond that of a simple exogenous ad valorem tariff. Therefore, the theory shows that
the presence of an AD duty has potentially important implications for pass-through effects of exchange
rate changes on prices to the both markets served by the firm. 17 Secondly, the model suggests that passthrough of an AD duty will be larger than for an equivalent standard tariff and could be as high as 200
percent. We next turn to analysis of the U.S. AD cases in Canadian iron and steel products to quantify
these implications.

4. A brief history of the U.S. AD cases in iron and steel products filed in 1992

Our analysis of how AD investigations may affect exchange rate pass-through focuses on the
U.S. antidumping investigation of imported iron and steel products that were filed in 1992 and its
subsequent effect on U.S.-imported Canadian steel prices. Figure 1 outlines a timeline of important
events during the U.S. 1992-93 AD steel cases. On June 8 of 1992, a group of U.S. steel producers filed
an antidumping petition against a wide range of iron and steel products covered under chapter 72 of the
Harmonized Tariff System (HTS) involving foreign producers from twenty different countries.18 For the

17

Firms may view the problem of pricing in the presence of an AD duty as a multi-period
problem, which we do not explore here. For example, the firm may want to completely eliminate the AD
duty over time, but does so incrementally over a number of periods. It is unclear how this would affect
the firm’s exchange rate pass-through behavior in that model relative to the one we present. However,
we note that in the U.S. steel cases presented in table 1, and particularly with the Canadian data we use
in the empirical analysis below, firms generally received duties close to zero after just the first
administrative review. This supports our modeling of only one review in our objective function.
18

The petitioning U.S. firms were ARMCO Steel Co. L.P., Bethlehem Steel Corp., Geneva
Steel, Gulf States Steel Inc. of Alabama, Inland Steel Industries Inc., LaClede Steel Co., LTV Steel Co.
Inc., Lukens Steel Co., National Steel Corp., Sharon Steel Corp., USX Corp., U.S. Steel Group, and WCI
Steel Inc. The investigated foreign firms were from Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Spain,

19
purposes of the investigation, the USITC categorized these products into four different groups which were
each separately investigated with respect to the “material injury” determination: 1) cut-to-length carbon
steel plate, 2) hot-rolled carbon steel plate, 3) cold-rolled carbon steel plate, and 4) corrosion-resistant
carbon steel sheet.19

On February 4, 1993, the USDOC announced preliminary dumping margins which

ranged from 0.88% to 109.22%, with an average margin across the country-product cases of 33.23%.
Thus, effective February 4, 1993, investigated firms were required by U.S. Customs to post a cash
deposit, a bond, or other security equal to the preliminary dumping margin for all subject merchandise
subsequently imported into the United States. On July 9, 1993, the USDOC issued its final dumping
margins which were very similar to its preliminary margins.20 On August 18, 1993, the USITC ruled its
final determination. Unlike the USDOC, the USITC did not rule affirmative on all remaining cases. Of
the 42 remaining country-product cases, the USITC ruled affirmative on 20 cases, primarily on cut-tolength carbon steel plate and corrosion-resistant carbon steel sheet. The remaining cases were ruled
negative and cash deposits (or bonds and/or other securities) that were collected during the investigation
since the preliminary USDOC margin determination were refunded (returned) to the importers.
As described in section 2, calculation of antidumping duties is an ongoing process through the
administrative review procedures followed in U.S. AD cases. With respect to the steel cases, nineteen
firms from Korea, Canada, Australia, Finland, Sweden, Germany, and the Netherlands requested
administrative reviews of their dumping margins on the first anniversary of the case in 1994. While the

Sweden, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom.
19

On August 21 of 1992, the USITC ruled “negative” on preliminary determinations with respect
to cold-rolled carbon steel plate from Australia, Taiwan and the United Kingdom; hot-rolled carbon steel
plate from Italy; cut-to-length carbon steel plate from Japan; and corrosion-resistant carbon steel sheet
from Taiwan. This ended the investigations for these products.
20

There were a few cases where preliminary USDOC dumping margins were amended prior to
the final USDOC margin determination.

20
petitions were initiated by the foreign firms, the original domestic petitioning steel firms also participated
heavily in these administrative reviews. With the exception of Broken Hill Propriety Co. from Australia,
all reviewed firms received substantially lower margins, with many reduced to almost zero. This suggests
that these firms changed their behavior to eliminate any dumping over the period reviewed. 21
The Canadian firms were in the group of firms that asked for administrative reviews and, as
shown in table 1, all had reduced their AD duty to less than 2% by the first administrative review. This
means the Canadian firms were aggressive in eliminating the AD duty and suggests they are an
appropriate focus for our examination of altered pricing behavior from the AD investigation and
administrative review process. It is important to note that although the first administrative review began in
August 1994, the final determination of new AD duties from this first review was not announced until
March 1996. 22 Thus, we assume in our analysis below that Canadian firms faced the same market
conditions and incentives from the end of the AD case in August 1993 through at least the end of 1995,
the end of our data sample.23

21

Interestingly, many foreign firms with duties did not petition for an administrative review.
Many of these were firms did not supply information in the original investigation and thus received
dumping margins calculated using the “best information available” or BIA, which is often the data
supplied by the domestic petitioners. This includes the Japanese and U.K. firms, as well as firms from
less-developed countries.
22

The U.S. steel AD determinations with respect to Canadian firms were also being reviewed by
a binational Canada-U.S. panel, as authorized by the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement, from
September 1993 through 1996. Our reading of the various Federal Register notices connected with the
case suggest these binational panel reviews led to no significant changes in the U.S. steel case
determinations during our sample period.
23

For example, if the results of the first administrative review were determined in mid-1995 by
the USDOC, this would establish “new” initial AD duties in our data and imply another change in the
objective function faced by the firms, and hence new effects of the AD duties on exchange rate passthrough. Thus, we would have to be testing for an additional structural break in exchange rate passthrough beginning in mid-1995.

21
5. Empirical implementation

5.1 Specification and Tests
As detailed below, our bilateral sample is disaggregate U.S. iron and steel imported products from
Canada. Modifying our notation to reflect the bilateral U.S.-Canadian sample (and suppressing for
simplicity the time and cross-section subscripts), our initial log-linear estimation equation that permits
examination of the impact of an AD duty on pricing behavior follows from equation (6a):24
+

+

+

+

+

?

?

ln pUS = f [ln e, ln (1+t0 AD ), ln (1+tT ), ln w, ln qUS , ln IUS , ln ICAN ],
(16)

where expected signs of coefficients are summarized above the regressors; pUS is the U.S. dollar price of
U.S. iron and steel imports from Canada; e is the U.S. dollar price of the Canadian dollar; t0 AD is the initial
antidumping duty; tT is the ad valorem tariff; w is an aggregate of home factor costs proxied by Canadian
producer costs in Canadian dollars; qUS is U.S. dollar price of the U.S. substitute good; IUS is U.S.
expenditures on steel in U.S. dollars; and ICAN is Canadian expenditures on steel in Canadian dollars.
We also consider specifications of (16) that include structural breaks, as suggested by our
comparison of the benchmark model to the case 1 and case 2 models in section 3. The coefficient on the
exchange rate is our estimate of exchange rate pass-through. One empirical focus is to explore how, if at
all, this coefficient is influenced by the AD duty. Other than the simple exercise of comparing estimates
of (16) with and without t0 AD , we explore the impact of the AD duty by identifying exchange rate passthrough across two dimensions of our panel. One dimension is to distinguish between iron and steel

24

The following predictions apply to both cases 1 and 2 of the model with an AD duty. Equation
(16) also includes the effect of a tariff.

22
products that were investigated and found affirmative, hence receiving a final AD duty, and those
products that were identified non-affirmative and did not receive a final AD duty. The other dimension is
to estimate separate exchange rate pass-through coefficients for both the time period prior to the
imposition of the final duty and the time period after its imposition. Our model predicts that, for
affirmative products, the exchange rate pass-through coefficient undergoes a structural break at the time
the final AD duty is imposed, but that the direction of the change is ambiguous. For the non-affirmatives,
the model predicts that pass-through coefficient remains constant throughout our sample and equal to the
coefficient for the affirmative products prior to the structural break.
Our second focus is to examine estimates of the coefficient on the AD duty variable -- ln (1+tAD ) -permitting structural differences between the estimate for the period prior to the final duty and the
estimate for the period after the final duty is imposed. Our primary prediction is that, because the final
duty margin in our sample is eliminated over time for the affirmative products, the coefficient on the duty
variable for the period after its final imposition may exceed unity and could approach two, implying passthrough of more than 100 percent of the duty.

5.2 Data
To test our model we examine data on U.S. imports of Canadian iron and steel products from
1989 through 1995. Examination of the Canadian case is appropriate for a number of reasons. As
described in section 4, numerous Canadian iron and steel products were involved in U.S. AD steel cases
filed in 1992. Canada was one of the largest import sources of iron and steel for the United States during
this time period and was one of the source countries with large volumes of trade involved in the U.S. AD
steel investigations and subsequent AD duties. The evidence from the duty determinations in
administrative reviews after the case suggest that the involved Canadian firms altered behavior

23
substantially to reduce the AD duty (see table 1). Furthermore, Canadian steel products were not subject
to any U.S. VRAs before or during the time period of our data. Finally, we were able to gather much
more detailed data to control for Canadian producer costs than for other source countries. As Knetter
(1993) and Goldberg and Knetter (1997) point out, it is important to control as precisely as possible for
cost shocks in empirical pass-through studies. These characteristics make the Canadian sample a natural
one to test for altered behavior in the presence of the AD duty.
We sample monthly data for all 10-digit Canadian imports of iron and steel products covered
under HTS codes 7201000000 up to 7220000000. The U.S. AD investigation involved a substantial
number of 10-digit HTS codes from HTS 7208000000 to 7220000000. Identified by Federal Register
notices connected to the case, a list of these subject codes is available from the authors upon request.
Thus, our data cover two types of iron and steel products: those involved in the U.S. AD iron and steel
cases that received an affirmative decision and AD duty, and those that either received a negative
decision and no duty or were not involved in the cases. The presence of the latter type of products, the
nonaffirmative products, allows us to identify the effect of the AD duty on the affirmative products.
Identification of AD effects is also facilitated by having monthly time-series data for each product
beginning three years before the AD case was filed to almost two years after the final determination. As
described in section 3, the U.S. AD steel investigations began in June 1992 and concluded in August 1993.
The first administrative review occurred in August 1994 and examined transactions over the period of
February 1993 through July 1994. These events occur in the middle of our 1989-1995 time series data.
We begin the sample in January 1989 when data by HTS product codes first became available in the U.
S. (rather than by the formerly-used TSUSA system). We end our sample in December 1995 because
there were significant changes in the U.S. iron and steel HTS product codes that took effect in January of
1996, and we were not able to confidently concord these changes into the original HTS codes in our

24
sample.
Our overall sample includes 345 10-digit HTS product codes, which vary substantially in terms of
trade volumes, prices, and frequency of transactions. About two-thirds of the products do not have
transactions for every month in our sample. However, over 70 percent of our observations are by
products with transactions in at least three-quarters of the months. In our analysis below, we also
estimate our model using only the 98 product codes that have complete time series. This subset allows us
to address potential statistical concerns related to time-series properties of our data in a more explicit
fashion.
Our dependent variable is the logarithm of the product’s U.S. price inclusive of the AD duty and the
tariff. Our U.S. price variable is constructed as monthly unit values for each of our products from official
U.S. Customs data multiplied by one plus any applicable AD duty rate or ad valorem tariff rate. The
data appendix describes construction of this variable and our other variables in more detail. We note that
an ideal data set would have data by product and by firm to correspond with our firm-level theory.
However, our product data encompasses activity by potentially numerous firms. The USDOC calculates
AD duty rates by product and by firm, but also reports a trade-weighted average of the firm-specific AD
duties by product which is called the “all other” duty, because it is applied to any new firm from the
source country that enters and exports the subject product. We use this trade-weighted “all other” AD
duty to construct our dependent variable.25
To obtain a first glance at the movement of the Canadian iron and steel prices during our sample
period, figure 2 displays the trade-weighted average log of the unit value for affirmative and

25

While the use of the “all other” AD duty and product level data to estimate firm-level passthrough is a concern, information in table 1 suggests that the firm, Stelco, Inc., was primarily responsible
for the majority of U.S. imports of Canadian cut-to-length plate and corrosion-resistant steel. To see this,
table 1 shows that the trade-weighted “all other” duty is very close to the firm-specific margin received by
Stelco, Inc.

25
nonaffirmative products in our sample. In figure 2 we also mark the beginning of the U.S. AD steel
investigations (June 1992) and the final decision in the case (August 1993). Surprisingly, both these tradeweighted price series show significant changes after the case, with sharp increases in prices generally.
One primary focus in this paper is the pass-through of exchange rate changes on prices before
and after the conclusion of AD investigations. Figure 3 shows the movement of the U.S.dollar value of
the Canadian dollar, end-of-month, for our sample period, and the beginning and end of the U.S. AD steel
investigations. From 1989 to the beginning of 1992, the Canadian dollar was fairly stable, with a slight
appreciation. This was followed by a significant depreciation of the Canadian dollar in 1992 and 1993,
with a leveling off in 1994 and 1995. While the general trends in the exchange rate vary in the preinvestigation, investigation and post-investigation periods, each subperiod experiences both increases and
decreases of the exchange rate.
Besides the logarithm of the exchange rate, other explanatory variables include the logarithms of
the AD duty, tariff, Canadian producers’ costs, the U.S. domestic substitute price, and Canadian and U.S.
expenditures on steel. We note that, while the exchange rate and Canadian and U.S. expenditures on
iron and steel variables vary only by time, the producer costs and U.S. domestic substitute prices vary by
time and by product. The data appendix describes construction and sources of these variables. Table 2
displays descriptive statistics for our dependent variable and righthand-side variables for the full sample of
345 products, whereas table 3 displays these same statistics for the sample of 98 products with complete
time series.

6. Results

6.1. Initial estimates
In this section, we present estimates of equation (16) and several variations using weighted least

26
squares (WLS), where the weight is the customs value of the imported good. The reason for using WLS
is because the volume and value of trade across the commodities is often very dissimilar. For some
goods, there is modest or even zero trade for many months, and for other goods, there is substantial trade
for all months. It thus seems inappropriate to weight each observation equally, since one would expect a
greater variance in the residual for observations with modest trade relative to those with substantial trade.
All WLS regressions include White’s correction for heteroscedasticity (robust estimates), fixed-effect
constants by product, and seasonal dummy variables. We also report estimates from alternative
specifications including panel-specific autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity, dynamic or lagged effects,
and tests of threat effects.
Table 4 summarizes pass-through estimates beginning with our full panel of 345 products from
January 1989 to December 1995. Column (1) reports estimates of equation (16) for the full sample
(17437 observations). All coefficients that have predicted signs are highly significant with the
theoretically correct sign (only the theoretical signs on the two expenditure coefficients are ambiguous),
supporting our basic pass-through specification. The coefficient on the exchange rate is 0.349, indicating
significant but incomplete pass-through, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that this coefficient is equal
to the coefficient on the Canadian producer cost (0.251), supporting a common restriction imposed in this
literature. The coefficient on the AD duty variable is significant at 0.818. 26
Columns (2) and (3) in Table 4, respectively, report pass-through estimates of equation (16) for
those products that received an affirmative decision and final AD duty (2608 observations) and estimates
for the nonaffirmative products, which did not receive a final AD duty (14829 observations). Estimates

26

If one drops the AD duty variable and re-estimates the column (1) specification (estimates are
omitted for brevity), one obtains extremely similar estimates to those in column (1) that include the duty.
One may infer from this that AD investigations and duties have no influence on exchange rate passthrough, but this inference is incorrect, as we demonstrate below.

27
in columns (2) and (3) are very similar qualitatively to those in column (1), with the only major difference
being a reduced statistical significance on most of the variables in column (2) (likely a result of the much
smaller sample size). Given the strong similarity in the exchange rate pass-through coefficients in all three
columns, as well as the similarity in the three AD duty coefficients, one would conclude that imposition of
an AD duty has no effect on pass-through equations. In fact, this conclusion is spurious, resulting from
imposing two invalid restrictions with the affirmative sample – a constant exchange rate coefficient and a
constant AD duty coefficient before and after the period of final determination of the AD investigation.
Columns (4) and (5) in Table 4 relax these two restrictions for the affirmative and nonaffirmative
products. In particular, the exchange rate coefficient, along with the AD duty coefficient, is permitted to
differ in the period before the final determination (Jan. 1989 to August 1993) relative to the period after
the final determination (September 1993 to Dec. 1995), noting that there was no duty, preliminary or final,
prior to February 1993. Based on the affirmative sample, estimates in column (4) show that exchange
rate pass-through prior to the final determination is not statistically different from zero, but becomes
significant at 0.860 after the final determination. Furthermore, the coefficient on the AD duty variable
increases from 0.876 to 1.626 for the period after final determination. Thus, column (4) supports a
dramatic structural break with the affirmative products on both the exchange rate coefficient and the AD
duty coefficient (structural change for each coefficient is significant at the 1 percent level), consistent
with theoretical predictions.27 Importantly, unrestricted estimates based on the nonaffirmative sample
lead to very different conclusions. The column (5) estimates do not support a structural break in

27

We cannot reject the hypothesis that the pass-through of the tariff and the AD duty are equal
in almost all specifications, despite our theory’s prediction that the AD duty pass-through after the final
determination should exceed the tariff. However, the estimate of pass-through of the tariff coefficient is
often insignificant and sensitive to specification, unlike our estimated AD duty pass-through.

28
exchange rate pass-through for nonaffirmative products.28 The two unrestricted exchange rate
coefficients are not statistically different from one another (1 percent level) and are numerically similar to
the column (4) estimate of exchange rate pass-through prior to the final determination -- findings also
consistent with theoretical predictions.29
A potential limitation with estimates in Table 4 involves possible time series problems such as
autocorrelation, a limitation that cannot be addressed with the full sample of 345 products because of
missing observations associated with zero trade. We address this limitation by estimating the five
specifications in Table 4 with generalized least squares for those 98 iron and steel products that have
complete time series, and present these results in Tables 5 and 6. To construct an appropriate
benchmark, Table 5 repeats the Table 4 WLS, but for the sample of 98 products. These Table 5 WLS
estimates support the major findings of Table 4. Table 5 estimates of the exchange rate coefficient in
columns (1), (2), and (3) are very similar to one another (ranging between 0.273 and 0.314), as are the
estimates of the AD coefficient (ranging between 0.736 and 0.954), yet, analogous to Table 4, the bias in
both these exchange rate and AD pass-through coefficients are revealed by the estimates in columns (4)
and (5). In the column (4) estimates for the affirmative products, the exchange rate coefficient increases
from zero to significantly positive (0.769) and the AD coefficient approximately doubles at the time of
final determination; yet the column (5) estimate for the nonaffirmative products indicates no substantial

28

The partial F-statistic comparing the restricted column (2) estimates to the unrestricted column
(4) estimates is 8.18, greater than the critical value F(2,4) of 3.00. This supports the structural break for
the affirmative sample. The analogous F-statistic for column (3) versus column (5) is 0.27, which is less
than the critical value F(1,4) of 3.84, and therefore does not support a structural break for the
nonaffirmative sample.
29

The estimates in Table 4 do not support symmetry in pass-through between the exchange rate
and the tariff, contrary to the finding in Feenstra (1989). It is clear from our model that this tariff
symmetry is not necessarily predicted in the presence of the AD duty. The intuition is analogous to why
the model predicts a change in exchange rate pass-through with a duty because the duty margin, the
spread between the price of the export to the foreign country and the home price of the good, is
endogenous.

29
change in the exchange rate coefficient.30
Estimates in Table 6 repeat the benchmark estimates from Table 5 after GLS correction for panel
specific autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity. The Table 6 GLS estimates support the major findings of
both Tables 4 and 5. The exchange rate coefficients in columns (1), (2), and (3) are very similar to one
another, as are the AD coefficients. However, for the column (4) estimates for the affirmative products,
the exchange rate coefficient increases from zero to significantly positive and the AD coefficient
approximately doubles at the time of the final determination; and for the column (5) estimates for the
nonaffirmative products, there is no substantial change in the exchange rate coefficient.

6.2. Dynamic considerations
Tables 4, 5 and 6 ignore potential dynamic effects in our model. In particular, one may expect
that, given monthly data, lagged values of the exchange rate may have an impact on the firms’ pricing
decisions, perhaps proxying for exchange rate expectations.31 If true, omission of lagged exchange rates
suggests that our pass-through estimates above are biased downward. To examine this, we next create a
one-half year moving average series of the logarithm of the exchange rate (contemporaneous plus the
previous six monthly observations), and use this in place of the contemporaneous exchange rate specified
above.

30

The partial F-statistic for structural break the affirmative products in Table 5 is 16.47, while
partial F-statistic for structural break for the nonaffirmative products in Table 5 is 8.45. Both support a
structural break, but we note that for the nonaffirmative products the magnitude of the change in the
exchange rate coefficient is small and in the opposite direction to the corresponding change in the
affirmative products. Similiar “structural break” tests yield qualitatively identical results for all other
estimates presented subsequently in the paper. Tests for structural break in exchange rate pass-through
are always confirmed for estimates of the affirmative products, while tests for the nonaffirmative
products either suggest no structural break or one that suggests a small downward shift after the final AD
determination. Details are available from the authors upon request.
31

Feenstra (1989) finds significant lagged effects in exchange rate pass-through, with the lagged
response distributed over one year.

30
Table 7 presents WLS estimates with this moving-average exchange rate variable for affirmative
and nonaffirmative products for both our sample of 345 products (columns (1) and (2)) and the sample of
98 products (columns (3) through (6)), where the final two columns also use GLS methods to address
panel specific autocorrelation and heterscedasticity

The exchange rate pass-through elasticities increase

substantially for the affirmative products relative to the static ones in Tables 4, 5 and 6, as one would
expect, while curiously there is little change in the magnitudes of these elasticities for the nonaffirmative
products. In addition, there is little qualitative (and in many cases, quantitative) changes in the other
coefficients -- in particular, pass-through of AD duties is almost identical to the static specification and
most coefficients on other variables are almost identical to previous estimates.
In sum, the structural break in exchange rate pass-through for the affirmative cases continues to
hold with a dynamic specification, suggesting a large increase in pass-through of both the exchange rate
and AD duty after the final determination. At the same time, the nonaffirmative products show no such
structural break in the full sample. These results are robust to other lag lengths in our moving-average
variables and to specifications that include the contemporaneous exchange rate and lagged exchange
rates as separate regressors.32
A related issue is stationarity, a topic of concern with data that have a time series dimension. In
general, the evidence suggests that this issue is likely not significant with our sample. First, 87 of the 98
price series that comprise our dependent variable in Tables 5, 6 and 7 reject the null hypothesis of a unit
root using a Dickey-Fuller test at the 5 percent significance level. 33 However, while the evidence
suggests our dependent variable is stationary, our regressors, including logarithms of the exchange rate,

32

We also examined the inclusion of a lagged dependent variable as an alternative. The
estimated coefficient on the lagged dependent variable was very small and statistically insignificant.
33

This evidence for general stationarity of the dependent variable may not be surprising in light of
the highly disaggregated nature of these price series.

31
Canadian producer cost series, U.S. domestic price, U.S. expenditures on iron and steel, and Canadian
expenditures on iron and steel, display mixed evidence with respect to stationarity. While Dickey-Fuller
tests cannot reject a unit root for all series, a Phillips-Perron test rejects a unit root for the exchange rate,
the U.S. domestic price, and eight of the nine Canadian producer cost series at the 1 percent significance
level. We also conduct Dickey-Fuller tests on our residuals by estimating each of the 98 cross-sections
separately and find that the tests reject a unit root in every case. If the non-stationarity properties of our
regressors were serious, we would typically expect non-stationary residuals after regressing our
stationary dependent variables on these regressors. Since this is not true, the evidence suggests our
specification with data in levels is appropriate.

6.3. Threat effects
A number of papers have found empirical evidence suggesting that the threat of AD actions,
including filings of AD petitions and preliminary determinations during AD investigations, can have effects
that rival those observed when firms and products face actual AD duties. Staiger and Wolak (1994) and
Krupp and Pollard (1996) show that AD petitions and preliminary determinations can have as large
effects on prices and quantities as final determinations, depending on the characteristics of the market and
firms involved in the case. Blonigen and Feenstra (1997) finds that the threat of U.S. AD protection has
a stronger correlation with increases of Japanese foreign direct investment into the United States than
measures of actual protection.
While we find no threat effects with our nonaffirmative estimates above, we examine threat
effects in two additional ways. First, our nonaffirmative products include products that were not
investigated as well as investigated products that received negative determinations. Both types of
products ultimately face no AD duty, but firms might perceive the future likelihood of an AD investigation
and affirmative decision for these two types of products differently and thus alter exchange

32
rate pass-through accordingly. 34 Our pooling of these two types of products may hide differences in
exchange rate pass-through. The first two columns of Table 8 repeat for convenience our GLS estimates
for the affirmative and nonaffirmative 98 products with complete time series, which were reported in
columns (5) and (6) in Table 6. For comparison, columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, respectively,
disaggregate our nonaffirmative estimates from column (2) into investigated-negative products and
noninvestigated products. The exchange rate pass-through elasticities for the two categories of
nonaffirmative products are extremely similar and remain unaffected by the final AD determination,
which does not support threat effects based on this test.
A second method to detect threat effects is by potential changes in exchange rate pass-through
when the products first received preliminary AD duties, rather than final duties. In the Canadian iron
and steel AD cases, preliminary duties began in February of 1993, approximately 6 months before the
final determination. Since the first administrative review by the USDOC included this period for their
calculations of the revised dumping margins, the firms may have changed their exchange rate passthrough during this period before the final determination, particularly if they anticipated affirmative
decisions. As an empirical test, we break the exchange rate pass-through elasticity estimates into three
periods rather than two: 1) Before the preliminary determinations in February of 1993, 2) During the
period between the preliminary and final determinations, and 3) After the final determination. Columns
(5) and (6) of Table 8 report GLS estimates for affirmative and nonaffirmative products for this new
specification, where the first row is exchange rate pass-through before the preliminary determination (as
opposed to the final determination). Here again we find no evidence of threat effects. For both sets of

34

The reasoning is that if a firm thinks an AD investigation is likely in the near future and they
wish to avoid AD duties, they will alter prices and pass-through currently because this may be the ultimate
period of time used by the USDOC to determine the dumping margin. It is not clear whether a firm
would consider a product that has already been investigated and received a negative determination more
or less likely to receive an affirmative decision in the future.

33
products, we find no difference between the exchange rate pass-through elasticity in the “before” or
“during” period, but statistically significant differences for the affirmative products between the “after”
period and both the “before” and “during” period. One potential explanation for this pattern is that it is
unusual for the USDOC to use the period between the preliminary and final determinations for
calculations of the dumping margin during the first administrative review (typically, they only use the
period after the final determination), and the involved firms may not have anticipated that the USDOC
would consider the period between the preliminary and final determinations in their first administrative
review.

7. Conclusion

This paper finds that antidumping investigations and duties have substantial impacts on exchange
rate and duty pass-through. With respect to exchange rate pass-through, we first present a model that
indicates that structural breaks are likely to occur from AD duties because future administrative review
duties are a function of the exchange rate. Our empirical results support this prediction by showing that,
for our sample of U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, exchange rate pass-through increased
dramatically after products received final AD duties. We find no similar structural break for
nonaffirmative products, regardless of whether they were investigated and received a negative
determination or were never investigated.
We also find that pass-through of final AD duties was more than complete (greater than 100
percent) for our sample. This again is consistent with the way that future administrative reviews of AD
duties are determined. In order to eliminate an AD duty in future reviews, a firm needs to pass-through
the AD duty 200 percent assuming a fixed home-market price. Even with a variable home market price,
pass-through of the duty to the export-market price is still likely to be greater than 100 percent. In fact,
our estimates find AD duty pass-through to the export-market price to be around 160 percent.

34
Consistent with previous literature, our results provide further evidence that the institutional
structure surrounding AD investigations and duties can have many important (and often subtle)
implications that transcend the simple ad valorem AD duties we observe. Furthermore, our analysis
shows that ignoring the effects of AD investigations can lead to significantly biased estimates of passthrough elasticities for products that receive AD duties. Given the breadth of AD investigations and
duties across U.S. manufacturing sectors, this critique may apply to many previous pass-through studies.
There are several extensions that follow naturally from our paper. First, we have not modeled or
estimated the determination of the foreign firm’s home market price of the product because the data were
unavailable for our U.S.-Canadian sample. Joint estimation of both prices (home and export markets)
would be useful to document effects of exchange rate changes on the home market price, as well as
testing whether shifts in the home market price help establish the law of one price, despite partial passthrough of the exchange rate to the export market. Second, to evaluate the generality of our findings, it
would be useful to examine the effect of AD investigations and duties on pass-through with firms from
other countries and across other products. A promising sample for this extension might be Japan, since ,
like Canada, Japan is one of the largest exporters of iron and steel to the U.S. and faced significant duties,
but unlike Canada, did not have the duties reviewed until a number of years after the final determination.

35
References

Anderson, James E. “Domino Dumping I: Competitive Exporters,” American Economic Review. Vol. 82
(1992): 65-83.
Anderson, James E. “Domino Dumping II: Anti-dumping,” Journal of International Economics. Vol. 35
(1993): 133-150.
Baldwin, Richard. “Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect,” American Economic Review
(September 1988): 773-785.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Robert C. Feenstra.” Protectionist Threats and Foreign Direct Investment,” in
Robert C. Feenstra (ed.), The Effects of U.S. Trade Protection and Promotion Policies. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press (NBER), 1997, 55-80.
Boltuck, Richard D. “An Economic Analysis of Dumping,” Journal of World Trade Law. Vol. 21(1987):
45-54.
Feenstra, Robert C. “Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates Under Imperfect
Competition: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 27(August 1989): 25-45.
Feenstra, Robert C., Joseph E. Gagnon, and Michael M. Knetter. “Market Share and Exchange Rate
Pass-Through in World Automobile Trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 40(February
1996): 187-207.
Feinberg, Robert M. “Exchange Rates and ‘Unfair Trade,’” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
71(November 1989): 704-07.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Paul D. Klemperer, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share Matters,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 79(September 1989): 637-654.
Gallaway, Michael P., Bruce A. Blonigen and Joseph E. Flynn. “Welfare Costs of the U.S. Antidumping
and Countervailing Duty Laws,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Goldberg, Penelopi Koujianou and Michael M. Knetter. Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have
We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 35(September 1997): 1244-72.
Gron, Anne and Deborah L. Swenson. “Incomplete Exchange-Rate Pass-Through and Imperfect
Competition: The Effect of Local Production,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
Vol. 86(May 1996): 71-76.
Harrison, Ann. “Imperfect Explanations for Imperfect Pass-Through: Market Power and Exchange Rates
in the US Steel Industry,” Mimeo, July 1992.
Knetter, Michael M. “International Comparison of Pricing-to-Market Behavior,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 83(June 1993): 473-86.

36
Knetter, Michael M. “Is Export Price Adjustment Asymmetric?: Evaluating the Market Share and
Marketing Bottlenecks Hypotheses,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 13(February
1994): 55-70.
Krupp, Corinne M. and Patricia S. Pollard. “Market Responses to Antidumping Laws: Some Evidence
from the U.S. Chemical Industry,” Canadian Journal of Economics. Vol. 29(1996): 199-227.
Prusa, Thomas J. “The Trade Effects of U.S. Antidumping Actions,” in Robert C. Feenstra (ed.), The
Effects of U.S. Trade Protection and Promotion Policies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
(NBER), 1997, 191-212.
Rosendorff, B. Peter. “Voluntary Export Restraints, Antidumping Procedure, and Domestic Politics,”
American Economic Review. Vol. 86(June 1996): 544-61.
Staiger, Robert W. and Frank A. Wolak. “Measuring Industry-Specific Protection: Antidumping in the
United States,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1994: 51-118.
U.S. International Trade Commission. The Year in Trade: Operation of the Trade Agreements
Program, 45th Report. USITC Publication 2769. Washington, DC: U.S. International Trade Commission,
1994.
Yang, Jiawen. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through in U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 79(February 1996): 95-104.

Table 1: Progression of AD duties over time from administrative review process in the1992-93 U.S. steel
cases involving Canada.
Products

a

Investigation

First Review
Period of Invest.:
2/4/93 - 7/31/94

Second Review
Period of Invest.:
8/1/94 - 7/31/95

Duty a

Method b

Duty a

Method b

Duty a

Method b

Cut-to-length Plate
IPSCO
Stelco, Inc.
Continuous Colour Cast

1.47
68.70
61.95

HM
HM
All Oth.

1.65
0.19
1.96

HM/CV
HM/CV
HM/CV

0.59d
0.55
1.31d

HM
HM
HM

Corrosion-resistant
Dofasco
Stelco, Inc.
Algoma Steel Inc.
Manitoba Rolling Mills

1.69c
28.27
22.29
22.29

HM
HM
All Oth.
All Oth.

0.92
1.82
0.02

HM/CV
HM/CV
HM/CV

0.00
0.37
WD

HM
HM

In percent. WD indicates the firm withdrew its request for a review.
Indicates the method used to determine fair market value by USDOC. “HM” indicates they used home
market transactions, “HM/CV” indicates USDOC used home market transactions, but also ruled out
some as “below cost” using a constructed value method, and “All oth.” indicates that a dumping margin
was not calculated for the specific firm at the time of the investigation and thus, the “all other” margin (a
trade-weighted margin of the firms for which a dumping margin was calculated) was applied.
c
Initial duty, calculated by USDOC, was 10.89, but ministerial errors led to correction and this lower duty
as of March 1994.
d
Duty that was amended subsequent to final determination due to ministerial errors. In both cases the
correction was very small.
b

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of variables for sample of all 345 products.

Variable

Mean

Standard
Deviation

0.103

Min

Max

1.677

- 2.948

8.977

- 0.220

0.072

- 0.346

- 0.121

Logarithm of (1 + AD duty).

0.015

0.062

0.000

0.523

Logarithm of (1 + tariff)

0.025

0.017

0.000

0.096

Logarithm of Canadian producer costs.

4.671

0.086

4.468

4.984

Logarithm of U.S. domestic substitute price.

4.728

0.075

4.556

4.885

Logarithm of U.S. expenditures on steel.

8.674

0.116

8.451

8.940

Logarithm of U.S. price.
Logarithm of U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar.

Logarithm of Canadian expenditures on steel.
6.679
0.206
6.300
7.112
Notes: The full sample has 17,449 observations. See data appendix for sources and construction of
variables.

Table 3: Descriptive statistics of variables for sample of 98 products with complete time series.

Variable

Mean

Standard
Deviation

0.081

Min

Max

1.920

- 1.902

7.470

- 0.219

0.072

- 0.346

- 0.121

Logarithm of (1 + AD duty).

0.014

0.061

0.000

0.523

Logarithm of (1 + tariff)

0.022

0.016

0.000

0.065

Logarithm of Canadian producer costs.

4.667

0.085

4.468

4.874

Logarithm of U.S. domestic substitute price.

4.727

0.077

4.556

4.885

Logarithm of U.S. expenditures on steel.

8.671

0.115

8.451

8.940

Logarithm of U.S. price.
Logarithm of U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar.

Logarithm of Canadian expenditures on steel.
6.674
0.205
6.300
7.112
Notes: The sample of 98 products with complete time series has 8,232 observations. See data appendix
for sources and construction of variables.

Table 4: Pass-through estimates for U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, 1989-1995, using
weighted ordinary least squares and fixed effects - sample of 345 products.
Full
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.349**
(0.078)

0.407
(0.283)

0.381**
(0.083)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period before final determination

0.245
(0.338)

0.406**
(0.079)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period after final determination

0.860**
(0.316)

0.385**
(0.080)

(1 + AD duty) * Period during
investigation

0.876**
(0.071)

1.053**
(0.085)

(1 + AD duty) * Period after final
determination

1.626**
(0.184)

Regressors
U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar

1 + AD duty

0.818**
(0.051)

1.006**
(0.068)

0.975**
(0.081)

1 + tariff

1.384**
(0.400)

2.337**
(0.900)

1.176**
(0.449)

1.563
(0.803)

1.185*
(0.467)

Canadian producer costs

0.251**
(0.057)

0.294
(0.215)

0.274**
(0.059)

0.376
(0.228)

0.272**
(0.058)

U.S. domestic substitute price

0.628**
(0.101)

0.352
(0.416)

0.595**
(0.099)

0.246
(0.374)

0.583**
(0.103)

- 0.155**
(0.059)

- 0.119
(0.120)

- 0.154*
(0.068)

- 0.060
(0.109)

0.219**
(0.032)

0.151**
(0.058)

0.234**
(0.036)

0.154**
(0.056)

0.239**
(0.036)

0.99

0.82

0.99

0.82

0.99

U.S. expenditures on steel
Canadian expenditures on steel

R-squared
F Test

95.37**

48.77**

62.71**

46.68**

- 0.170*
(0.072)

61.89**

Sample Size
17437
2608
14829
2608
14829
NOTES: The dependent variable is the U.S. price (inclusive of the duties and tariffs) of the Canadian
imported steel product. All variables are in logarithms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, with
** and * denoting statistical significance (two-tailed test) at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Table 5: Pass-through estimates for U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, 1989-1995, using
weighted ordinary least squares and fixed effects - sample of 98 products with complete time series.
Full
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.273**
(0.086)

0.292
(0.289)

0.314**
(0.093)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period before final determination

0.113
(0.357)

0.473**
(0.086)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period after final determination

0.769*
(0.301)

0.348**
(0.088)

(1 + AD duty) * Period during
investigation

0.858**
(0.075)

1.089**
(0.093)

(1 + AD duty) * Period after final
determination

1.583**
(0.111)

Regressors
U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar

1 + AD duty

0.736**
(0.052)

0.954**
(0.060)

0.896**
(0.089)

1 + tariff

0.986*
(0.405)

2.823**
(0.897)

0.518
(0.446)

1.890*
(0.775)

0.663
(0.471)

Canadian producer costs

0.205**
(0.066)

0.058
(0.243)

0.256**
(0.063)

0.168
(0.263)

0.230**
(0.061)

U.S. domestic substitute price

0.433**
(0.117)

0.655
(0.482)

0.351**
(0.112)

0.575
(0.443)

0.318**
(0.116)

U.S. expenditures on steel

- 0.098
(0.067)

- 0.072
(0.131)

- 0.096
(0.078)

- 0.000
(0.120)

Canadian expenditures on steel

0.227**
(0.035)

0.167**
(0.061)

0.238**
(0.041)

0.160**
(0.061)

0.260**
(0.041)

0.99

0.83

0.99

0.83

0.99

R-squared
F Test

85.59**

53.89**

53.79**

70.48**

- 0.162*
(0.082)

53.29**

Sample Size
8232
1008
7224
1008
7224
NOTES: The dependent variable is the U.S. price (inclusive of the duties and tariffs) of the Canadian
imported steel product. All variables are in logarithms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, with
** and * denoting statistical significance (two-tailed test) at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Table 6: Pass-through estimates for U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, 1989-1995, using
weighted generalized least squares and fixed effects - sample of 98 products with complete time series.
Full
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

Affirm
Sample

Nonaffirm
Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.080*
(0.033)

0.109
(0.152)

0.109**
(0.033)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period before final determination

- 0.111
(0.161)

0.183**
(0.039)

U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar
* Period after final determination

0.550**
(0.190)

0.121**
(0.033)

(1 + AD duty) * Period during
investigation

0.797**
(0.058)

1.036**
(0.069)

(1 + AD duty) * Period after final
determination

1.503**
(0.157)

Regressors
U.S. dollar price of Canadian dollar

1 + AD duty

0.872**
(0.027)

0.909**
(0.063)

0.976**
(0.067)

1 + tariff

2.743**
(0.262)

3.055**
(0.778)

2.448**
(0.282)

2.229**
(0.748)

2.668**
(0.284)

Canadian producer costs

0.278**
(0.032)

0.144
(0.103)

0.336**
(0.034)

0.300**
(0.101)

0.320**
(0.035)

U.S. domestic substitute price

0.450**
(0.053)

0.585*
(0.246)

0.378**
(0.054)

0.386
(0.237)

0.357**
(0.053)

U.S. expenditures on steel

0.007
(0.020)

- 0.091
(0.073)

0.034*
(0.020)

- 0.098
(0.079)

0.021
(0.020)

Canadian expenditures on steel

0.050**
(0.010)

0.076
(0.040)

0.049**
(0.010)

0.126**
(0.043)

0.056**
(0.010)

1339650**

3788.58**

1437391
**

4963.40
**

1456510
**

Wald × 2 statistic

Sample Size
8232
1008
7224
1008
7224
NOTES: The dependent variable is the U.S. price (inclusive of the duties and tariffs) of the Canadian
imported steel product. All variables are in logarithms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, with
** and * denoting statistical significance (two-tailed test) at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Table 7: Pass-through estimates for U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, 1989-1995, using
weighted least squares and fixed effects - using moving average lags of exchange rate terms.
Sample of 345
products,
weighted OLS

Sample of 98
products,
weighted OLS

Sample of 98
products,
weighted GLS

Regressors

Affirm
(1)

Nonaff
(2)

Affirm
(3)

Nonaff
(4)

Affirm
(5)

Nonaff
(6)

Moving-average of U.S.
dollar price of Canadian
dollar * Period before final
determination

0.736
(0.691)

0.418**
(0.095)

0.619
(0.776)

0.473**
(0.103)

0.111
(0.209)

0.175**
(0.052)

Moving-average of U.S.
dollar price of Canadian
dollar * Period after final
determination

1.315*
(0.598)

0.418**
(0.097)

1.230
(0.653)

0.372**
(0.108)

0.769**
(0.248)

0.119**
(0.043)

(1 + AD duty) * Period
during investigation

0.932**
(0.105)

1.051**
(0.084)

0.911**
(0.115)

1.082**
(0.091)

0.801**
(0.064)

1.033**
(0.070)

(1 + AD duty) * Period
after final determination

1.596**
(0.198)

1 + tariff

0.048
(1.422)

1.213*
(0.496)

0.258
(1.584)

0.761
(0.512)

1.114
(0.874)

2.734**
(0.292)

Canadian producer costs

0.401*
(0.197)

0.312**
(0.056)

0.181
(0.219)

0.279**
(0.058)

0.268**
(0.102)

0.342**
(0.035)

U.S. domestic substitute
price

0.296
(0.312)

0.595**
(0.104)

0.603
(0.349)

0.323**
(0.116)

0.529*
(0.243)

0.352**
(0.053)

U.S. expenditures on steel.

-0.097
(0.105)

- 0.186**
(0.070)

-0.032
(0.115)

- 0.177*
(0.079)

-0.110
(0.079)

0.018
(0.020)

Canadian expenditures on
steel.

0.245**
(0.086)

0.254**
(0.036)

0.255**
(0.095)

0.273**
(0.040)

0.157**
(0.045)

0.056**
(0.011)

0.82

0.99

0.83

0.99
4933.55
**

1495306
**

R-squared
F Test (Wald × 2 statistic
for GLS)

46.19**

1.543**
(0.110)

61.84**

59.99**

1.467**
(0.166)

53.42**

Sample Size
2608
14829
1008
7224
1008
7224
NOTES: The dependent variable is the U.S. price (inclusive of the duties and tariffs) of the Canadian
imported steel product. All variables are in logarithms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, with
** and * denoting statistical significance (two-tailed test) at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Table 8: Pass-through estimates for U.S.-imported Canadian iron and steel products, 1989-1995, using
weighted generalized least squares and fixed effects - estimates of threat effects.
Sample of 98
products,
weighted GLS
Regressors

Affirm
(1)

Nonaff
(2)

Sample of 98
products,
weighted GLS
Negative
(3)

Non Inv

Sample of 98
products,
weighted GLS
Affirm
(5)

Nonaff
(6)

0.013
(0.102)

0.105**
(0.027)

0.030
(0.076)

0.070**
(0.019)

(4)
U.S. dollar price of
Canadian dollar * Period
before AD determination

- 0.111
(0.161)

0.183**
(0.039)

0.028
(0.088)

0.130**
(0.045)

U.S. dollar price of
Canadian dollar * Period
during investigation
U.S. dollar price of
Canadian dollar * Period
after final determination

0.550**
(0.190)

0.121**
(0.033)

- 0.095
(0.079)

0.075*
(0.037)

0.690**
(0.147)

0.025
(0.018)

(1 + AD duty) * Period
during investigation

0.797**
(0.058)

1.036**
(0.069)

1.292**
(0.074)

1.043**
(0.094)

0.830**
(0.067)

0.961**
(0.069)

(1 + AD duty) * Period
after final determination

1.503**
(0.157)

1 + tariff

2.229*
(1.117)

2.668**
(0.284)

5.019**
(0.496)

2.274*
(0.437)

1.942**
(0.647)

3.256**
(0.268)

Canadian producer costs

0.300**
(0.101)

0.320**
(0.035)

0.531
(0.052)

0.115*
(0.045)

0.274**
(0.104)

0.299**
(0.035)

U.S. domestic substitute
price

0.386
(0.237)

0.357**
(0.053)

0.221
(0.116)

0.559**
(0.062)

0.359
(0.237)

0.360**
(0.053)

U.S. expenditures on steel.

- 0.098
(0.079)

0.021
(0.020)

0.039
(0.039)

0.017
(0.025)

- 0.081
(0.080)

0.005
(0.020)

Canadian expenditures on
steel.

0.126**
(0.010)

0.056**
(0.010)

0.133**
(0.021)

0.033**
(0.013)

0.138
(0.042)

0.053**
(0.011)

Wald × 2 statistic

4963.40
**

1456510
**

6472.52
**

1415701
**

5492.83
**

1589994
**

1.560**
(0.156)

Sample Size
1008
7224
2604
4620
1008
7224
NOTES: The dependent variable is the U.S. price (inclusive of the duties and tariffs) of the Canadian
imported steel product. All variables are in logarithms. For columns (1) through (4), the first row is the
exchange rate coefficient for the period before the final determination, whereas for columns (5) and (6) it

is the coefficient before the preliminary determination. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, with **
and * denoting statistical significance (two-tailed test) at the 1 and 5 percent levels, respectively.
Appendix

This appendix shows that elasticity of the price in the foreign market with respect to the exchange
rate in the benchmark case may be higher or lower than that in case 1 or case 2 even when we assume
that demand is linear in both the home and foreign market and there are constant marginal costs. In
particular, assume demand in the foreign and home markets take the general linear form, xF = aF - bF pF
and xH = aH - bH pH , respectively. Also, assume the cost function for joint production of goods for both
markets displays constant marginal costs and takes the form: c(xF + xH ) = w xF + w xH . We use the
subscripts, B, 1, and 2, to denote prices in the benchmark case, case 1 and case 2, respectively, and a “*”
to denote equilibrium values of variables.
Substituting these functional forms into equation (1) of the paper, we can solve for the firm’s
optimal prices in terms of the parameters and show that the second-order sufficient conditions hold,
provided both demand curves slope downward in price. Then, by the implicit function theorem, the
elasticity of the foreign price with respect to the exchange rate in the benchmark model can be expressed
as:
Mp BF

e

Me p( F
B

'

2e w b F b H
4b F b H p( FB

'

ew
>0
a F/b F % e w

(A1)

Likewise, we substitute the specific functional forms into equation (7) of the paper and solve for the
effect of the exchange rate on the foreign price for case 1 as:
Mp1F

e

Me p( F
1

'

2e b F b H (p( H1 % w)
[4kb F b H & e (b F)2]p( F1

>0

(A2)

where k ' (2% t0AD)/ (1% t0AD) , p( H1 ' [k(2a H % a F % 2w b H) % e w b F ] /[4kb H & eb F ] , and
p( F1 ' [2ka F (b H / b F) % e a H % 3ew b H ] / [4kb H & e b F ] . It easy to show that the expression in (A1)
is larger than the expression in (A2) for the parameter values: aF = aH =3, bF = 1, bH = 2, w=0.5, e=1 and
t0 AD = 0.1. On the other hand, one need to only change bH = 1 (instead of 2) to get the opposite result
that the expression in (A2) is larger than the expression in (A1). Of course, the parameter values in both
cases translate into nonnegative prices, quantities, and profits, and satisfy second-order sufficient
conditions.
To compare the elasticity of the foreign price to the exchange rate in case 2 to the benchmark
case, one can first derive the case 2 elasticity by substituting the specific functional forms and the
equality, p H ' p F /e (1% t0AD) , into equation (1) of the paper. This yields
2

Mp2F e
& (2b H k̂ ) /e & (e w b F) / p( F2
'
>0
Me p( F
F & (2b H k̂2)/ e
&
2b
2

(A3)

AD
F
where k̂ ' 1/ (1% t0 ) and p( 2 ' (a F % k̂a H % ew b F % k̂b H)/ (2b F % 2 k̂b H / e) . By calculation, (A1)

47
is larger than (A3) for parameter values: aF = aH =3, bF = 1, bH = 0.2, w=1, e=1 and t0 AD = 0.5. In
contrast, (A3) is larger for values: aF = aH =3, bF = 1, bH = 0.3, w=1, e=1 and t0 AD = 0.5. Again, the
parameter values translate into nonnegative prices, quantities, and profits for both cases.

Data Appendix
To construct our dependent variable, monthly prices of imported iron and steel products at the 10digit Harmonized Tariff System (HTS) level, we first obtained U.S. Customs data on monthly customs
value and quantity for iron and steel products by 10-digit HTS from 1989 through 1995 with the generous
help of Michael Gallaway at the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC). From these we
constructed unit values by dividing customs value by quantity. To derive our dependent variable, we then
multiplied these unit values by (1 + CUSFTAtar) and (1 + ADduty), where CUSFTAtar denotes the ad
valorem standard tariff rate that was applied to imports from Canada as negotiated by the Canada-U.S.
Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) and ADduty is the ad valorem duty rate assessed on imported
Canadian iron and steel products subject to preliminary and/or final U.S. antidumping (AD) duties from
the steel cases filed in 1992. It should be noted that the CUSFTA, which went into effect on January 1,
1989 - the beginning of our sample, involved gradual yearly reductions in the ad valorem tariff rate applied
to the products in our sample. We obtained the standard ad valorem CUSFTA tariff rates by product
from the NBER Trade Database Disk 1: U.S. Imports, 1972-1994 and from the Harmonized Tariff
System, 1995, published by the USITC. We obtained information on the AD duties applied to Canadian
iron and steel products from various Federal Register notices documenting the findings of the
antidumping cases.
Monthly data on the U.S.-Canada bilateral exchange rate are official Bank of International Settlement
end-of-month data defined in terms of U.S. dollars per Canadian dollar.
In order to proxy for factor prices for the Canadian steel exporting firms , we use monthly industrial
product price indexes published in Statistics Canada, Industry Price Indexes, various issues. The
following table gives the concordance we use to map Canadian industrial product price indexes (base
1986=100) to our HTS codes in iron and steel products.
Canadian industrial product price index

1992 HTS Product Codes

1) D691716
2) D691718
3) D691719
4) D691723
5) D691725
6) D691726
7) D692843
8) D692844
9) D693073
10) D693074
11) D693075

7217
7213, 7214
7215
7208.31 - 7208.33, 7208.42, 7208.43, 7211.21, 7211.22
7210, 7212, 7216, and 7211, except 7211.21 and 7211.22
7219
7208, except those codes covered in 4) above
7209
7202
7201, 7203 - 7206, 7218
7207

Data for U.S. expenditures on iron and steel products was constructed as U.S. manufacturers’
shipments of steel minus exports plus imports. Manufacturers’ shipment data come from
Manufacturers' Shipment, Inventories, and Orders: 1987-1996, published by Bureau of the Census,
U.S. Department of Commerce, June 1997. The series we use is the seasonally unadjusted “Blast
furnaces, steel mills”. Recorded data on U.S. imports and exports of “iron and steel mill products” come
from the Census web site: http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/www/press.html#prior. The Census

web site had these data back to 1991, so data for 1989 and 1990 were taken from official published
Census FT900 reports titled, U.S. Merchandise Trade.
Data for Canadian expenditures on iron and steel products were retrieved from the Statistics
Canada online access to CANSIM data. Analogous to the U.S. expenditure data this variable is defined
as Canadian steel manufacturers’ shipments of steel minus exports plus imports. Monthly Canadian steel
shipments include series D315529 (Primary steel industries) and D315534 (Iron foundries). Monthly
import data include series D398024 (Steel bar, rods, plates and sheets) and D398025 (Other iron and steel
products). Monthly export data include series D399265 (Steel bar, rods, plates and sheets) and D399264
(Other iron and steel products).
Data for the U.S. domestic substitute good price comes from monthly data on producer price indexes
published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (USBLS) and available from their website at:
http://stats.bls.gov/ppihome.htm. The following table gives the concordance that maps appropriate
USBLS producer price indexes to our HTS codes in iron and steel products.
USBLS price index

1992 HTS product codes

1) PCU3312#2
2) PCU3312#3

7201 - 7207, 7218
7208, 7210, 7211.1, 7211.2, 7211.9, 7212,7219.1, 7219.2 ,
7219.3
7216, except parts of 7216.5 and 7216.6
7213, 7214, part of 7216.5
7217
7209, 7211.3, 7211.4, 7219.3
7215, part of 7216.6

3) PCU3312#4
4) PCU3312#422
5) PCU3312#5
6) PCU3312#7
7) PCU3312#8

