                                NBER WORKThTG PAPER SERIES




                          THE FUTURE OF HEALTH ECONOMICS

                                           Victor R. Fuchs




                                         Working Paper 7379
                                 http://www.nber. orglpapers/w7379


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




I am very grateful to Richard Zeckhauser for helpful comments on a preliminary draft and to Deborah K.
Kerwin-Peck for excellent research assistance. Financial support from the Robert Wood Johnson and the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundations is also gratefully acknowledged. Forthcoming in Journal of Health
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

c 1999 by Victor R. Fuchs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Future of Health Economics
Victor R. Fuchs
NBER Working Paper No. 7379
October 1999
JELNo. 110



                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper discusses health economics as a behavioral science and as input into health policy
and health services research. I illustrate the dual role with data on publications and citations of two
leading health economics journals and three leading American health economists. Five important,
relatively new topics in economics are commended to health economists who focus on economics as
a behavioral science. This is followed by suggestions for health economists in their role of providing
input to health policy and health services research. I discuss the strengths and weaknesses of
economics, the role of values, and the potential for interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research.
The fourth section presents reasons why I believe the strong demand for health economics will
continue, and the paper concludes with a sermon addressed primarily to recent entrants to the field.



Victor R. Fuchs
Henry J. Kaiser, Jr. Professor Emeritus
Stanford University
30 Alta Road
Stanford, CA 94305-8006
and NBER
clairenewage3 . stanford. edu
                         The Future of Health Economics'
                                       by Victor R. Fuchs


         The future of health economics depends heavily on how well health economists

cany out two distinct albeit related missions: a) enhancing understanding of economic

behavior, and b) providing valuable input into health policy and health services research.

This paper examines both roles and suggests ways to make them more fruitful in the years

ahead.

         Although the focus is on the /i'iurc, it is useful to note the tremendous expansion

of the field in the past 35 years. In the US the number of Ph.D.s awarded annually in

health economics has increased more than 12-fold since 1965. Health economists now

hold regular faculty appointments in many leading economics departments as well as in

schools of business, public policy, medicine, and public health. They also serve in

important positions in government agencies that make health-related decisions. This

expansion has been worldwide. The iHEA World Conference in Rotterdam in June 1999

attracted over 800 participants from 55 countries; just one-fourth caine from the United

States. The principal reasons for this rapid growth, I believe, have been intellectual

advances, greater availability of data, and, probably most importantly, ever-increasing

health care expenditures (Fuchs, 1996).


         'Adapted from a presentation to the iHEA Second World Congress, Rotterdam, June 9,
1999.
       There has also been a vast expansion of health economics as input into health

policy and health services research. This expansion did not come easily at first. For

example, my appointments to the President's Committee on Mental Retardation and the

US Health Services Research Study Section in the rnid-1960s were greeted with surprise

and suspicion by many physicians, sociologists, psychologists, and other traditional

participants in those domains. By the mid-l980s, however, US health economists were

playing a dominant role in health policy and health services research because they were

particularly well-equipped to help with the difficult choices facing public and private

decision makers. To be sure, pockets of strong resistance to the application of economics

to health problems remain. As I shall note later, some of that resistance is justified.



                            TI: e   Two Hats of Health Econ oniics

       The great British scientist, Lord Kelvin, said "When we cannot measure, our

knowledge is meager and imperfect."2 In order to throw some quantitative light on the

"two hats" of health economics, I have categorized data on citations and publications by

five types ofjournals: 1) economics (excluding health); 2) other disciplines (excluding

economics and health); 3) health economics; 4) health policy and health services

research; and 5) medical.3 Table I shows the relative frequency of citations in the two

       2Upon hearing this the American economic theorist, Jacob Viner, is supposed to have
snorted "Even when we can measure, our knowledge is meager and imperfect."

       3The sources, Journal Citation Reports arid Social SciSearc/i. at LANL, include papers
and citations from 1973 to 1999. There are approximately 1700 journals covered they are
leading health economics journals in l996 by type ofjournal. We see that 42 percent of

the citations in the Journal of Health Economics were to economics journals (excluding

health economics), while the papers in Health Economics drew less heavily on

economics with only 24 percent of citations coming from that field. By contrast, Health

Economics papers drew more heavily on health policy, health services research, and

medical journals. The citations5 to the Journal of Health Economics and Health

Economics (Table 2) also reveal significant differences between the two journals. In

1996 there were no citations to Heal/h Economics in either economics journals or

journals of other disciplines such as statistics, demography, or operations research; by

contrast, more than one—fourth of the citations to the Journal of Health Economics were

in journals with no direct connection to the health field. Medical journals accounted for

more than one-third of the citations to Heal/h Economics, but only 7 percent of the

citations to the Journal of Health Economics.

       Tables 3 and 4 also illustrate the "two hat" nature of health economics by showing

the distributions of papers and citations to papers of three leading American health

economists whom I identified by conducting an informal survey of knowledgeable

experts. The survey asked each respondent to name four or five health economists whose



predominantly but not exclusively English language publications.

       4This year was chosen because the data were available to me in electronic form.

      5The citations appeared in 1996, but could have referred to any publications in JHE and
HE between 1973 and 1996.
work has had the "most impact," with the respondents free to define impact as they

wished. According to the replies, the economists represented in the tables are arguably

tile three leading American health economists of their generation, but given the

informality of the survey and the subjective nature of the responses, I only claim that they

are certainly among the leading scholars in the field. It is also worth noting that I chose

only economists who received their Ph.D.s after 1965 and who have made their

reputations entirely, or almost entirely, in health economics.

         All three scholars have published from 1 0 to 15 percent of their papers in health

economics journals per se. But otherwise, the distributions of their papers vaiy

enormously, with Economist A publishing almost two—thirds in economics and other

nonhealth disciplines and C publishing only one-fourth in those two types of journals.

By contrast, C published two-thirds in health policy, health services research, and

medical journals compared to A's one-fifth in those three types ofjournals. Economist

B's distribution of papers is intermediate between A and C. Not surprisingly, the same

qualitative differences emerge in Table 4 for the distribution of citations6 to the papers of

the three economists, but the differences are not as great as in Table 3. One possible

explanation for the greater differences in Table 3 is that the results include all papers,

whereas the distribution of citations in Table 4 is based on first-authored papers only.

Also, because citations to an author's work tend to be concentrated on a relatively small


         6The citations appeared in 1990-99 covering first-authored papers published from 1973 to
 1999.

                                                -4-
number of papers, it would not be surprising if the pattern of citations differed

substantially from the pattern of publications.

       The comparisons between the journals or among the health economists are not

intended to suggest that one pattern of publication or citation is "better" than another. ln

my view, both "hats" are important. Health economists should strive for and respect high

quality research whether it advances economics in general or contributes more directly to

health policy and medical care.



                         Health Economics As Be/i a i'ioral Science

       As the data in the preceding section suggest, some health economists stay closer to

economics as a behavioral science while others give more emphasis to health policy and

health services research. Moreover, the same scholar may develop a diversified research

portfolio that shifts in emphasis from time to time. For those whose research bent lies in

the direction of economics as behavioral science, I would like to suggest five areas where

I believe health economists can make a significant contribution: endogenous technology

and preferences, social norms, principal-agent problems, behavioral economics, and

measurement and analysis of quality of life.7

       En dogenous tee/i nologv and prekrences. Traditionally, standard economic

models focus on the normative and positive aspects of maximization, taking technology



       7This list is not meant to be exhaustive. These five areas look particularly promising to me.

                                               -5-
and preferences as given. The assumption of exogenous technology and preferences may

be reasonable for a good deal of economic analysis, but there is increasing awareness that

for some problems the assumption is not warranted. Fifty years ago Jacob Schmookler

began an ambitious program of empirical research on the question of technology. He

concluded that "technological change . . is usually not apart from the normal processes

of production and consumption, but a part of them" (Schmookler, 1966, p. 207).

Recently, economists interested in economic growth have been emphasizing endogenous

tecimology, but there has been only a little effort to apply this concept to medical care. It

should not be difficult to show that the character, shape, and pace of medical innovations

are influenced by market forces as well as by exogenous scientific discoveries.

       Systematic research on the (partial) endogeneity of preferences is more recent

(Lindbeck, 1995), but is already evident in the work of numerous economists spanning

the ideological and methodological spectrums (Becker and Mulligan, 1996; Bowles,

1998). Attempts to uncover the endogenous aspects of technology and preferences in

health and medical care could be extremely fruitful; the empirical results generated by

health economists could enrich the mainstream literature.

       Social (including professional) norms. The endogeneity of preferences is

closely related to an exciting and relatively new area of economic research, the role of

social norms in economic behavior. There is increasing awareness that social norms can

affect consumer demand, labor force participation, employer-employee relations, and

many other kinds of economic interactions (see Akerloff and Yellen, 1 990). According to

                                             -6-
Assar Lindbeck, social norms in Sweden in the second half of the twentieth century were

strongly influenced by the economic policies of the welfare state (Lindbeck, 1997;

Lindbeck, Nyberg, Weibull, 1999). Sociologists and anthropologists have long

recognized that social norms affect attitudes toward health and the use of medical care.

Health economists could profitably incorporate this perspective into their analyses.

       Professional norms are an aspect of social norms that are particularly important in

health care. They can play a key role in ameliorating many imperfections in medical

markets, as Arrow noted in 1963, but this theme has not been adequately developed in the

health economics literature. Moreover, many policy analysts mistakenly ignore such

norms in their preoccupation with debating the merits of competition vs. government

regulation. Given the complex and dynamic nature of medical technology and the highly

personal and emotionally charged character of many medical encounters, neither

competition nor regulation, alone or in combination, can provide an adequate basis for the

social control of medical care (Iglehart, 1998). I believe professional norms are a critical

third element.

       Principal-agent problem. Unlike the relatively unexplored role of social norms,

the principal-agent problem occupies a well-established niche in economic theory (Pratt

and Zeckhauser (eds.), 1985; Krebs, 1990) and has been fruitfully applied to problems

ranging from executive compensation to economic development. The physician-patient

relationship appears to epitomize the principal-agent problem and warrants intensive

study by economists (see McGuire, 1999). More recently another form of the principal-
                                             -7-
agent problem has emerged in health care, namely the relation between physicians and

their managed care organizations. Research on physicians as agents of their patients and

their organizations would nicely complement research on professional norms.

      Behavioral economics. The pioneering work in behavioral economics was done

mostly by psychologists, especially Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky (Kahneman and

Tversky, 979; Tversky and Kahnernan, 1 99 1). Economist Richard Thaler also deserves

credit for forcing economists to confront behaviors that are not adequately encompassed

in standard models (Thaler, 1991a; Thaler, 1991b). This literature emphasizes the

importance of relative rather than absolute levels of outcomes, a disproportional aversion

to losses compared with desire for gains, the roles of fairness, reciprocal alti-uism and

revenge, systematic biases in judgiiient, and the importance of framing. An excellent

review of this literature was recently published by Rabin (1998). 1 do not believe that

behavioral economics will replace standard models for most problems, but there are some

areas where new insights could substantially increase understanding. Health and medical

care appear to be prime candidates for benefitting from attention to behavioral economics

because uncertainty is rampant, stakes are often high, and trade-offs are often difficult.

       Qualitj' of ilk: Measurement and analrsis. The fifth and final item on my list

of promising areas for future work is the measurement and analysis of quality of life.

This is not a subject, however, where mainstream economics has a great deal already "on

the shelf." On the contrary. health economists who work on quality of life issues are

probably ahead of their mainstream colleagues (Dolan, 1999). The challenge to health

                                             -8-
economists is to use their results to give substance to the vast but mostly amorphous

literature on utility.



           Economics As Input to Health Po/icp and Health Services Research

       Economics is a necessary input to good health policy (macro or micro), but to be

most effective it usually must be supplemented by insights from other disciplines and by

explicit attention to values.

       Strengths 01 economics. The greatest strengths of economics and economists are

a framework of systematic theory, an array of concepts and questions that are particularly

relevant to the choices facing policy makers, and skill in drawing inferences from

imperfect data. Because health economists often take standard economic theoiy for

granted (like being able to walk or talk), it is easy to underestimate the advantage this

framework offers economics over the other social and behavioral sciences. When

economists encounter a new problem, one with which they have had no previous

experience, they immediately have a way to begin thinking about it long before data

collection begins. Scholars in the other "policy sciences" do not. They typically require

some detailed knowledge of the particular problem before they can begin to think

productively about it. Economists' framework of systematic theoiy facilitates the transfer



       I base this in part on having spent two years as a Fellow at the Center for Advanced
Study in the Behavioral Sciences, where I interacted regularly with some of the nation's leading
psychologists, sociologists, political scientists, and anthropologists.

                                               -9-
of knowledge drawn from other fields of study to the health field.

       Health economists have also inherited froiii economics a set of concepts and

questions that have proven to be particularly relevant to the policy problems that have

emerged in health during the past three decades. Scarcity, substitution, incentives,

marginal analysis, and the like were "just what the doctor ordered"—although in many

cases the "patient" found the medicine bitter and failed to follow the prescribed advice.

       Another strength of economists is skill at drawing inferences from imperfect data.

Indeed, a standard joke among sociologists is that "there are no data so bad that an

economist won't use them." To some extent that's true. Economists take pride in the

fact that they can frequently massage poor quality data so as to draw some reasonable

inferences from them. But such statistical legerdemain has a downside; many economists

neglect the important task of tiying to get better data. Even if the conclusions don't

change, results based on better data will command more respect in policy circles, and that

alone can justify the effort.

       Weaknesses of ecoiwrnics.      Economists have many strengths, but scholars in the

other behavioral sciences are better at some aspects of research. For instance,

psychologists have been successfully carrying out controlled experiments for generations.

In recent years a few economists (see Kage! and Roth, 1995) have been developing

experimental economics and this approach bears watching to see if any new important

findings emerge. Survey research is another approach where health economists could

learn from others, especially sociologists and political scientists who have extensive

                                            -10-
experience at designing and administering surveys, choosing samples, and the like.

Sometimes health economists could profitably incorporate survey research in their efforts

to contribute to health policy.

       Also, many economists do not pay enough attention to institutions. Institutions

matter, and sometimes they matter a great deal, particularly in health care. I'll illustrate

this by considering two alternative methods for financing a national health plan. One

way is with a payroll tax of 7 percent earmarked for health care. The second approach is

a mandatoiy contribution of 7 percent of payroll earmarked for health care. Most

economists would see little difference between those two approaches. Many would say

that they are identical.9 But in the real world they could be veiy different. Why?

Because the first plan would probably be administered by the Ministry of Finance (the

Department of Treasuiy in the US), while the second plan would be administered by the

Ministiy of Social insurance or its equivalent (the Department of I-lealth and Human

Services in the US). Depending on the country, people might have veiy different

judgments about whether their health insurance plan should be administered by the

finance department or by the social insurance department. Overseas, I've met people who

say, "in my country I wouldn't trust the finance ministry as far as I could throw them. I

want that money to go into social insurance." In the United States, many people would

have more confidence in the Treasury than in Health and Human Services. Moreover,



       9And inight belittle non-economists who fail to see the equivalence.

                                               -ii-
even within the same country different individuals and different interest groups would

probably differ in their preferences.

       Institutions matter in part because history matters. Consider, for example, health

insurance in Canada and in the US. It is not possible to understand why these two

countries have such sharply divergent approaches without familiarity with their histories

(Lipset, 1990). Moreover, language matters. Health economists need look no farther

than the phrase "employer-provided health insurance" to see how language can mislead

the public and distort policy discussions. Economists have been 'e1y good at showing

the world the importance of economic incentives, even in health. But we err if we think

that only incentives matter. To be more useful in the arena of health policy and health

services research, economists need to pay more attention to institutions, histoiy, and

language (Ronier, 1996).

       Interdisciplinary and nuilti-disciplinary research. The preceding discussion of

the strengths and weaknesses of economics suggests tlìat health policy and health services

research require inputs from many disciplines—i.e., interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary

research. The former is veiy difficult to execute but the latter is quite feasible, and often

veiy necessary. To understand why interdisciplinary research is so difficult, we must ask

what it is that distinguishes one discipline from another. Most important, in my view, are

the concepts that the discipline uses. To appreciate this point, I suggest that you try the

following experiment. Ask a few leading economists of your acquaintance to write down

the 10 to 20 most important concepts in economics. Then ask a few leading

                                             -12-
psychologists, sociologists, and political scientists to do the same thing. You will find

that there is almost no overlap in the lists of concepts. The concepts that we think are

important do not appear on their lists, and vice-versa. This discordance makes true

interdisciplinary research—a blending and fusion of concepts—unlikely.

       The next most distinguishing feature of a discipline is the queslions it seeks to

answer. Again, ask representatives from the different behavioral sciences "What are the

most important, the most central, the most enduring questions in your field?" and wide

differences in the answers will be apparent across the disciplines. There may be a little

more overlap of questions than concepts, but basically tlìe different disciplines have

different interests. The philosopher Susan Haack (1998, p. 59) points out that disciplines

are like maps; different maps answer different questions. Suppose you are planning a trip

to Northern California. You would almost surely want a map that showed the roads and

highways, cities and towns, the locations of airports, and so on. But you might also be

interested in hiking and camping and fishing, so you would also want another map—a

topographical map which shows altitudes, the location of lakes, rivers, and campgrounds.

It is also possible that you would want to consult a meteorological map to learn about

expected temperatures and precipitation, and one can imagine still other maps (e.g., one

showing places of historical and cultural interest). One map is no "better" than another;

they simply serve differeiit purposes. The same is true of disciplines. They attempt to

answer different questions, all of which may be relevant to a policy decision.

       In addition to differences in concepts and questions, the disciplines also differ in

                                            -13-
their methods. To oversimplify, economists are good at building models, at

econometrics, and at teasing inferences from "natural experiments." Psychologists are

masters of the controlled experiment, while sociologists and political scientists have

expertise in survey research. Interdisciplinaty research in the behavioral sciences thus far

has largely taken the form of borrowing methods. One of my colleagues in political

science, for example, tells his graduate students, "We have some good questions, but if

you want to learn how to answer them, go take the econometrics sequence." Many

sociologists have begun to import econometric methods. Some economists have made

considerable investments in survey research and others have been conducting controlled

experiments. The exchange of methods is no doubt useful, but so long as the disciplines

employ distinct concepts and address different questions, true interdisciplinary research

will remain elusive.

       Multidisciplinary research, on the other hand, is vety feasible and often necessary.

It involves policy analysts drawing on the results of studies from several disciplines and

integrating these results. This approach will usually provide more understanding and

contribute to better decisions than would be possible through reliance on a single

discipline.

       The role of values. Finally, I conic to the role of values, and offer two cautionary

comments. First, when doing research, be aware of your values and guard against

allowing them to bias your research. Values can shape framing of the problem, choice of

data, and judgment concerning the reliability of the results. A good scholar will try as

                                            -14-
much as possible to keep his or her values from influencing the research. Second, when

making policy recommendations, be as explicit as possible about the respective roles of

your analysis and your values in those recommendations. Economists are naive if they

expect that good economic research with strong results will translate immediately into

policy. Policy depends on analysis and on values; sensitivity to that interaction will make

economists more useful contributors to health policy.



                  Wi/I the Bull Market in Health Economics Continue?

       Health economics has enjoyed several decades of remarkable growth, but will this

bull market continue? Several trends suggest to me that it ui/I, at least for the next

decade or two.

       Factors fueling the demand ft'r lieu/ti: economics.      First, there will be a growing

gap between what medicine can do and what it is economically ftasihle to do. Because

technological change is, in part, efl(logeflOuS, the gap is not likely to widen indefinitely,

but there will be a lag between the constraints imposed by financial limits and their effect

on the flow of medical advances. The outpouring of expensive new drugs and procedures

that are already in the R&D pipeline will make the necessity for choice starker and more

urgent. Decision makers at all levels will inevitably look to economics, the discipline that

emphasizes trade-offs and provides a rigorous way of thinking about them.

       Second, aging populations will put more pressure on health care resources. In the

United States, people over 65 consume three to four times as much medical care per

                                             -15-
capita as people under 65, and those 85 and over consume three times as much as those

65 to 69. Given the trends in medical technology and demography, the problem of

financing health care for the elderly will soon equal and then surpass the problem of

financing retirement (Fuchs, forthcoming).

      Third, the recent large increase in resources devoted to technology assessment,

outcomes research, and evidence-based medicine centers will create a much richer

database. These better data will make economic analyses more reliable and more widely

accepted.

       Finally, I believe that the current anti—egalitarian trends evident in most modern

societies will also increase the demand for health economics. Although the dominant

trend in what is loosely called the "West" over the last several hundred years has been

egalitarian, I believe that the last 20 years have been marked by a halt and even a reversal

of the trend toward greater economic equality. In his classic textbook, Economics (1948),

Paul Sarnuelson noted that eveiy society faces three basic economic questions: What?

How? and For Whom? In a completely egalitarian health care system, the "What?" and

"How?" questions require economic analysis, but the "For Whom?" question is irrelevant.

If the health care system is fbi egalitarian, however, distributive questions are also

important for both analysis and policy. Economics cannot offer definitive solutions to

questions of distribution, but economists can help analyze the causes and the

consequences of changes in distribution.

       Reasons for anti-egalitarian trend. Anti-egal itari an policies are fueled by

                                             -16-
several forces that apply to the economy as a whole: the growth of international business

competition, an increasing awareness of some negative consequences of the welfare state,

the collapse of socialist economies in Eastern Europe, and the absence of major wars.

Several other reasons are specific to health care. First, there is a growing awareness that

socioeconomic differentials in health status are not primarily related to access to medical

care. One of the major arguments advanced in support of national health insurance plans

was that they would eliminate or at least substantially reduce the strong association

between socioeconomic status and health. Many decades of experience, however, have

demonstrated tile inability of egalitarian plans to achieve these objectives (Fuchs. 1991).

It is still possible to argue in favor of equal access to health care on other grounds. but it

is not possible to contend that equal access to health care equalizes health outcomes.

       Second, many of the medical innovations that have appeared in recent years are

addressed primarily to improving the qualify of life, not to exiending life.10 Tile original

rationale for equal access to medical care was that eveiyone ought to have an equal

chance to live, regardless of economic position. But as the emphasis shifts from

extending life to improving its quality, it is questionable whether medical care will get the

egalitarian priority that it now gets under the old rationale of extending life. If society

wants to improve tile quality of life for tue poor, there are many other areas requiring

attention, including educati on, housing, transportation, and public safety.



       '°Exarnples include drugs to treat baldness and erectile dysfunction.

                                               -17-
       The third reason is a growing awareness of the probahi/i.iic nature of medical

services. Whether one considers preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, or rehabilitative

interventions, there is rarely certainty regarding outcomes. In an influential pioneering

book, Archie Cochrane (1972), wrote, "All medical care that's effective should be free to

all." No country can come close to following that precept today. There are

literally thousands of medical interventions that have soiie effectiveness; i.e.. that have

some probability of doing some good for some patients. The probability ranges from

veiy low to veiy high, depending on the intervention and the patient. In such a world,

questions of access become much more complicated for analysis and policy. Most people

will find the case for equal access to interventions with a high probability of success more

compelling than for interventions with low probability. To be sure, probability of success

is not the only relevant criterion; the magnitude of the effect of a successful intervention

on well-being is also important. In addition, decision makers need to consider the

possibility of heterogeneity in patient preferences with regard to extension of life,

restoration of function, relief of symptoms, and side effects of the intervention. Thus,

questions about where to draw the line, and whether the same line should or could apply

to all, will challenge analysts and policy makers for the foreseeable future.



                                   Con clii ding Homilies

       I conclude this essay on the future of health economics by offering five homilies

distilled from almost a half century of teaching and research.

                                             -18-
       I) Remember your roots. Most of the readers of this essay were economists
before they were health economists. Much of your intellectual strength and ability to do

good work in the health field comes from your training in economics. If you maintain

those ties and keep up with the major advances in economics, you will be able to sustain

your effectiveness over a long career. If you simply live off your accumulated capital,

you will eventually run diy. Moreover, at least some health economists should tiy to

nourish their economic roots by feeding back their theoretical or empirical results into the

economics mainstream.

       2) Learn a great deal about health care technology and institutions. A solid
working knowledge of economics is necessaly, but rarely sufficient to be an effective

health economist. When I asked a representative sample of leading American theorists to

answer some basic questions regarding health economics, their replies, on average, were

only slightly better than could be obtained by tossing a coin (Fuchs, l996).1 Any

economist who is serious about health economics must learn a great deal about health

care technology and institutions.

       3) Work hard and, more importantly, work smart. "Keep up with economics."
"Learn more about health." How can one person do all that and still complete some

research? Working hard is an obvious, but probably superfluous, answer. It is difficult to

get through graduate school without learning how to work hard. Working smart is


       11Practicing physicians (who presumably have little or no training in economics) did
equally poorly on the same questions.

                                               -'9-
different. In my experience you don't learn how to work smart in graduate school.

Almost the reverse is true. You're expected to learn eveiything, to master a huge array of

theoretical results and techniques, with little regard for their validity or relevance.'2

\Vorking smart is just the opposite. It requires the ability to discriminate, to choose what

to learn, from a torrent of new work. Economic theoiy is veiy important, but much new

work at any given time is faddish and self-referential, the intellectual equivalent of

flexing one's muscles on the beach.'3 A similar stoly can be told about medical research.

Tens of thousands of medical articles are published every year; many of them contradict

some previously published article. Working smart means learning how to identify what is

important and relevant. No health economist can stay on top of two entire literatures.

Cultivate the ability to be selective—selective in the seminars and conferences you

attend, selective in the review articles that you read, selective in the experts you consult.

The goal is to capture most of what is valuable and relevant in new mainstream

economics and in medicine.

       4) Don 't try to be a sc/whir and a p/aver at the same time. A player is someone

who is actively participating in a partisan, political process. A scholar is tmying to

enhance understanding, without fear or favor. Both roles are important for society, and




        '2A leading economics professor told me that he felt obliged to teach graduate students a
currently "hot" theory even if he believed it was wrong because the students would be expected to
know the theory when they entered the job market.

        13See Blinder (1999) for a similar view.

                                                   -20-
the same person can fill both at different times,4 but it is not possible to be an effective

player and a first-rate scholar simultaneously. Successful players and scholars have some

characteristics in common,'5 but the two roles also require different skills and virtues.

The most important quality for a player is Ioyalty—loyalty to the team, and especially to

the captain of the team. An economist-player who cannot put aside reservations,

qualifications, and questions about the team's policy will soon be marginalized as a

player. Another important attribute is speed. The economist-player who can devise a

new policy initiative oveiiight or who can identify the weaknesses in the other side's

proposals even as they are being made will often cany the day. Finally, a player must be

tough, must have sharp elbows. Toughness is needed to win intra-team squabbles and to

withstand the slings and arrows of the other side. Loyalty, speed, and toughness are not

necessarily incompatible with the role of a scholar, but great scholarship usually requires

a different set of virtues.

        5) Cultivate the scholarly virtues.        Excellence in research requires many

virtues, but tiiee are preeminent. The first is honesty, in two senses. A scholar must be

 self-consciously honest in carrying out research. This means confronting the limitations

 and qualifications of one's own data amid methods. In addition, a scholar must strive for

 honesty in reporting the results of research. A second virtue is courage, again in two


         '4Many good scholars have gone on to become effective players. It is rare for someone to
 be a player for an extended period and then produce high quality scholarship.

        '5E.g., intelligence, creativity, stamina, and the ability to communicate effectively.

                                                 -21-
senses. Scholars should not be timid about the choice of problems or the method(s) of

attack. "Faint heart never won fair lady"—or produced great research. Once the research

is complete, courage is required to present and defend the results, especially when they

challenge current opinion. The third scholarly virtue is patience, and again it is needed in

two senses. A few great scientific advances come quickly, but most are the result of

years and often decades of intense and persistent work. Beware the temptation to become

a member of the "paper-of-the-month" club. If you have chosen a worthy problem,

devote whatever time is required to get it right, be it a semester or a decade. And finally,

have patience in waiting for acceptance of your results. The economics literature is

studded with examples of major articles that were rejected when first submitted

(Shepherd and Gans, 1994). Even when a significant result is published, the world often

will not immediately snap to attention and salute you. But if your work is valid and

relevant, and if you are patient, people will eventually take notice and your efforts will

bear fruit.

          In my experience, health economics can be intellectually stimulating, socially

useful, and personally rewarding. It has been a privilege and a pleasure to work in the

field. To this possibly biased observer, the future of health economics looks extremely

bright.




                                              -   7_
References
Akerloff, G. A., Yellen, J. L., 1990. The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment.
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 255-283.

Anow, K., 1963. Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care American
      Economic Review 53, 94 1-973.

Becker, G. S., Mulligan, C. B., 1997. The endogenous determination of time preference.
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 729-758.

Blinder, A. S., 1999. Economics becomes a science—or does it? Princeton University
       mi meo.

Bowles, S., 1998. Endogenous preferences: The cultural consequences of markets and
     other economic institutions. Journal of Economic Literature 36, 75-111.

Cochrane, A. L., 1972. Effectiveness and Efficiency: Random Reflections on Health
      Services. London, Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust.

Dolan, P., forthcoming. The measurement of health-related quality of life for use in
      resource allocation decisions in health care. In: Newhouse, J. P., Culyer, A. J.
       (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics. North Holland, Amsterdam.

Fuchs, V., 1991. National health insurance revisited. Health Affairs [Winter], 7-17.

Fuchs, V., 1996. Economics, values, and health care reform. The American Economic
      Review 86, 1-24.

Fuchs, V., forthcoming. Provide, provide: The economics of aging. In: Saving, T. R.,
      Rattenmaier, A. (Eds.), Medicare Reform: Issues and Answers. Chicago,
      University of Chicago Press.

Haack, S., 1998. Between the Scylla of scientism and the Chaiybdis of apriorism. In:
      Hahn, L. (Ed.), The Philosophy of Sir Peter Strawson (Libraty of Living
      Philosophers). Open Court, LaSalle, Illinois.


                                           -23-
Iglehart, J. K., 1998. Physicians as agents of social control: The thoughts of Victor
       Fuchs. Health Affairs 17, 90-96.

Kagel, J. H., Roth, A. E. (Eds.), 1995. The Handbook of Experimental Economics.
      Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
     Econometrica 47, 263-29 1.

Krebs, D., 1990. A Course in Economic Theoiy (Ch. 16). Princeton University Press,
       Princeton, New Jersey.

Lindbeck, A., 1995. Welfare state disincentives with endogenous habits and norms.
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics 47, 477-494.

Lindbeck, A., 1997. The Swedish experiment. Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1273-
       Ii
Lindbeck, A., Nyberg, S., Weibull, J. W., 1999. Social norms and economic incentives in
      the welfare state. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1-35.

Lipset, S. M., 1990. Continental Divide. Routledge, New York.

McGuire, T. G., 1999. Physician agency. In: Newhouse, J. P., Culyer, A. J. (Eds.),
     Handbook of Health Economics. North Holland, Amsterdam.

Pratt, J. W., Zeckhauser, R. J. (Eds.), 1985. Principals and Agents. Harvard Business
        School Press, Boston.

Rabin, M., 1998. Psychology and economics. Journal of Economic Literature 36, 11-46.

Rorner, P. M., 1996. Preferences, promises, and the politics of entitlement. In: Fuchs,
      V. R. (Ed.), Individual and Social Responsibility: Child Care, Education, Medical
      Care, and Long-Term Care in America. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Samuelson, P., 1948. Economics. McGraw-Hill, New York.


                                            -24-
Schmookler, J., 1966. Invention and Economic Growth. Harvard University Press,
     Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Shepherd, G., Gans, J. S., 1994. 1-low are the mighty fallen: Rejected classic articles by
      leading economists. Journal of Economic Literature 8, 165-179 (Winter).

Thaler, R. H., 1991a. The Winner's Curse. Free Press, New York.

Thaler, R. H., 199 lb. Quasi-Rational Economics. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1991. Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-
      dependent model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1039-106 1.




                                            -25-
                        Table 1

 Distribution of Citations IN
Journal of Health Economics
  and Health Economics in
  1996, by Type of Journal
                            Percent of citations'
Type of journal                     JTIE           HE

Economics (except health)             42              24
Other disciplines
(not economics or health)             16              11
Health economics                      16               16
Health policy and
health services research               16              23
Medical                               10               26
                                      100             100

Source: Journal Citation Reports, 1996, Social Science ed.
Journas with only one citation in JHE or HE were not included in
the distributions.


                             -26-
                          Table 2

 Distribution of Citations TO
Journal of Health Economics
  and Health Economics in
  1996, by Type of Journal
                Percent of citationsa
Type of journal      JHE         HE
Economics (except health)                20                0
Other disciplines
(not economics or health)                  7               0
Health economics                         30              31
Health policy and
health services research                 37              34
Medical                                     7            36
                                        100'           100
Source: Journal Citation Reports, 1996, Social Science ed.
Journals with only one citation to JHE or HE were not included in
the distributions.
hTotals may not equal 100 because of rounding.



                                -27-
                        Table 3
Distribution of Papers" of Three
   Leading American Health
Economists" by Type of Journal
                                Economist (percent of papers)

Type of journal                     A        B          C

Economics (except health)           51       30          18
Other disciplines
(not economics oi health)           13         4          6
Health economics                    15       14          10
Health policy and
health services research            13       41          36
Medical                                 8     10         30
                                    100 100            100
Source: Social SciSearch® at L14NL, version 1.0 (Stanford
         University Libraries).
 'Published after 1972
 bphD received after 1965.
 Note: Totals may not always equal 100 because of rounding.



                             -28-
                            Table 4
                                                               I)
Distribution of Citations to Paper?'
of Three Leading American Health
 Economist? by Type of Journal in
      Which Citation Appeared
                               Economist (percent of papers)

Type of journal                       A          B           C
Economics (except health)             30          27         16
Other disciplines
(not economics or health)             23          21           9
Health economics                      16          12          16
Health policy and
health services research              14          29          41
Medical                                18          12         18
                                      100 100 100
Source: Social SciSearch® at LI4 'IL, version 1.0 (Stanford
University Libraries).
 'First-authored papers only.
 bpubljshed after 1972.
 cph.D. received after 1965.  Note: Totals may not always
                                      equal 100 because of rounding.



                               -29-
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7324            Mark McClellan                     Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit and Not-for-   8/99
                Douglas Staiger                    Profit Hospitals

7325            David Ikenberry                    Stock Repurchases in Canada: Performance and Strategic 8/99
                Josef Lakonishok                   Trading
                Theo Vermaelen

7326            Thomas C. Kinnaman                 The Economics of Residential Solid Waste Management 8/99
                Don Fullerton

7327             Mark McClellan                    The Quality of Health Care Providers                    8/99
                 Douglas Staiger

7328             John DiNardo                      The Phillips Curve is Back? Using Panel Data to         8/99
                 Mark P. Moore                     Analyze the Relationship Between Unemployment and
                                                   Inflation in an Open Economy

7329             Austan Goolsbee                   Evidence on Learning and Network Externalities in the 9/99
                 Peter J. Klenow                   Diffusion of Home Computers

7330             Young-Hye Cho                     Time-Varying Betas and Asymmetric Effect of News:       9/99
                 Robert F. Engle                   Empirical Analysis of Blue Chip Stocks

7331             Young-Rye Cho                     Modeling the Impacts of Market Activity on Bid-Ask      9/99
                 Robert F. Engle                   Spreads in the Option Market

7332             Daniel S. Hamermesh               The Changing Distribution of Job Satisfaction           9/99

7333             James L. Heckman                  Causal Parameters and Policy Analysis in Economics:        9/99
                                                   A Twentieth Century Retrospective

7334             Rajesh K. Aggarwal                Performance Incentives Within Firms: The Effect of         9/99
                 Andrew A. Samwick                 Managerial Responsibility

7335             Rajesh K. Aggarwal                Empire-Builders and Shirkers: Investment, Firm             9/99
                 Andrew A. Samwick                 Performance, and Managerial Incentives

7336             Richard Portes                    The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows              9/99
                 Hélène Rey

7337             Kathryn M. Dominguez              The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention 9/99
7338             Jeffrey A. Frankel                No Single Currency Regime is Right for all Countries   9/99
                                                   or at All Times



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                             www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7339            Axe! BOrsch-Supan                  Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain 9/99
                                                   Disability Option

7340            Hylke Vandenbussche                Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy     9/99
                Jozef Konings
                Linda Springael

7341            Robert F. Engle                    CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile          9/99
                Simone Manganelli                  Regression

7342            David C. King                      Congressional Vote Options                             9/99
                Richard J. Zeckhauser

7343            Christina Paxson                   Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment                  9/99
                Jane Waldfogel

7344            Michael Hout                       Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race           9/99
                Harvey S. Rosen

7345             Jean 0. Lanjouw                   The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with            9/99
                 Mark Schankerman                  Multiple Indicators

7346             Geert Bekaert                     Stock and Bond Pricing in an Affine Economy                9/99
                 Steven R. Grenadier

7347             Thomas N. Hubbard                 How Wide Is the Scope of Hold—Up-Based Theories?       9/99
                                                   Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking
7348             Jonathan Gruber                   The Wealth of the Unemployed: Adequacy and                 9/99
                                                   Implications for Unemployment Insurance

7349             Edward P. Lazear                  Educational Production                                 9/99

7350             Tamim Bayoumi                     The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in              9/99
                                                   Japanese Growth in the 1990s

7351             Taizo Motonishi                   Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the          9/99
                 Hiroshi Yoshikawa                 1990's: Financial or Real?

7352             Daron Acemoglu                    Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance             9/99
                 Robert Shimer

7353             Jeff Grogger                      Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits                         9/99
                 Charles Michalopoulos



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7354            Roberto Rigobon                    On the Measurement of the International Propagation      9/99
                                                   of Shocks
7355            Ricardo J. Caballero               The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-             9/99
                Mohamad L. Hammour                 Liquidationist View

7356            Alec Ian Gershberg                 Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special   9/99
                Michael Grossman                   Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                Fred Goldman                       exempt Hospital Bonds

7357             Robert E. Lipsey                  Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm         9/99
                                                   Employment

7358             Vernon Henderson                  Marshall's Economies                                     9/99

7359             lain Cockburn                     The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:          9/99
                 Rebecca Henderson                 Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                 Scott Stern

7360             Douglas Holtz-Eakin               Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business           9/99
                 John W. Phillips
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7361             Bong-Chan Kho                     Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                       9/99
                 René M. Stulz

7362             Jagadeesh Gokhale                 Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans:          9/99
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff             How Bad Can It Get?

7363             Bruce D. Meyer                    Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the             9/99
                 Dan T. Rosenbaum                  Labor Supply of Single Mothers

7364             Dani Rodrik                       Short-Term Capital Flows                                   9/99
                 Andrés Velasco

7365             Michael D. Bordo                  The Future of EMU: What Does the History of                9/99
                 Lars Jonung                       Monetary Unions Tell Us?

7366             Emmanuel Saez                     Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                         9/99

7367             Emmanuel Saez                     The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel        9/99
                                                   Study of 'Bracket Creep'
7368             Alan L. Gustinan                  What People Don't Know About Their Pensions                9/99
                 Thomas L. Steinmeier              and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                   From The Health and Retirement Study


                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number           Author(s)                           Title

7369             Wolfgang Keller                     Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct          9/99
                 Arik Levinson                       Investment Inflows to U.S. States

7370             Michael Baker                       Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian           9/99
                 Gary Solon                          Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                     Tax Records

7371             Michael Baker                       Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                 Nicole M. Fortin                    1987-1988

7372             B. Douglas Bernheim                 The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the         10/99
                 Lorenzo Forni                       Health and Retirement Survey
                 Jagadeesh Gokhale
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373             Paul A. David                       Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
                 Bronvyn H. Hall                     R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                 Andrew A. Toole

7374             Peter Cappelli                      Do "High Performance" Work Practices Improve             10/99
                 David Neumark                       Established-Level Outcomes?

7375             Charles I. Jones                    Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?                  10/99
                                                     Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

7376             Harrison Hong                       Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage                10/99
                 Jeremy C. Stein                     and Market Crashes

7377             George Chacko                       Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with             10/99
                 Luis M. Viceira                     Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets

7378             Bruce A. Blonigen                   Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of         10/99
                 Stephen E. Haynes                   Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

7379             Victor R. Fuchs                     The Future of Health Economics                            10/99



Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambndge, MA
02138-5398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax                  (617-868-2742), or email
(ordersãnber.org).

                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                                www. nber. org
                             Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
