                                                                                                  1




                        New Trends in Pension Benefit
                         and Retirement Provisions

                                      Olivia S. Mitchell
                              with the assistance of Erica L. Dykes


       The last twenty years has brought about a substantial transformation in
the US private pension environment. Employee interest in pension programs has
grown as a result of the aging of the baby boom, as workers began to demand
retirement savings, and as the stock market has made retirement saving an
appealing (and a tax-preferred) way to invest in equities. In addition, rising life
expectancies and longer worklives made the pension promise more valuable to
groups that had traditionally lacked pensions, especially women.1 Employers,
too, were willing and even eager to supply new forms of pensions, responding to
the need to downsize their workforces, to changes in the industrial and
occupational mix of employment, and to an interest in using pensions to induce
particular worker behaviors.2 The regulatory environment also changed in the
last two decades, as tax reform has imposed stricter limits on funding levels,
contribution amounts, and benefit payouts (McGill et al, 1996). In sum, the last
two decades proved conducive to pension growth and development along some
dimensions, but also turned out to be a time of substantial challenge to both
those wanting and supplying pensions in America (Sass, 1997).
       In the present report, we highlight and evaluate some of the most
important changes observed in US private sector pension plan retirement
formulas and benefit provisions during the two decades of the 1980s and the
1990s. To learn more about trends in pension provisions and formulas over time,
we have gathered, tabulated, and interpreted information provided in a series of
reports published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) over the last two

1For a discussion of the role of pensions in women’s retirement income see Levine, Mitchell and
Phillips (1999).
2For a discussion of these and other effects see the studies reviewed in Gustman et al (1994,
1995), Ippolito (1986), and Mitchell (forthcoming).
                                                                                               2




decades on pensions offered by medium and large firms. Over the period between
the early 1980’s and the mid-1990’s, the BLS tabulated and published individual-
year summaries of information from its Employee Benefits Survey (EBS). In the
present study we have collected these data as well as additional unpublished
tabulations for 1997 generously supplied by the BLS.3 In doing so we update our
previous study (Mitchell, 1992) which explored changes in pension provisions
through 1988. In the present report, where possible, we extend the time series by
relying on published tables to 1995 along with unpublished reports for 1997.
There are no more recent data publicly available for this purpose.
          The plan of the paper is as follows. We begin with a discussion of
retirement plan features, particularly focusing on benefit formulas. Next, we
analyze trends in retirement provisions and benefit formulas found in defined
benefit and defined contribution plans over time. We conclude with a summary
of findings.


Overview of Pension Type and Pension Features4
          In the US corporate or private sector pensions may be classified onto two
general types: defined contribution and defined benefit plans.5 In the defined
contribution (DC) pension, a covered employee often has a choice as to whether
to participate in the plan, and if so, how much to contribute. In addition, the
plan sponsor often adds to the pension fund on behalf of participating employees
based on some match of employee contributions. Contributed funds are then
invested in the capital market; a participant often has choice over investment
options into which his own – and sometimes his employer’s – funds are deposited.


3   We thank Ann Foster of the BLS for assistance obtaining these data.
4   This discussion builds on Mitchell (1992).
5Cash balance plans are sometimes seen as a third type of plan, in that they seem to combine
elements of both DB and DC pensions. However they are, strictly speaking, defined benefit plans
because the plan sponsor guarantees the promised rate of return on participant assets (Rappaport
et al., 1998). In any event, thus far the BLS has not generated special tabulations for cash
balance or hybrid plans.
                                                                                     3




Usually, the contributions and earnings on the investments must be preserved
for retirement, but sometimes an active worker may access his funds for hardship
or some other purpose. On leaving the firm, the departing worker may receive
his accrual in the form of a lump sum (thought receipt of the lump sum may
trigger a tax penalty unless he is at least age 59.5); alternatively the departing
worker may take his pension benefits in the form of a periodic amount or buy a
life annuity. The value of the plan accrual at any given date depends on amounts
contributed and investment returns earned on these, over the entire worklife. By
contrast, a worker with a defined benefit (DB) plan receives a promise of an
eventual pension benefit that is determined by a pre-specified formula. Here the
replacement rate (defined benefit as a percent of pre-retirement pay) is typically
a function of the covered worker’s age, pay, and/or service levels. In most cases
the defined benefit is payable as a life annuity though in some cases the benefit
may be accessed as a lump sum.
      As we shall show below, both pension plan types embody a range of
eligibility, contribution, vesting, benefit, withdrawal, and retirement provisions
and formulas. In addition, there are myriad special provisions regarding post-
retirement benefit increases, provisions for special payouts (e.g. disability or
lump sum cashouts), and other features. It is our goal in this investigation to
determine how, if at all, pension plans of medium and large firms in the private
sector have changed over the last two decades, to determine whether any salient
trends deserve attention.
      Understanding how pension provisions and benefit entitlements have
changed over the last two decades is important for several reasons. It is well
known that many pension provisions powerfully affect the nature of the pension
promise, and in turn they influence worker and firm behavior (c.f., Gustman and
Mitchell 1992; Gustman et al 1994 and 1995). For instance, a pension-covered
employee allowed to take a loan or a lump-sum cashout from his plan after a
short vesting period gains access to his pension saving early the worklife, a
practice that some worry will fail to protect him in old age. The employee
                                                                                      4




prohibited from taking a loan or cashing out the pension accrual lacks access to
the accrued pension, and he may end up with a better-funded retirement period
than his counterpart. These and other structural features of pensions also
influence worker turnover patterns. That is, vesting and benefit formulas can
deter mobility for younger employees, and they can also induce workers to
remain on the job longer if the plan offers substantial rewards for continued work
(c.f., Fields and Mitchell 1984). Other times, as in the case of defined contribution
pensions, retirement benefits may depend on amounts contributed and how the
worker chose to invest his pension assets. It has been shown that investment
decisions depend to a large degree on how successful employers are in
communicating benefit plan attributes to employees (Mitchell and Schieber,
1998).
         Before turning to a more detailed discussion of pension trends in the EBS,
it is useful to briefly review key pension terminology and the importance of
specific pension provisions.
Plan Participation and Vesting. Workers covered by a private pension are often
not permitted to join their pension plan immediately; rather many plans limit
participation to workers who remain at the firm more than one year, and
sometimes also limit coverage to those over the age of 21. The Employee
Retirement Income Security Act [ERISA] of 1974, as amended, mandated that
plan participation requirements could not be more stringent that this, but plans
may be more generous. What is meant by ‘plan participation’ matters, of course,
since some pensions begin to count years of service for benefit purposes from the
date that the worker becomes a plan participant. ‘Vesting’ in a pension plan is
important since it refers to the juncture at which the worker gains a legal claim
to an eventual benefit from a pension plan in which he is a participant. Many
firms do not offer new workers an immediate right to a benefit; rather, the firm
will specify that workers gain this legal claim only when they meet employment
criteria specified in the plan’s vesting formula. This is often expressed in terms
of minimum age and/or years of service required to gain a legal claim over a
                                                                                        5




retirement benefit. In 1974, ERISA spelled out a series of legally permissible
vesting schedules including the very common “10-year cliff vesting rule”, which
required a worker to be vested after 10 years of service. Vesting standards were
subsequently eased under the Tax-Reform Act of 1986, with most plans now
using a “5-year rule” for cliff vesting.
Retirement Eligibility Requirements. Most pension plans require that a covered
employee must complete a requisite number of years of service and/or attain a
specified age, in order to receive a pension annuity payment. Thus, for instance,
a worker may be eligible for early retirement at age 55 with 10 years of service,
while normal retirement might be defined as leaving at age 65 with at least 10
years of service.
       Such plan-based age and service requirements are common in both DB and
DC plans, and they are important because these establish conditions under which
the worker can claim plan benefits. However eligibility requirements play a
crucial role in DB plans, since age and service directly affect the level of benefits
a retiree may receive. This is because defined benefit plans often adapt
payments based on the retiree’s age and/or service at the worker’s departure
date. For instance, an early retiree might receive a lower annual benefit amount
that the one payable at the plan’s normal retirement age. The higher benefit for
normal retirement is reflective of the fact that at a later age, a worker has more
years of service, possibly a higher pay lever, and fewer years of life remaining
over which to draw a benefit. In addition, defined benefit plans frequently
structure their benefit formulas so as to subsidize early retirement (c.f., Fields
and Mitchell 1984). Hence retirement requirements are important insofar as
they establish when a worker may begin to receive subsidized early payouts.
       For many years, corporate sponsors in the US were permitted to use their
pension formulas to induce older workers to leave their jobs, mainly by limiting
pension accruals after a specific age (Luzadis and Mitchell 1998). But in an effort
to reduce the extent of age discrimination, the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of
1986 required private-sector pensions to continue benefit accruals after normal
                                                                                                  6




retirement, a ruling that took effect for most private sector pensions in 1988.
(Collectively bargained plans were permitted somewhat longer to come into
compliance.) Hence retirement eligibility rules for private sector pension plans
have become more liberal over time, somewhat increasing benefit incentives to
remain employed at older ages.
Retirement Contribution and Benefit Provisions.
Defined Benefit Plans: Defined benefit plans use many different methods to
compute participants’ payouts at retirement. Some pension benefit formulas
provide for flat dollar amount entitlements, while others base benefits on
employee pay, age, and/or service at retirement. If pension benefits depend on
earnings, the employer generally specifies what percentage of earnings will be
paid per year of service. A related issue is that earnings-based plans differ in
terms of which definition of earnings they consider relevant. For instance,
straight-time pay alone may be considered, or a plan may add overtime, shift pay,
and/or commissions into the formula. In addition, pay-based plans differ in terms
of the period of time over which earnings are computed. In a career earnings
plan, pay during the entire period of employment is considered; conversely, a
terminal earnings plan focuses on compensation just prior to retirement. Even
terminal earnings benefit formulas generally include more than the final year’s
pay in the formula; it is not uncommon to use the worker’s highest or last 5 years
as the basis fore a final average pay figure.
          In some cases pension formulas are integrated with social security rules
following one of two general patterns.6 “Offset” formulas typically reduce a
pension benefit payment by some fraction of the worker’s primary social security
amount, while an “excess” plan will apply lower pension benefit accruals to
earnings below the social security taxable wage base (or some similar threshold)
and higher benefit accumulations to earnings above this amount. Terminal
earnings plans tend to use the offset approach when they are integrated, while


6   For a more complete discussion of integration with Social Security see McGill et al (1996).
                                                                                       7




career earnings plans tend to sue the excess method. Integration is less common
in plans using flat dollar amounts.
Defined benefit pension plans have various other special benefit rules, many of
which affect retirement benefits under certain conditions. The BLS has gathered
information over time on benefit reduction factors, important in determining the
rate at which annual benefit payments are reduced for workers retiring early.
These reduction factors often turn out to encourage early retirement, because
they reduce early retirement pension payments often to prove to be larger than
the normal retirement benefits in present value terms, providing a pension
subsidy for early retirement. Trends in these are examined in the next section.
      Other aspects of defined benefit plans may also be developed using the
BLS tabulations, though unfortunately these have not all been carried out in a
continuous way over all years and some important series are no longer provided.
One of particular interest is the time series on average replacement rates for
employees of varying pay and service levels, indicating how retirement pensions
compare to pay levels just prior to retirement. These tabulations indicate the
extent to which pensions have risen relative to final pay. In addition benefit
maximums are indicated, usually as a function of service and/or pay. Many plans
also offer pension increases after retirement, in partial recognition of the
declining purchasing power of benefits fixed in nominal terms. Though most
private-sector pensions do not formally index benefit payouts, ad hoc increases
have been implemented in inflationary times, contributing to increased economic
security in retirement (Allen et al. 1986).
      Another feature of interest to pension experts is data on workers’ access to
pension accruals for special reasons, including for early receipt of vested benefits
and for disability. When workers have access to vested accrued benefits, they
sometimes fail to save the accumulations for retirement, a subject of much policy
debate (Fernandez, 1992). Disability pensions are another way in which workers
can receive benefits prior to becoming qualified for a regular pension, which also
plays a role in increasing economic security.
                                                                                     8




Defined Contribution Plans: The institutional structure of defined contribution
plans is as varied as among their defined benefit counterparts, but along
different dimensions. Many different types of plans exist, categorized according
to various classification schemes. In the past, the BLS distinguished between
plans it called “retirement” plans, versus those called “capital accumulation”
plans; the former generally prohibited withdrawal of pension accruals prior to
retirement, and the later afforded easier access to plan assets. But over time, it
has become clear – and the BLS has recognized – that “most defined contribution
plans can be used to provide retirement income or to accumulate financial assets”
(US DOL, 1989, p.107). In addition, many of these plans allow lump-sum cash-
outs rather than a benefit annuity. Of course several new plan types have also
gained in importance during the late 1980’s and thereafter. For this reason the
BLS tabulations now distinguish types of defined contribution plans according to
the source of their finances, or to the way in which their assets are held.
Examples include savings and thrift plans, profit-sharing programs, money
purchase pension plans, employee stock ownership/stock bonus plans, and 401(k)
plans. Savings and thrift plans are those where workers contribute a percentage
of their pay and employers generally offer some amount of matching contribution
(perhaps up to a maximum). The tax treatment of employee contributions
depends on both individual plan structure and overall tax code limitations on the
amount of compensation that can be tax deferred. Savings and thrift plans often
permit workers to borrow from or make taxable withdrawals from their plans in
special circumstances (e.g., educational or medical expenses). Profit sharing
plans offering deferred income tend to link employer contribution levels to
company profits, and then allocate the employer contribution levels to company
profits, and then allocate to employer contribution based on workers’ pay or other
formulas. Early withdrawals or loans are rather less common here than in other
plans. In a money purchase plan, employer contributions are fixed, usually as a
fraction of earnings, whereas in stock ownership and stock bonus plans the
employer contributions are usually in the form of company stock. And from the
                                                                                       9




late 1980’s on, 401(k) pensions have grown quite rapidly. The BLS has sought to
adapt the EBS by following changes in plan type, tracking not only profit sharing
and savings/thrift plans but in more recent years adding series on 401(k) plans as
well. Here the time series are necessarily shorter than for defined benefit
provisions.


Changes in Pension Plans: 1980-1997
      Tabulations of Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) data on pensions by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics are presented in two separate segments, one linked to
DB plans and the other to DC plans. Each is taken up in turn, with reference to
the relevant tables we have collected for our purposes, which appear at the end of
the report. We note that the BLS did not present identical tabulations in all
years, producing some inconsistencies in the reporting (see the Appendix). In
addition some series stop being reported toward the late 1980’s, while others
were developed for the first time during the early 1990’s. This change in format
and coverage makes it difficult and in some cases impossible to develop and
interpret some interesting hypotheses regarding pension trends.


Defined Benefit Plans. Time series EBS data are available on three important
characteristics of defined benefit pension plans: (1) participation, eligibility and
vesting; (2) withdrawal and benefit formulas, and (3) special provisions. Trends
in each are examined in turn.
Participation, Eligibility and Vesting. Defined benefit pension plans typically
specify criteria that covered employees must meet before becoming full-fledged
pension participants. Such requirements are justified by the need to reduce
administrative costs that would otherwise be incurred for young workers. The
effect of these participation requirements is thought to be a reduction in turnover
by offering workers an incentive to remain with the company (Gustman and
Mitchell, 1992). Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of
1974, full-time employees age 25 or older must be granted participant status
                                                                                     10




after completing 1 year of service. Participation rules were subsequently
amended by the 1984 Retirement Equity Act (REA), which for most plans
lowered the participation requirement to age 21 as of mid-1986.
      The EBS information on plan participation requirements (Table 1)
indicates that there was a steady increase in the fraction of full-time employees
covered by DB plans having a minimum age and/or service requirement, over the
period 1981-1997. For the DB plan participants examined in 1981, 59% had
minimum age and/or service requirements; the fraction grew to 68% by 1997.
About half of the plans require only 1 year service, with the other half covered by
the “age 21/service 1” rule imposed by the REA. Virtually no plan has an “age
only” criterion. The pattern is therefore consistent with the notion that the law
change (REA) was successful in bringing about earlier participation for many
workers, but the drop in the fraction of workers permitted to participate in their
plans immediately seems to have worked in the opposite direction.
      Also appearing in Table 1 is information on a practice permitted by ERISA
until 1988, namely the imposition of participation limits if a worker joined a firm
within 5 years of the pension plan’s normal retirement age. During the 1980s
this practice permitted firms to hire older workers without incurring large
pension obligations, and as of 1981-2, some 60% of covered workers were in plans
of this type. But the 1986 Omnibus Reconciliation Act (OBRA) eliminated
maximum age restrictions from 1988 onward, by which year the fraction dropped
slightly, to 47%. The BLS did not tabulate comparable data thereafter, but the
pension change brought about by OBRA likely increased employment costs for
firms hiring older workers near the plan’s retirement age.
      Once a worker becomes a DB plan participant, he must typically satisfy a
plan service requirement before gaining a legal vested right to the plan.
Economists have argued that these vesting requirements serve to deter worker
turnover, inasmuch as vesting guarantees and eventual retirement benefits
would otherwise be lost if a worker changed employers (c.f., Gustman and
Mitchell 1992; Gustman et al. 1994 and 1995). In 1974 the Employee Retirement
                                                                                              11




Income Security Act (ERISA) specified a number of permissible vesting formulas
including a “10-year cliff” rule requiring an employee to participate in the plan
for a decade, before becoming 100% vested. Subsequently, the 1986 Tax Reform
Act (TRA) required single-employer plans to convert to a 5-year schedule if using
cliff vesting (or 7 years if graded vesting was in place); the 5-year approach was
adopted by most plans by 1989. Table 2 shows that the fraction of DB plan
participants with cliff vesting rose over time from 89% to 96%, but the modal
number of years until vesting fell from 10 to 5 between 1988 and 1989, consistent
with the legal requirement. Graduated vesting schedules give an employee a
right to a gradually increasing share of accrued benefits, eventually reaching
100% at a specified age and/or service point. Graduated vesting schedules
covered about 11% of all DB participants in 1980, rose to 17% in the late 1980’s,
and then fell to 3% by 1997. Overall, vesting requirements in DB plans have
definitely eased over last two decades.
Contributions. Turning to contributions, the evidence shows that most private
sector DB plan participants are rarely required to contribute to their pensions
out of own salary or earnings. This question has only been tracked since 1993,
but the evidence shows that only 3-5% of participants have employee
contributions required (Table 3).7
Withdrawal and Benefit Formulas. We focus next on conditions under which
participants can access the funds in their pension accounts. DB plans generally
specify minimum age and/or service criteria that a worker can must satisfy in
order to retire and receive “early” benefits. The relevant trends are reported in
Table 4, and the data show that early retirement was and has remained the norm
in the DB environment, with 95% or more having this in their plans since 1980.
But the fact that early retirement is generally available obscures changes in
requirements for collecting early benefits. It does appear that earlier retirement
has become somewhat more accessible over time: in 1982, 60% of all participants

7This pattern is markedly different from the public sector environment where most employees
contribute from own pay; see Mitchell, McCarthy, Wisniewski, and Zorn (forthcoming).
                                                                                      12




could leave at age 55 (in some cases, depending on service), and by 1995 this
fraction stood at 66%. But the trends are not uniform: in the late 1980’s there
was a peak in the fraction of workers permitted to leave at age 55 with 10 years
of service, but this practice appeared to fall during the 1990s. Conversely it
became much easier to retire with only 5 years of service at age 5,with the
fraction in this group rising from 3% to 20% between 1980 and 1997. It is
interesting that relatively few participants (5%) were in plans where they had to
satisfy only an “age plus service” requirement in 1980; the practice increased
slightly (to 10%) by 1985, and then declined again (to 8%) by 1997.
      Turning to “normal” retirement requirements, most DB plans require
retirees to meet certain age requirements, or alternatively age plus service (Table
5). Only 11% of DB plan participants in 1980 could obtain normal retirement by
virtue of service alone, and 30 years was the typical cutoff; by 1997 fewer than
half this many (5%) of the participants could take normal benefits based on
service alone. Just under half of all participants were subject to normal
retirement eligibility rules that only depended on age in 1980, with fraction
remaining fairly stable over the entire period. Where age only serves as the
criterion for normal retirement, age 65 has traditionally been the modal age.
During the late 1980s there was a small increase in early retirement age
requirements at 62 and 60, but the trend appeared to have reversed by 1997.
Turning to requirements involving both age plus service, it appears there has
been an increase in the propensity of participants to have normal retirement
available at age 62 with a combination of years of service. In 1981, 17% of the
participants were able to retire at 62 with full benefits (4% at 62 with no service
plus 13% with some service); by 1997 this fraction had risen to 21% (3% and 18
respectively). In other words there appears to be a continued trend toward
permitting workers to before age 65 and receive full (unreduced) benefits. These
patterns are in line with findings from other studies indicating that many
pension plans have encouraged earlier retirement over time (Luzadis and
                                                                                       13




Mitchell, 1991; Mitchell and Luzadis, 1988). Whether this pattern will persist
into the tight labor markets projected for the next 20 years remains to be seen.
      Benefit formulas are described in Table 6 where we see that the fraction of
DB plan participants with benefits based on a flat dollar amount fell from 30% in
1980, to 23% by 1997. This decline may be due to the steady drop in the
unionization rate of the US workforce, since flat dollar benefits were often
associated with collective bargaining agreements. Instead, most DB plans
surveyed in the 1990s used workers’ earnings to determine benefit amounts. This
fraction stood at around 2/3 of all participants in 1997, virtually the same as in
1980. It is not surprising that terminal earnings are by far the most common in
benefit formulas, since this approach is believed to protect retirement promises
from inflation, at least to the extent that pre-retirement pay tracks inflation.
The fraction using this approach varied around the 55-58% level throughout the
period. By contrast, only 11% of all DB participants still had benefits computed
using career earnings in 1997, down from 15% in 1980. Each of these changes
somewhat reduces the risk of inflation that the workers bear in their prospective
pension payments, by linking benefits to pay during the final years of the work
career. In addition, terminal earnings plans tie retirement benefits more closely
to individual performance toward the end of the worklife, as compared to the
previously more-popular career average plans.
      In addition to knowing what years of earnings are included in the formula,
it is of interest to investigate what pay definition is used. Table 7 indicates that
there has been a marked increase in the fraction of workers receiving benefits
based on straight-time or base pay alone, from 44% to 62% in just the eight years
between 1988 and 1995 (data for other years are not available). And fewer DB
plans now include other forms of pay including shift differentials, bonuses, and
commissions, signaling a reduction in the incentive-based portion of pensions as
compared to earlier years. Limiting the full range of compensation used in
computing benefits may make it easier for workers to remain employed at older
ages, despite possible changes in productivity.
                                                                                    14




      Defined benefit plans generally allocate benefits according to some percent
per year of service or pay, and these fractional benefit rules are summarized in
Tables 8 and 9. For career earnings plans, only about one-third of all participants
in 1991 were covered by a plan with a flat percent per year of service, with the
most common percentage being 1.25-1.75% of pay (the data were not tabulated
for the more recent years; see Table 8). By contrast, some 60% of participants
were in plans paying benefits where the fraction of pay varied by year of service,
with the modal pattern being a fraction varying by earnings. For terminal
earnings plans, Table 9 shows that most plans used five years’ pay, with five
consecutive years being the most common approach. Nevertheless, there was a
small increase in the prevalence of plans using three instead of five years of pay,
rising from 14% to 17% over the period 1983-1997. More confounding is the
inverted U-shaped pattern in the fraction of pay used in benefit formulas: early
in the 1980s, 47% of the participants had benefits that were a flat percent per
year of service (with the norm being in the range of 1.25-1.5%). Then the fraction
of participants using a flat percent per year of service in the benefit formula rose
slightly, to 54% by the late 1980s, and subsequently it fell to 35% by the late
1990s. By contrast, over time plans were more likely to employ benefit
percentages that depended on other factors, with the fraction depending on
earnings rising and on service falling. Finally, Table 10 provides tabulations on
the prevalence of dollar amount formulas over time. Here it is clear that the
plans using dollar amounts tended to increase those amounts over time, with the
modal factor now being over $30 per year of service. Of course, it will be recalled
that few plans are in this latter group.
      Benefits paid by DB plans depend not only on earnings or service-based
formulas; in addition, retiree payments are frequently integrated with Social
Security benefits. Table 11 shows that 45% of DB plan participants had their
benefits integrated with Social Security in 1980, and though the integration
fraction crept up to 63% by 1989, it fell back again by 1997 (to 49%). What is
interesting is that this overall pattern hides major changes in the way
                                                                                               15




integration has been handled over time. Specifically, between 1980 and 1997,
there was a halving of the fraction of workers with benefits offset by Social
Security payments where the fraction fell from 30% to 13%; what grew instead
was the prevalence of plans with excess formulas. In the latter case, a DB
formula might provide 1% of pay up to the Social Security earnings threshold per
year of service, for example, with some higher fraction (such as 1.5%) for pay
above this level. So while there is no overall change in the degree of Social
Security integration in the Employee Benefits Survey, the type of integration
used has actually changed substantially. It is of interest to recognize that these
changes in pension integration practices coincide with large Social Security
payroll tax increases; though a casual relationship cannot be proven in the data,
the correlation is striking.
       For those who retire early, benefits are often reduced in DB plans in
recognition of the fact that early retirees will receive benefits for a longer period
of time. Table 12 summarizes trends in early retirement reduction factors, and
the evidence indicates that that many plans subsidize early retirement quite
substantially. This may be concluded since in both 1982 and 1997, one-quarter of
all DB participants were covered by early retirement reduction factors of 6% or
smaller; it is often held that a reduction of more than 6 percent is required for
actuarial neutrality (McGill 1996).8 Reduction factors are also applied to vested
workers who leave their employers; here too, it appears that vested terminated
workers face benefit reductions of 6% or less (but only three years of data are
provided making it difficult to confirm the trend). The final panel of Table 12
shows that at least 90% of plans permit vested terminated workers to take their
benefits prior to normal retirement, but only about half face the same reduction
as applied to early retirees.
       Benefit formulas are often quite complex to interpret, and for many years,
the BLS provided a useful set of tabulations that could be used to compare

8Early retirement may also be subsidized in other plans using factors that vary with age and
service, but this cannot be determined from available tabulations.
                                                                                      16




retirement benefits for different hypothetical workers in the set of DB pensions
under study. The technique adopted involved using plan information to compute
“replacement rates”, defined here as the ratio of the DB retirement plan benefits
to the worker’s final year of earnings. These computations were published for the
period 1984-1993, calculated at the normal retirement age using six standardized
pay levels and three seniority profiles (see Table 13). Unfortunately the agency
ceased publishing these computations after 1993, which makes extrapolation
beyond that date impossible.
      In any event, Table 13 indicates that DB plan replacement rates typically
rise with service for a given pay level; they follow this pattern both within a year
and also over the period 1984 -1991. In 1993, however, the computed replacement
rates fell across the board, and no computations were published in subsequent
years. Comparing replacement patterns within service categories, it appears that
these DB plan benefit formulas were fairly redistributive: that is, replacement
rates were higher for the lower paid, and fell as pay rose for a given level of
service. For instance, in 1993, the latest year reported, the replacement rate for
a 30-year worker earning $15,000 was 27%, and only 21% for a $65,000 per year
worker. We note that the “illustrative” pay levels reflected in the Table are not
comparable in real terms, since a constant nominal earnings assumption implies
a falling real pay level over time. As a very rough correction, one can compare
replacement rates for a $25,000 worker in1984 with those of a $30,000 level in
1989, and these with that of a $35,000 worker in 1993. This simple approach
suggests that pension replacement rates have been fairly constant over time; that
is, holding constant real pay levels, benefit replacement rates for 10, 20, and 30
years of service changed relatively little over the years with the exception of the
final year tabulated (1993).
Special Provisions in DB Plans. In the private sector, few pensions are protected
against inflation by formal indexation; as a rule, private pension benefits are
usually delivered as fixed nominal annuities. This is not a major concern for
many older workers and retirees during low-inflation periods such as the present,
                                                                                      17




but even a low inflation rate can cut a retiree’s consumption in half in old age. In
any event, Table 14 indicates that pension benefits are rarely tied explicitly to a
cost of living index (COLA); indeed in 1995 only 7% of EBS participants had a
COLA, and only 3% had an automatic escalator. Quite frequently benefits are
not increased at all, as can be seen by the fact that only 4% of the participants
had plans with discretionary benefit increases in 1995. This is quite
extraordinary given the generally strong equity market performance experienced
by most of these plans during the 1980s and 1990s, but it is usually explained by
the low inflation rates of the period.
      In addition to these other benefit provisions, private pensions frequently
impose a ceiling on benefit amounts payable to retirees. The prevalence of this
phenomenon has been declining as is evident from Table 15. In 1984, for
instance, 42% of the participants faced a benefit maximum; by 1997, only 33%
were capped. In plans that did limit benefits, they tended to do so by capping the
number of years of service that can be counted for benefit purposes. In 1997, for
instance 31% of the DB participants faced a maximum limit on service years.
The modal choice for a maximum has generally been between 30 and 39 years of
service since 1984.
      In addition to early and normal retirement, the vast majority of DB plan
participants – three-quarters, in 1997 – is also covered by plans that will pay
disability benefits (Table 16). The prevalence of disability pensions seems to
have changed however in 1989, where coverage fell from near 90%, to a much
lower 81% and dropped further thereafter. It is not entirely clear why this
sudden drop occurred, followed by an additional slide, though there were other
changes taking place in the market for disability insurance driving employers to
contain costs along many fronts. Indeed it appears that many DB plans tightened
access to disability benefits over the period, by requiring that employees wait a
longer time to qualify for long term disability insurance: only 46% was eligible
for immediate disability benefits in 1997, down from a high of 70% in 1980. Other
features were also reduced in generosity after a run-up in benefits observed
                                                                                    18




during the late 1980’s, with companies being far less likely to credit service to
retirement, and less likely to give unreduced normal benefits to the disabled
employee.
      A final DB payout issue is depicted in Table 17, which describes the
prevalence of employer willingness to permit participants to take their benefits
as lump sums at retirement. Initially this was unheard of in DB plans, and even
in 1991 when these data were first tabulated, only 14% of participants could take
any lump sum (about two-thirds of these could take the entire amount). By 1997,
23% of participants was permitted to take a lump sum, with the overwhelming
majority entitled to take all of it in a lump sum. This trend underscores other
evidence indicating the decline of annuitization among American workers
(Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, Brown, forthcoming).


Defined Contribution Plans. In turning to DC pension plans, we can draw on
published evidence on (1) coverage and vesting patterns, (2) contributions and
withdrawals, and (3) special features of 401(k) plans. We note that defined
contribution plans experienced a rapid growth in popularity over the last two
decades, and so consequently the BLS tabulations for this set of plans has
changed in response to innovations in both plan type and plan design. As a
result, BLS published information for DC plans is of more recent vintage and in
some cases less continuos over time than the extensive BLS information on DB
plans. In most cases, for instance, there is not complete data for the entire period
1980-1997; rather the data tend to be clustered around more recent survey dates.
Plan Types, Coverage, and Vesting. The BLS has traditionally examined data on
several types of DC plans including retirement and capital accumulation plans;
these encompass money purchase and profit sharing, saving and thrift, and cash
and deferred salary reduction plans including 401(k)s. Data are available on
many of these only from 1985 on, since previously the BLS did not tabulate plan
participation and design features for DC pensions in a comparable format. The
                                                                                   19




time series are also often incomplete, since in many cases they end in 1991 due to
changes in BLS reporting.
      Statistics on participation in retirement and capital accumulation plans
appear in Table 18. The BLS defines “retirement” plans as those where employer
contributions are required to remain in the participant’s account until
retirement, death, disability, termination, hardship, or attainment of age 59 ½;
by contrast “capital accumulation” plans are those where a participant may
withdraw the money under other circumstances. The overall decline in coverage
is unmistakable over the short period for which data are reported: noncoverage
rose from 8% to 21% between 1985 and 1991. While the fraction having only
retirement plans dropped slightly, the proportion with both types of plans fell
from 20% to under 10% in just six years.
      Combinations of DB and DC plans appear in Table 19. One striking
change evident in this table is the substantial drop in DB plan coverage, from
89% of the medium and large firm employees in 1985, to half (50%) in 1997. A
second fact is that the fraction of DB-covered workers with no other plan type
appears to be growing, from 45% in 1985 to 55% by 1997. Of those that have both
a DB and a DC plan, the most prevalent DC type is a savings/thrift plan – almost
one-third of all DB participants also had a DC benefit plan available to them in
1993 (more recent data are not provided). Another striking change is in the rapid
overall growth of savings/thrift plans, where full-time worker coverage rates
jumped from only 1% in 1985 to 29% coverage in 1991. Cash or deferred salary
plans also grew in prevalence, with 26% of full-time employees having either type
in 1985, and 45% by 1995. A slightly longer time series appears in Table 21,
where it is clear that relatively few workers now have profit sharing plans; the
fraction declined from a high of 22% in 1986 down to 13% in 1997. Stock and
stock bonus plans are apparently quite rare, and there has been no long-term
growth in profit sharing plans. Overall, the findings reinforce conclusions from
other data sources indicating that the US workforce has increased its
                                                                                       20




participation in DC plans but reduced DB plan coverage (Piascentini and Cerino
1990, Turner and Beller, 1989).
      Age and service requirements for DC plan participation and vesting are
given in Tables 22 and 23. Comparing the three DC plan types for which data
are available – savings/thrift plans, profit sharing, and 401(k) plans – it is clear
that participation requirements differ substantially. In the first two cases, the
plans generally require minimum age and/or service for participation, with only
around 15% of the workers were permitted immediate participation. By contrast,
27% of the 401(k) plan participants were allowed immediate participation. In all
three instances, if a participation clause was in place, service of up to 1 year was
the norm; relatively few plans also have an age requirement.
      Vesting rules for all three DC plans are reported in Table 23, and show
first a loosening in vesting rules, followed by a tightening thereafter. An inverted
U-shaped pattern is evident for savings/thrift and profit shaving plans, with the
fraction allowing immediate full vesting rising from the 20-percentile range to
the high 30s and even 40% by 1991, then falling back to the 20s by 1997. The
time series is shorter for 401(k) plans but indicates that more of the participants
– 34% – could vest immediately on joining the plan. This contrasts with data
presented earlier on DB plans, where virtually no employees had full and
immediate vesting. Among those unable to vest in their DC plans immediately,
participants appeared to be evenly split between cliff and graduated vesting. For
instance in 401(k) plans, by the 1997 survey, cliff vesting (typically at 5 years)
and graduated vesting (with two-thirds vesting at 5 years or later) were the norm
for those without immediate full vesting. The trend to shorter cliff vesting is in
part a result of the 1986 Tax Reform Act requiring most plans using cliff vesting
to convert to a 5-year schedule as of 1989.
                                                                                     21




Contribution and Pre-retirement Access Patterns. Published tabulations of EBS
include data on employee and employer contributions, as well as conditions under
which employees can access these contributions prior to retirement.
      Rules for employee contributions in savings/thrift and 401(k) plans are
summarized in Table 24, with the vast majority of participants having plans that
base employee contributions on workers’ earnings – almost 90% in 1997 for both
plan types. Most employees are now allowed to deposit their funds into the
savings/thrift plans pre-tax, a substantial increase from 1985 (similar data for
401(k) plans are not available). Over the period, there appears to have been a
gradual decline in the extent of earnings-based contributions – a 10% decline in
the case of the former plan type. Additionally the maximum fraction of earnings
that can be contributed has been reduced over time, with fewer workers being
allowed to deposit more than 15% of their pay over the 1985-1997 timespan.
      Evidence on employer matching contributions is summarized in Table 25
for the period 1985-1991 (more recent data are unavailable). Results show that
almost no covered employees had firms that provided a specified dollar amount
(1% in 1991). Most employers match worker contributions with the modal match
being 6% of pay; most plans (86% in 1993) had contributions of 6% or less, and
only a minority (15%) of covered employees had match rates of 7% or greater. In
general, it appears that employer matching contributions averaged a much
smaller fraction of earnings than employee contributions, and the rate of
employer match seems to be falling over time. Employer contribution patterns
for profit sharing plans appear in Table 26, indicating that around 60% of those
with this plan type use fixed formulas – with a most depending on profits (either
as a fixed or variable fraction of profits). The remaining 40% use no fixed
formula in determining contributions. When it comes to allocation of profits,
there has been a decline over time in the practice of allocating profits according
to earnings, with “other” formulas rising in importance.
      One area that is of substantial interest has to do with time trends in the
ways that employees are allowed to access their accounts, either before or after
                                                                                                  22




leaving their firms. The practice of allowing loans from employee accounts
appears to be on the upswing in profit sharing plans (Table 26), with just a
quarter of covered employees having this access in 1986, and almost a third
permitted this access by 1997. A very different pattern appears in Table 27A
describing conditions under which employees are permitted to withdraw pension
assets in the event of hardship or other circumstances in saving/thrift plans (e.g.,
at termination). The data indicate a sharp cut in the fraction of people allowed to
access funds in these plans: for instance in 1985, 80% of the participants could
access employer contributions “early” (prior to retirement age), but by 1997 only
52% of the participants were so able. Despite this apparent increase in access
restrictiveness, there was almost a doubling in the fraction of workers allowed to
take the funds in the event of “hardship”.9 Access provisions for 401(k) plans are
described in Table 27B, where it appears that over half of all plan participants in
1997 could obtain funds from their plans via a loan, up from 43% in 1993.
Furthermore, the modal participant could obtain a loan for any reason, not just
for hardship. Therefore the pattern of employee access to DC accounts is a mixed
one across plan types, with access becoming easier in 401(k) plans, but more
restrictive in other DC plans over time.
Pension Payout Trends. Distribution of pension assets at retirement may take
various forms. Table 28 indicates that savings/thrift plans distribute their funds
as cash in the vast majority of cases, and lump sum payouts are very prevalent –
some 90% of participants or more have this access. Of more concern to those
focused on the adequacy of retirement income is the fact that only about one-
quarter of participants with these plans have access to an annuity, and this
percent has fallen slightly over time. Installment plans may afford some
retirement income security, but here too the practice seems to be declining: only


9 Exactly what constitutes a hardship according to plan sponsors is somewhat imprecise; the BLS
indicates that possible reasons include purchase of repair of primary residence, illness or death in
the family, education of an immediate family member, or sudden uninsured loss. More precision
about the definition of hardship would be useful in future surveys, particularly since it appears
that the ability to withdraw such funds without penalty is increasing.
                                                                                                  23




41% in 1997 could take their funds in installments down from 59% in 1985. A
shorter time series on payout options is available for 401(k) plans (Table 29), and
here a similar pattern prevailed. In 1993, some 34% of the participants could
take their funds as a life annuity, and by 1997 this option was available to only
27%. Installment options were also falling in prevalence, from 49% to 41%. In
general, then, workers retiring from a DC plan are less likely to have available to
them the traditional annuity payout option that once was identified as the
cornerstone of retirement income security.10
Investment Choices. One feature contributing to the widespread popularity of DC
pension plans in the last 20 years is the fact that they typically offer employees
some control over their pension investments. Table 30A illustrates trends in
these choices and options for savings/thrift plans for the period 1989-1997, and
Table 30B reports available information for 401(k) plans over the period 1993-
1997.
        One factor worth noting is that different provisions typically apply to
employee versus employer contributions. For instance in 1997, rules governing
the investment options for employee contributions were more flexible than for
employer contributions. That is, in 87% of the cases employees could select their
savings/thrift investment options in 1997, but this applied to only 65% of
employer contributions. Eight years previously, an even smaller fraction of the
employer share, 53%, could be allocated by the participant. This compares to a
virtually identical range of investment flexibility and investment choices for
401(k) plans in 1997 (Table 30B) in which 87% of the employees could elect
among investment choices for their own contributions and 65% of employer
contributions. It is also interesting that the modal number of investment choices
available for both employee and employer contributions was 3 in 1989 for


10In most cases, the retiree could probably roll DC pension assets into an Individual Retirement
Account and then purchase an individual life annuity. In so doing, however, the retiree would
then lose access to the group risk pooling and would be forced to pay for adverse selection costs as
well as possibly higher loadings in the individual retail market (see Mitchell, Poterba,
Warshawsky, and Brown forthcoming).
                                                                                    24




savings/thrift plans, and 4 in 1993 for 401(k) plans; by 1997 the modal number
was at least 5 choices for both plan types.
      The evidence also indicates that the range of investment choices has
changed over time, at least for savings/thrift plans (comparable data are
unavailable for 401(k) plans). As the fraction of workers covered by savings/thrift
plans increased from 18% in 1985 to 37% in to 1993 (Table 20) there were also
changes in investment design features. For instance, the fraction of covered
employees permitted to invest their own contributions in common stock fell from
83% in 1989 to 69% in 1997, but this decline was partly offset by an increase in
employee access to diversified stock and bond funds (from 31% to 54%). In 1989,
half of the savings/thrift plan participants were permitted to invest their own
contributions in company stock; by 1997, the fraction permitted to invest in
company stock had fallen to 42%. The prevalence of workers allowed to deposit
their own contributions in guaranteed insurance contracts fell from 59% to 20%,
while those allowed to invest in bonds rose from 31% to 54% over the same
period. Somewhat similar patterns appear to have applied to employer
contributions in these plans, with employer stock and common stock funds
declining in importance and diversified portfolios grew. Thus, while employees
were offered more investment options in 1997 than they were earlier, the types of
investments they could elect in their savings/thrift plans tended toward
diversified stock and bond portfolios rather than the less diversified options
available during the 1980s.
      Finally there is modest evidence on the periodicity with which employees
in savings/thrift plans are permitted to change their investment allocations in
their DC plans. The data in Table 30A cover only 1993 on but they suggest that
employees are more likely to be able to exert choice over their own contributions
of late. That is, in 1993 only 29% of the covered employees could change their
investment options anytime, and only five years later the fraction was 47%.
Similarly the fraction allowed to alter the investments made with employer
contributions grew from 19% to 36% in a very short time. Conversely, the number
                                                                                   25




restricted to switching their own investments to four times a year or less fell from
48% to 24% in just five years’ time (and a similar pattern applies to employer
contributed assets).


Conclusions
        Since the survey covers only pension plans offered by medium and large
firms, the results cannot be generalized to the entire US pension environment.
Nevertheless, the EBS reveals new trends in plan features, trends that are
indicative of what has happened to pensions in companies that have traditionally
been the most consistent providers of employer-sponsored retirement benefits in
the US.
        Our research has identified several key changes in the defined benefit
environment. These include changes in participation and vesting rules;
increased access to early retirement; declines in normal retirement ages; and the
movement of pension benefit formulas toward final rather than career earnings.
Benefit integration with social security also grew, but the type of integration
changed substantially. Pension replacement rates appear to have fallen over
time, benefit ceilings remain in place, and disability benefit provisions have
become more stringent. Specific findings are summarized as follows:
· Participation rules in DB plans have become more stringent over time. In 1981,
minimum age/service requirements were the norm for 59% of the participants
while by 1997 some 68% had these limitations. Most plans required that a
participant have either 1 year of service or attain at least age 21 with 1 year.
Early in the 1980s, some firms precluded older workers from becoming plan
participants if they were close to retirement age at hire, but this was outlawed in
1988.
• Vesting rules in DB plans have eased over time. Most participants now have
cliff vesting (96% in 1997) but the modal number of years required has fallen
from 10 to 5, consistent with the change in the TRA tax law.
                                                                                       26




• Virtually no private DB pension participants are required to contribute to their
own pensions out of salary.
• With regard to benefit formulas, early retirement is permitted by virtually all
DB plans and has been since 1980. Normal retirement ages have declined
somewhat with more have access to unreduced benefits younger than age 65.
Early retirement has long been heavily subsidized in DB plans by virtue of the
fact that they use actuarially subsidized reduction factors. No substantial change
in the extent of early retirement subsidies over time could be ascertained in these
tabulations, though more precise information on reduction factors might reveal
additional changes.
• There is a striking trend toward DB plans excluding anything other than
straight-time earnings in the benefit formulas, signaling a reduction in the
incentive-based portion of pensions as compared to earlier years. Fewer DB plan
participants were covered by flat dollar benefit formulas by the end of the 1990s
as compared to previously. Social Security integration has changed markedly in
DB plans: many fewer workers have benefits offset by Social Security payments,
and more workers today are covered by excess formulas that provide higher
proportional benefits to those with higher earners. In plans that cap benefit
payouts, they generally do so by limiting the number of years of service counted
in the formula.
• DB pension payments in the private sector are vulnerable to inflation since
benefits are not generally indexed to inflation. The low inflation rates of the last
dozen years probably have permitted the decline in indexation.
• DB replacement rates in the past have a positive link between replacement
rates and service for a given pay level, and a negative link between earnings and
benefits, for a given level of service. Replacement rates in 1993 were lower than
prior years, a factor that is not well explained; unfortunately the BLS did not
continue the time series in subsequent years to determine if these changes in
benefit provisions were permanent.
                                                                                     27




• DB plans are increasingly permitting participants to take their benefits as a
lump sum at retirement, which suggests a decline in the degree of annuitization
among American workers. By 1997, almost one-fifth of participants were
permitted to take a lump sum, with the overwhelming majority entitled to take
their entire benefit in this form.
• Disability benefit provisions have become more stringent in DB plans over time.
Fewer plans offer disability benefits, and those that do have tightened access.
This may be due to increases in costs for disability benefits over time.
      Turning now to a summary of findings for defined contribution plans, we
are somewhat hampered by the fact that the EBS time series is not as complete
over time on these plans as for the DB pensions. This is mainly because most of
the series started later, but it is also because similar tabulations have not always
been maintained consistently over the years. In any event, here too there are
major changes in plan coverage and features over time. Most striking is an
overall decline in coverage, particularly DB plan coverage among those with DC
plans. Among DC participants the main plan growth was among savings/thrift
pensions as well as cash/deferred salary plans; very few participants have stock
or profit sharing plans. Other specific findings include the following:
• Participation and vesting requirements differ across DC plan type.
Participation barriers are lower in 401(k) plans as compared to savings/thrift and
profit shaving plans, though only 1 year service is the most common requirement.
Vesting data suggest that here too, rules are less stringent for 401(k) plans than
virtually any other plan type (DB and DC).
• Employee contributions are the norm in DC plans, with most participants
required to take employee contributions as a function of earnings – where the
fraction of pay that can be contributed is usually capped at 15%. Employers often
match employee contributions with the modal match being 6% of pay, but the
rate of employer match seems to be falling over time.
• Employee access to pension fund assets prior to retirement is a topic of
substantial interest to policymakers. The EBS data suggest that employees are
                                                                                      28




increasingly permitted to use loans to access their profit-sharing accounts and
take hardship withdrawals, with 401(k) plans allowing the most liberal access
under a wide range of circumstances (not just for hardship). Turning to
retirement benefits, there has a decline in the fraction of participants that have
access to a life annuity as a payout option, particularly from 401(k) pensions
where only 27% have this option.
• DC plans generally offer participants some choice over investing both their own
and their employer’s contributions. Over time, participants have gained
additional investment choices in their DC plans. Participants have also gained
access to diversified stock and bond funds, with fewer permitted to invest in own-
employer stock, common stock funds and guaranteed insurance contracts.


Discussion and Outlook
      The pension trends found in our tabulations of EBS pension data over time
bring into focus several critical questions that will certainly drive discussion of
pension design and function in the next several years. For example, small
employers have moved away from DB and toward DC plans, and now our
analysis confirms this trend for medium and large firms as well. In many ways,
the movement toward the DC plan type is a logical, market-driven, response to
workforce demography, new employer personnel needs, and probably most
important, employee interest in investing in a healthy US stockmarket.
Nevertheless, some plan features appear to contradict others, and these
countervailing messages will no doubt require plan redesign in the future. For
instance, the fact that many pension plans have lower hurdles for vesting and
participation may help induce an aging workforce to remain on the job longer; on
the other hand, employers may need to reduce the benefit subsidy for early
retirement if they hope to boost DB rewards from remaining employed at older
ages. Policymakers can also learn from the data on pension integration with
Social Security, since those charged with solving the Social Security system’s
                                                                                                  29




insolvency problems should recognize how pension costs might change in
response.
       These issues and others make it clear that it is important to continue the
substantial data collection and tabulation effort that the EBS represents in the
future. The EBS is the only employer-based nationally representative survey in
the US that collates extensive data on provisions of company-provided benefits,
and pensions in particular. For this reason it would be invaluable to have the
identical (‘core’ set) tabulations carried out from the EBS for each future (and
past) year of the survey.11
       Some improvements could also be suggested for the EBS; inevitably,
future surveys will need to adopt new questions and eliminate some old topics
that are no longer relevant. It is likely that such changes would benefit from
researcher and policymaker input. It would also be valuable to design
tabulations that can answer parallel questions across plan types. For instance,
future reports could investigate the extent to which 401(k) participants can
switch investment options, a tabulation currently provided for savings/thrift plan
participants. And some series seem to have been dropped despite the fact that
they are of substantial interest. Our incomplete tabulations provide several such
examples, but perhaps the most notable is the (incomplete) replacement rate
series for DB plans.
       Going further, it would be most valuable to structure future Employee
Benefits Survey data so that one benefit plan could be linked with another – for
instance, a health and a pension plan for a given firm could be related. This
would permit analysis of potential substitution across benefit offerings. Of
course researchers would also welcome the linking of information on benefit
provisions and benefit costs, as well as possible labor force or other


11It would be useful to permit researchers to access the firm-level data collected over time, so as
to devise additional tabulations and exploratory studies. If it were necessary for confidentiality
reasons, this could probably be accomplished under restricted conditions such as those developed
for restricted data users of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS); for details see
http://www.umich.edu/~hrswww.
                                                                                               30




consequences.12 Pension research in the 21st century would be immeasurably
benefited by such additions.




12   A more complete discussion of this approach is provided in Gustman and Mitchell (1991).
                                                                                                  31




Data Appendix: The Employee Benefit Survey
          Those seeking a greater understanding of trends in pension formulas and
provisions must understand how the BLS develops its Employee Benefits Survey
data, on which we rely in the present report. The Employee Benefits Survey
(EBS) includes information on a wide range of employee benefits provided by US
employers, from health to insurance to pension plans. In the early days, these
data were collected annually and only for medium and large firms. More
recently, the BLS has used an alternating year format to track benefits in
medium and large firms (small establishments as well as public sector employers
are surveyed in other years). While the BLS does not make available to
researchers the underlying firm-level reports, it does publish a set of tabulations
that is more or less consistent through time. For the present purpose, we have
therefore collected and examined BLS tabulations on the pension plans offered by
medium and large private employers, focusing on the incidence and
characteristics of pension plans described in a series of publications appearing
between 1980 and 1995.13 In addition we were provided prepublication copies of
the 1997 report by the BLS to round out the series. No more recent information
on pension offerings by medium and large firms is available from this source
today.14
          Users of the data series should be aware that the BLS changed its
sampling design slightly in 1998. Until that year, the Employee Benefit Survey
used a sampling frame that included only firms employing at least 50,100, or 250
workers, depending on the industry in question. This in the mining,
construction, retail trade, and some manufacturing and transportation sectors,


13   See BLS (various years).
14The BLS also collects data on only three major occupation groups: professional and
administrative, technical and clerical, and production and service. Not included in any surveys
are data for executive management workers and part-time, seasonal, temporary, and traveling
employees. Hence the figures reported below cover only these key occupational categories.
                                                                                    32




the survey approached establishments employing only 250 workers or more. In
accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping, the minimum firm size was 50 employees.
From 1988 forward, however, the BLS elected to focus on all firms employing at
least 100 workers. As a result, the survey sample size increased in 1988 from
about 1,300 to about 2,100 firms by virtue of this change in scope (US DOL,
1989). In addition, the BLS extended its industrial coverage in this year.
Industries analyzed prior to the change included mining; construction;
manufacturing; transportation; communications; electric, gas, and sanitary
services; wholesale and retail trade; finance, insurance, and real estate; and
selected services. Beginning on 1988, coverage for the service sector became
more extensive; in particular, health and educational services had previously
been underrepresented and were thereafter included in the sample.
      As a result of the sampling changes in EBS scope and coverage, we
acknowledge that the pension information collected before and after 1988 is not
strictly comparable. Thus in 1988 and thereafter, the BLS tabulations include
more small firms and offer slightly broader industrial coverage. For the purposes
of examining series overlap, the BLS did prepare some tabulations in 1988 both
ways, to show how the design changes might have altered reported pension
statistics. The BLS did not, however, indicate whether differences in reported
tabulations due to coverage format changes are statistically significant. Where
available, we provide both tabulations (for the “old” and the “new” scope) in the
tables. It appears that along many of the important pension dimensions of
interest here, the “old” and “new” scopes appear similar. Some differences do
emerge: because the larger sample in 1988 and thereafter included smaller firms,
benefit coverage as well as benefit generosity was somewhat less. Hence with the
new format, in 1998 pension coverage appeared to have fallen, requirements for
normal retirement appeared to have suddenly become more stringent, and plans
appeared to have dropped post-retirement benefit increases among defined
benefit plan participants. In the defined contribution area, more changes are
evident because such plans were more prevalent among smaller firms. For this
                                                                                   33




reason, the reader should be alert to the fact some of the differences in levels
observed between 1985 and 1998 are due to the change in sampling frame.
                                                                                  34




References
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Employee Benefits in Medium and Large
      Private Establishments, US Department of Labor Bulletin, various years.
Fernandez, Phyllis. “Pre-retirement Lump Sum Distributions”. In Trends in
      Pensions 1992. J. Turner and D. Beller, eds. Washington, D.C.: US Dept. of
      Labor, PWBA, 1992.
Gustman, Alan, and Olivia S. Mitchell. “Pensions and the US Labor Market.” In
      Pensions and The Economy, Z. Bodie and A. Munnell, eds. Philadelphia,
      PA: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 1992: 39-87.
Gustman, Alan L., Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L.
      Steinmeier. “Evaluating Pension Entitlements.” In Forecasting Retirement
      Needs and Retirement Wealth. Eds. O.S. Mitchell, B. Hammond, and A.
      Rappaport. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of
      Pennsylvania Press, forthcoming.
Gustman, Alan, Olivia S. Mitchell, Andrew A. Samwick, and Thomas L.
      Steinmeier. “Pension and Social Security Wealth in the Health and
      Retirement Study”. In Wealth, Work, and Health: Innovations in Survey
      Measurement in the Social Sciences. Ed. Robert Willis. 1999: 150-208.
Gustman, Alan, Olivia S. Mitchell and Thomas Steinmeier. “Retirement
      Measures in the Health and Retirement Survey”. Journal of Human
      Resources 30, Supplement (1995): S57-S83.
Gustman, Alan S., Olivia S. Mitchell and Thomas Steinmeier. “The Role of
      Pensions in the Labor Market” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47
      (3) (1994): 417-438.
Ippolito, Richard A. Pensions, Economics, and Public Policy. Homewood, Il: Dow
      Jones-Irwin, 1986.
Levine, Phillip, Olivia Mitchell and John Phillips. “Worklife Determinants of
      Retirement Income Differences”. NBER WP 7243, August 1999.
Levine, Phillip, Olivia S. Mitchell, and James F. Moore. “Women on the Verge of
      Retirement: Predictors of Retiree Well-being”. In Forecasting Retirement
                                                                                35




      Needs and Retirement Wealth. Eds. Olivia S. Mitchell, Brett Hammond,
      and Anna Rappaport. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press,
      forthcoming.
Lumsdaine, Robin and Olivia S. Mitchell. “New Developments in the Economics
      of Retirement”. In Handbook of Labor Economics. Orley Ashenfelter and
      David Card, eds. forthcoming.
Luzadis, Rebecca and Olivia S. Mitchell. “Explaining Pension Dynamics”.
      Journal of Human Resources 26 (Fall 1991): 679-703.
McGill, Dan, John Haley, Gordon Goodfellow, and Sylvester Schieber.
      Fundamentals of Private Pensions, 7e. Philadelphia: University of
      Pennsylvania Press, 1996.
Mitchell, Olivia S. “Developments in Pensions”. In Handbook of Insurance. Ed.
      Georges Dionne. Forthcoming. prc.wharton.upenn.edu/prc/wp98-4.PDF].
Mitchell, Olivia S. “Trends in Pension Benefit Formulas and Retirement
      Provisions”. In Trends in Pensions 1992. J. Turner and D. Beller, eds.
      Washington, D.C.: US Dept. of Labor, PWBA, 1992: 177-216.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Rebecca Luzadis. “Changes in Pension Incentives Through
      Time.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 42, October 1988: 100-108.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, Jeffrey Brown. “New
      Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities”. American
      Economic Review. forthcoming. [NBER WP 6002. April 1997.]
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Sylvester Schieber, Eds. Living with Defined
      Contribution Pensions, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania
      Press, 1998.
Mitchell, Olivia S., David McCarthy, Stanley Wisniewski, and Paul Zorn.
      “Developments in State and Local Pension Plans”. In Public Sector
      Pensions. Eds. Olivia S. Mitchell and Edwin Hustead. Philadelphia, PA:
      University of Pennsylvania Press, forthcoming.
      [http://prc.wharton.upenn.edu/prc/99-4.PDF]
                                                                                36




Piascentini, J. and T. Cerino. EBRI Databook on Employee Benefits. Washington,
      D.C.: EBRI, 1990.
Rappaport, Anna M., Michael Young, Christopher Levell, and Brad Blalock.
      “Cash Balance Pension Plans” In Living with Defined Contribution
      Pensions, Olivia S. Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber, Eds. Philadelphia, PA:
      University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998: 29-45.
Sass, Steven. The Promise of Private Pensions. Cambridge: Harvard University
      Press, 1997.
Turner, John and Daniel J. Beller. Trends in Pensions 1988. Washington, D.C.:
      US Dept. of Labor, PWBA, 1998
Table 1

Age and Length of Service Requirements for Pension Participation: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1981-97



                                                                                        Percent of full-time participants
Type of requirements         1981        1982        1983        1984         1985       1986        1988†           1988     1989         1991         1993        1995           1997

No minimum age
 and/or service
 requirements                   41          39         37           37          40          40           37           33         35           29          34          31             31

With minimum
 age and/or
 service
 requirements                   59          61         63           63          59          59           63           66         66           71          66          69             68
 Service only                   20          23         20           22          23          21           27           28         26           26          26          27             28
   1 year or
     less                      NA          NA          18           20          21          17           23           24         22           26          26          25             27
 Age only                       4           4           3            3           3           3            3            3          4            4           4           3              1
 Age and
   service                      35          34         39           39          32          35           33           34         34           39          37          36             36
   Age 25 and 1
     year*                     NA          NA          35           34         NA           NA          NA           NA         NA           NA           NA          NA            NA
   Age 21 and 1
     year*                     NA          NA          NA          NA           13          18           31           33         31           36          30          34             34

With maximum
 age limitation**               58          61         55           61          61          58           47           47        NA           NA           NA          NA            NA




  * The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 required that pension plans allow full-time employees age 25+ with at least 1 year of service to participate. The Retirement
Equity Act of 1984 required that nearly all plans allow participation to full-time employees age 21+ with at least 1 year of service by June 1986. The 1986 data surveyed plans prior to the law
change.
  ** ERISA permitted plans to impose a maximum age for participation within 5 years of the plan's normal retirement date. The Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1986 eliminated such
maximums for plan years beginning in January 1988, with slightly later dates for collectively bargained plans.
  † In a few cases the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†," whereas tabulations from 1988 and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1981-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988† figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data
in 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 2

Vesting Schedules: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97



                                                                                                  Percent of full-time participants
Vesting formula                1980         1981          1982          1983          1984         1985             1986            1988      1989          1991        1993    1995   1997

Cliff Vesting: *                 89            91            90            89            89           88             89              82         89            92         96      96     96
Full vesting after:
 10 years at any
     age                         70            67            66            65            66           69             69              62         29            16         12       6       6
 10 years after
     given age                   19            21            22            22            19           17             18              15          9            ---         ---    NA      ---
 5 years at any
     age                        NA            NA            NA            NA            NA            NA             NA              45         44            69         79      87     85

Graduated
 Vesting: **                     11            13            12            13            14           13             13              17         11             8           4      3       3
Full vesting after:
 <10 years of
   service                      NA            NA            NA            NA            NA            NA               6              9          9             5         NA      NA       3
 15 years of
   service                        5             4             4             4             4             3              3              5          2           NA          NA      NA      ---

  *A cliff vesting schedule requires an employee to satisfy specific service conditions in order to become 100% vested. ERISA defined 10 years as the maximum
requirement for this form of vesting. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 required single-employer plans to convert to a 5-year schedule if using cliff vesting:
this provision was to be adopted by most plans during 1989, with slightly later dates for collectively bargained plans. ** Graduated vesting schedules
give an employee rights to a gradually increasing share of accrued pension benefits, eventually reaching 100% at specified age and/or service points.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1980-1997." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS)
was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later comparable
with previous years' tabulations.
Table 3

Defined Benefit Plans: Employee Contribution Requirements 1993-1997


                                          Percent of full-time participants
                                     1993           1995                1997

% with Employee
 contribution required                  3               3                5
% pre-tax allowed                       1               1               NA


 Note: NA = not available

  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits
in Medium and Large Firms, 1993-1997".
Table 4

Minimum Age and Service Requirements for Early Retirement: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97


                                                                                                                     Percent of full-time participants
Type of requirement                      1980            1982            1982           1983            1984           1985             1986             1988          1989            1991      1993   1995    1997

Plans permitting early
  retirement *                              98             98              97              97              97             97              98              98              97                98    95     96      95
Service requirements alone                  10              5               5               6               5              4               5               7               6                 7     5     NA       8
    30 years required                        9              5               5               6               5              4               5               6               5                 6     4     NA       8
  Age requirements alone                     9             10               9              10              10              9              10              10               6                 6     2     NA       3
    Age 55                                   8              9               9              10               9              9              10              10               6                 5     2     NA       3
  Age and service requirements:
    Age 55 and 5 years                      3                4               4              3               4              3               3               4               9                17    20     NA      20
    Age 55 and 10 years                    NA              36              35              35              39             43              41              44              43                32    32     NA      30
    Age 55 and 15 years                    NA              11              10               9               7              8               7              10               8                10    12     NA       9
    Age 60 and 10 years                    NA                4               4              5               5              4               4               5               4                 4     3       1      2
    Age 62 and 10 years                    NA               ---             ---            ---             ---            ---             ---             ---              2                 2     2       --     1
  Age plus service sum                      5                9             10               9              10             10               9               4               4                 6     3       4      8
    Sum equals 80 or less                  NA              NA              NA               6               6              5               5               2               1                 2     2       3      6
    Sum equals 85 or more                   3                6               5              5               5              4               4               1              ---                1    ---     ---     1

Plans not permitting early
  retirement                                 2               2               3              3               3               3               2              2               3                2      5       4      5

  * Early retirement is defined as the point when a worker can retire and immediately receive accrued benefits based on service and earnings; benefits are reduced for years prior to the
normal age.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding: NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1980-1997." A comparable Employee Benefits (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely
comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 5

Minimum Age and Service Requirements for Normal Retirement:* Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97


                                                                                               Percent of full-time participants
Type of requirement               1980         1981         1982          1983         1984        1985          1986      1988†    1988       1989       1991       1993        1995      1997

Service requirements alone          11            14           13            17          17           14         13           9         7          8         8           5           6         5
 30 years required                  11            14           13            16          16           14         13           9         7          7         7           4           5         4
Age requirements alone              45            46           43            38          40           37         40          35        42         43        39         33          48        41
 Age 60                              2             2            2             4           3            4          4           4         3          4         2           3           1         3
 Age 62                              4             4            4             2           4            4          4           4         6          6         6           3           3         3
 Age 65                             39            39           36            31          33           29         32          27        33         33        30         26          36        29
Age & service reqs.                 37            33           36            36          34           39         36          41        39         37        46         55          48        54
 Age 55 and 20 years                NA             2            2             2           2            1          2           1         1          1         1          ---         ---       ---
 Age 55 and 30 years                NA             2            2             2           2            2          1           1         1          1         1           3           3        ---
 Age 60 and 1-5 years               NA            ---          ---           ---          2           ---         3           2         2          2        ---          3           1         1
 Age 60 and 10 years                NA             2            2             2           2            4          3           3         2          2         2           1           3         2
 Age 60 and 15-20 years             NA           **1          **2           **3           2            1          1           3         3          1         1          ---         ---        1
 Age 60 and 30 years                NA             2            2             4           3            3          3           2         1          3         2           4           2         2
 Age 62 and 1-5 years               NA             1            1             1           1            1          1           4        ---         2         2           5           4         3
 Age 62 and 10 years                NA             8            9             6           7           11          7          13        11         10         7           7           9       11
 Age 62 and 15-20 years             NA           **2          **2           **2           2            4          4           2         2          2         4           3           7         3
 Age 62 and 30 years                NA             2            2             3           1            2          1           3         2          2        ---          1           2         1
 Age 65 and 5 years                  2             1            1             1           1            1          2           1         1          2        10         15            9       15
 Age 65 and 10 years                NA             3            5             5           3            2          2           2         5          2         4           2           2         3
Age plus service sum                 6             7            8             9           9           10         11          15        12         12         6           8           9         8
 Equals 80                           1            ---           1             1           1            1          1           1         1          1         1           1           1         1
 Equals 85                           3             3            3             4           4            4          5           6         5          6         3         NA          NA        NA
 Equals 90 +                         1             1            2             2           2            3          4           5         4          4        ---          2           1        ---

   *At normal retirement a participant can retire and receive unreduced benefits immediately.
   **Data available for 15 years' service only instead of 15-20.
   †In a few cases, the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes, these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†", whereas tabulations from 1988 and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1980-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBC sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 6

Benefit Formulas in Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97


                                                                                   Percent of full-time participants
Formula based on          1980       1981       1982        1983       1984       1985       1986       1988†        1988       1989       1991       1993       1995        1999

Dollar amount               30          32         30         28          28         29         26          27         26         22         23          22         23         23
No alternative              27          29         28         27          27         28         25          26         25         19         21          21         23         23

Earnings                    68          66         67         70          68         70         72          71         72         75         70          72         69         67
Terminal earnings           53          50         52         54          54         57         57          54         55         64         56          61         58         56
 No alternative             21          26         27         24          24         27         29          26         30         35         38          40         40         37
Career earnings             15          16         15         16          14         13         15          17         17         11         14          11         11         11
 No alternative              8          10          9         10           8          7          8          10         11          6         10           8          6          8

Cash account or
 money purchase             ---         ---        ---         1           2         ---         ---         1          1          2           3          3          3           6

Percent of
 contributions              ---          2          2          1           2          1          ---        ---         1          1           4          2          2           3

   *Alternative formulas are generally designed to provide a minimum benefit for employees with short service or low earnings.
   †In a few cases, the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes, these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†", whereas tabulations from 1988 and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1980-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBC sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 7

Definition of Earnings Used in Earnings-Based Benefit Formulas:*
Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1988-97


                                                    Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                           Total
                                          1988       1989       1991       1993         1995   1997

Basic or straight-time earnings only        44         53         56          67         62        NA

Plus overtime                               43         37         35         32          32        NA
  Shift differentials                       35         30         19         23          24        NA
  Bonuses                                   32         29         30         NA          NA        NA
  Commissions                               32         28         20         19          18        NA

   *Tabulations exclude supplemental pension payments.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1988-97." Comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) tabulations are not
available for earlier years.
Table 8

Career Earnings Benefit Formulas by Type: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1983-91


                                                               Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                     1983      1984     1985    1986      1988       1989      1991   1993    1995    1997

Flat percent per year of service       37       36       31       40       35        40        36     NA       NA      NA
  Less than 1.25 percent                7        5        6        5        3         8         6     NA       NA      NA
  1.25_1.74                            26       27       18       29       24        23        21     NA       NA      NA
  1.75-2.00                             1        3        1       ---       2         2         1     NA       NA      NA
  2.00 or more                          2        1        6        4        5         8         7     NA       NA      NA

Percent per year of service            63       64       68       60       63        59        60     NA       NA      NA
 By earnings                           60       62       63       56       57        43        51     NA       NA      NA
 By service                             3        2        4        4        5         4         4     NA       NA      NA
 Other                                 ---      ---       1       ---       1        12         9     NA       NA      NA

   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available,
and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1983-97."
A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988
to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 9

Terminal Earnings Benefit Formulas by Type: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1983-97


                                                                       Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                             1983    1984      1985     1986     1988         1989        1991   1993    1995    1997

Definition of terminal earnings:
 Five years                                  83       86        84        84        82        81          82     83       78     78
    Last 5                                    5        2         5         4         4         3           6      3        3      1
    High 5                                    8        9        11        10        12        12          10     16       11     13
    High consecutive 5                       70       75        70        69        67        65          67     65       64     65

  Three years                                14       11        12        13        13        16          15     14       17     17
    Last 3                                   ---       1         1         1         1         1           2      1       ---     1
    High 3                                    2        1         3         1         1         3           1      3        5      5
    High consecutive 3                       12        9         7        11        11        12          11      9       12     12

Other                                          3        3        4         3         5          3          3      2         3     3

Fraction of pay used in benefit formulas:
  Flat percent per year of service           47       49        50        57        54        54          42     48       37     35
    Loss than 1.25 percent                    8        5         6         7         6        12           9      9       12     11
    1.25-1.74                                23       26        29        32        34        25          24     30       18     14
    1.75-2.00                                 4        5         5         5         4         5           3      4        3      9
    2.00 or more                             11       14         9        13        10        12           5      5        4      5

Other percent per year of service            53       51        50        43        46        46          57     51       62     65
   By earnings                               23       24        25        20        23        24          36     36       41     39
   By service                                24       22        18        16        16        16           9      7        8     11
   Other                                      6        5         7         7         7         6          13      8       13     16

   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available,
and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1983-97."
A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to
include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 10

Dollar Amount Benefit Formulas by Type: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1983-97


                                                          Percent of full-time participants
Amount per year of service    1983     1984     1985      1986     1988        1989       1991   1993   1995    1997

Flat monthly amount             71       75        66       59        73         81        95     97     94      97
  <$5.00                         3       ---        3        4        ---         2         1      2      4       8
  $5.00-9.99                    16       19        10       10         8          7         5      6      2       4
  $10.00-14.99                  16       18        16       10        16         12         8      6      4       3
  $15.00-19.99                  27       30        28       21        20         18        26     12      9      10
  $20.00-24.99                   4        4         4       10        19         23        23     29     15      12
  $25.00-29.99                   1        2         2        3         5         16        17     18      9      11
  $30.00 +                       3        2         2        2         5          3        15     25     51      50

Amount varies                   29       25        34       40        27         19         5      3       6       3
 With service                    3        5         8        6         8          4         3      1       6       3
 With earnings                  28       20        26       34        19         15         2      2      ---     ---

   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1983-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 11

Integration of Benefit Payments With Social Security: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97


                                                                              Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                         1980    1981     1982     1983     1984    1985      1986     1988      1989   1991    1993   1995   1997

Without integrated formula                 55      57      55       45       44        39       38       38      37      46      52    49     51

With integrated formula                    45      43      45       55       56        61       62       62      63      54      48    51     49
  Benefit offset by SS payment*            30      33      35       35       36        40       43       39      41      19      17    14     13
  Excess formula**                         16      10      10       20       20        27      24        26      24      36      31    37     36

    *Pension benefit calculated is reduced by a portion of primary social security payment.
    **Pension formula applies lower benefit ratio to earnings subject to social security taxes below a specified dollar threshold.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1980-97."
A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to
include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 12

Reduction Factors for Early Retirement and Early Receipt of Deferred Vested Benefits: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1982-97


                                                                                     Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                              1982       1983      1984       1985         1986          1988       1989   1991     1993   1995   1997

(1) Early retirement reduction factor
     where applied:
    Uniform percentage* per year                46        45         41         49           46          50         49     47       36     40     43
      Less than 3.0 percent                      2         1          1          2            2           3          3      3        2      4      3
      3.0                                        7         7          7         10           10           8          8      6        4      3      6
      3.01 to 4.9                                9         8         10         12            9           9         10     10       10      7      6
      5.0 to 5.9                                 7         9          6          7            9          10         12      8        8      7      9
      6.0                                       16        16         15         14           13          14         11     15       11     14     17
      6.1 and over                               5         3          2          3            3           6          4      4        2      5      4

Percent varies with:
   Age                                          30        35         56         49           51          49         49     49       54     57     57
   Service                                       3         3          3          2            2           2          1      3       10      3      4

(2) Deferred vested reduction factor
    where applied:
    Uniform percentage* per year               NA         NA        NA         NA           NA           34         34     34       NA     NA     NA
       Less than 3.0 percent                   NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            1          1      1       NA     NA     NA
       3.0                                     NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            4          5      5       NA     NA     NA
       3.1 to 4.9                              NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            4          7      6       NA     NA     NA
       5.0 to 5.9                              NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            6          9      4       NA     NA     NA
       6.0                                     NA         NA        NA         NA           NA           12          8     13       NA     NA     NA
       6.1 and over                            NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            5          4      5       NA     NA     NA

Percent varies with:
   Age                                         NA         NA        NA         NA           NA           65         65     65       NA     NA     NA
   Service                                     NA         NA        NA         NA           NA            1          1      1       NA     NA     NA

(3) Def. Vested available
prior to normal age                                                                                                        NA       98     93     90
Reduction same
as early                                                                                                                   49       46     60     52

    *Uniform percentage early retirement factors may approximate actuarial reductions.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available,
and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1981-97."
 A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988
 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 13

Average Pension Replacement Rates for Specified Illustrative Workers: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1984-97


                                                                        Retirement annuity as percent of final earnings*
Illustrative worker with                            1984      1985       1986       1988         1989       1991      1993   1995   1997

10 years of service and final annual earnings of:
  $15,000                                           11.0      10.9        11.1        11.9       12.1      14.2       8.1     NA     NA
   20,000                                            9.9       9.8        10.0        10.5       10.9       NA        NA      NA     NA
   25,000                                            9.7       9.5         9.7        10.0       10.4      12.0       6.9     NA     NA
   30,000                                            9.7       9.5         9.7         9.8        9.9       NA        NA      NA     NA
   35,000                                            9.7       9.6         9.7         9.8        9.8      11.2       6.6     NA     NA
   45,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     10.8       6.4     NA     NA
   55,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     10.8       6.3     NA     NA
   65,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     10.8       6.3     NA     NA

20 years of service and final annual earnings of:
  $15,000                                           21.0      21.2        21.6        23.1       23.4      27.4      17.0     NA     NA
   20,000                                           18.8      19.1        19.5        20.4       21.1       NA        NA      NA     NA
   25,000                                           18.4      18.6        18.9        19.3       20.0      22.9      15.0     NA     NA
   30,000                                           18.5      18.6        18.9        19.0       19.8       NA        NA      NA     NA
   35,000                                           18.6      18.7        19.1        19.1       19.9      21.4      14.1     NA     NA
   45,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     20.9      13.5     NA     NA
   55,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     20.8      13.3     NA     NA
   65,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     20.1      13.3     NA     NA

30 years of service and final annual earnings of:
  $15,000                                           30.8      31.4        31.5        33.5       34.6      39.3      27.0     NA     NA
   20,000                                           27.4      28.3        28.5        29.6       31.3       NA        NA      NA     NA
   25,000                                           26.6      27.6        27.6        28.0       29.7      32.5      23.6     NA     NA
   30,000                                           26.5      27.3        27.4        27.3       29.4       NA        NA      NA     NA
   35,000                                           26.5      27.3        27.4        27.3       29.5      30.8      22.2     NA     NA
   45,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     30.2      21.5     NA     NA
   55,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     29.0      21.0     NA     NA
   65,000                                             ---       ---         ---         ---        ---     29.1      21.0     NA     NA

    *The maximum private pension was calculated using the earnings and service shown, not reduced for early retirement or
joint-and-survivor annuities. Replacment rates refer to the ratio of the retirement pension to the final year's earnings.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means
 data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1984-97."
 A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988
 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable
with previous years' tabulations.
Table 14

Prevalence of Ad hoc Postretirement Benefit Annuity Increases:*
Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1983-97


                                                                       Percent of full-time participants
Benefit increases                              1983    1984    1985      1986      1988      1989      1991   1993   1995   1997

At least one postretirement increase in last
   5 years                                      51      47      41          35       27        24       ---    10      7     NA

Automatic COLA                                   ---     ---     ---        ---      ---       ---      ---     4      3      ---

Discretionary in last 5 years                    ---     ---     ---        ---      ---       ---      ---     6      4      ---

   *Unscheduled increases in pension payments for already-retired employees.
   **Figures exclude one-time lump-sum payments.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1983-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 15

Maximum Benefit Provisions: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1984-97


                                                   Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula             1984     1985     1986     1988         1989       1991    1993   1995   1997

Not subject to maximum        58       60       59         60         59        61      63      65    67
Subject to maximum*           42       40       41         40         41        39      37      35    33
 Limit on service years       34       34       36         37         37        37      37      33    31
    Less than 20               2        2        2          1          1         1       5       5     --
    20-29                      5        3        6          6          5         5       5       5     6
    30-39                     32       24       22         23         24        25      25      29    19
    40 or more                 4        5        7          9          9         8       7       5     6
 Other limit                  11        8        7          6          6         4       1       1     2

   *Sums of individual items do not equal totals because more than one maximum may apply.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1984-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 16

Disability Retirement Provisions: Defined Benefit Pension Plans, 1980-97


                                                                  Percent of full-time participants
Plan characteristics                  1980   1981   1982   1983   1984 1985 1986 1988 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997

Disability retirement available        87     88     89     91     90    85    89    92         81    79    69   73    75
Minimum requirements for disability
   retirement where available:
 No age or service                     16     15     16     14     17    16    13    13         12    20    11   11    NA
 Service only                          61     57     56     57     52    54    50    57         56    54    36   28    NA
 Age only                               1      1     ---    ---    ---   ---   ---    1         ---   ---    1   ---   NA
 Qualifies for LTD*                    11     18     20     21     22    20    25    31         31    18    16   17    NA
Benefit provisions for disability
    retirement where available:
  Immediate                            70     67     66     66     62    60    55    52         57    63    41   45    46
     Unreduced normal                  55     51     51     50     48    47    41    39         42    46    32   29    30
     Other                             15     16     15     16     14    13    14    13         15    17     9   16    17
Deferred                               30     33     34     34     38    40    45    48         43    37    23   28    28
       Service credit to retirement    24     27     30     29     31    32    37    39         37    28    24   24    24
       Other                            6      6      4      5      7     8     8     9          6     9     4    4     4

   *Long term disability insurance.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1980-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 17

Defined Benefit Plans: Lump Sum Available at Retirement, 1991-97



                             Percent of full time participants
                           1991        1993           1995       1997

% with Lump Sum              14            10           15          23
  Full Amount                 9             9           15          22
  Amount Limited              5             3            5           1


Note: Sums may not add up due to rounding.

  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee
Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1991-1997."
Table 18

Participation in Retirement and Capital Accumulation Plans, 1985-97


                                                         Percent of full-time employees
Plan participation              1985    1986    1988†        1988        1989      1991   1993   1995   1997

Not covered by a plan              8        9       12         18         17        21     NA     NA     NA
Covered by a plan                 92       91       88         82         83        79     NA     NA     NA
  Retirement only*                71       67       69         68         69        69     NA     NA     NA
  Capital accumulation only**      1        1        2          2          1         1     NA     NA     NA
  Both                            20       22       17         12         12         9     NA     NA     NA

   *Includes defined benefit and defined contribution plans such as money purchase pensions,
profit sharing, and savings and thrift plans when employer contributions must remain in the
participant's account until retirement, death, disability, separation from service, age 59 1/2, or
hardship.
   **Includes plan in which employer contributions may be withdrawn from participant's
account prior to retirement, death, disability, separation from service, age 59 1/2, or hardship.
  †In a few cases the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame
similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†," whereas tabulations from 1988
and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1980-1997." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987.
The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before,
so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 19

Combinations of Retirement and Capital Accumulation Plans, 1985-97

                                                          Percent of full-time participants
Combinations covering participants     1985     1986      1988     1989         1991      1993   1995   1997

Defined benefit plan with:                89       85       76        76         59       56      52     50
  No other plan                           45       35       45        42         35       61      NA     NA
  Profit sharing*                          5       13        9         7          5        3      NA     NA
  Savings/thrift                          15       15       21        24         15       17      NA     NA
  Stock plan                              23       22        1         2          1       NA      NA     NA
  Money purchase                          ---      ---       1         1          1        2      NA     NA

Profit sharing plan with:                  9       11       12        10         16       13      13     13
  No other plan                            7        8       10         8          8        6      NA     NA
  Savings/thrift                           1        1        1         1          1        2      NA      --
  Stock plan                               1        1        1         1         ---      NA      NA     NA

Money purchase plan with:                 ---      ---       5          5         7        8       7      8
  No other plan                           ---      ---       5          4         5       NA      NA     NA
  Savings/thrift                          ---      ---       1          1         1       NA      NA     NA

Savings/thrift plan with:                  1        3        5          8        29        29     41     39
  No other plan                            1        2        5          8        15         5     NA     NA

Stock plan with:                          ---       1        1          1        2         ---     2      1
   No other plan                          ---       1        1          1       NA        NA      NA     NA

   *Includes profit sharing and saving/stock combination plans; excludes pure cash profit
sharing plans.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 20

Participation In Cash or Deferred Plans Including Salary Reduction Plans, 1985-97


                                                    Percent of full-time employees
Type of plan                  1985     1986    1988†    1988         1989    1991    1993    1995     1997

Cash or deferred plan*          26       33       42        36       41        44     36         45    NA
Salary reduction plan           26       31       40        34       38        40     35         44    NA
  Salary and thrift             18       21       27        22       28        28     29         37    NA
  Profit sharing                 4        6        9         7        4         4      4          5    NA
  Money purchase                 1        1       ---       ---       1         1     NA         NA    NA
  Other                          3        3        5         6        5         4      3          2    NA

   *Cash or deferred plans are included only if they allow income to be deferred; data include
employee contributions to various retirement plans but exclude cases where employee
contributions may be required to a defined benefit pension plan.
  †In a few cases the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame
similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†," whereas tabulations from 1988
and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988? Figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling
frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for
1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 21

Participation in Defined Contribution Plans, 1985-97


                     Percent of full-time employees
Type of plan             1985       1986    1988†     1988   1989   1991     1993     1995       1997

Savings and thrift         27        28        32      25     30      29       29       41        39
Profit sharing             18        22        21      18     16      16       13       13        13
Stock ownership            24        30         2       2      3       3        3        5         4
Stock bonus                 1        ---       ---     ---    ---     ---      ---       2        NA
Money purchase              4         2         3       6      5       7        8        7         8

  †In a few cases the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame
similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†," whereas tabulations from 1988
and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
  Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988† figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling
frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for
1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 23

Vesting Schedules: Savings and Thrift, Deferred Profit Sharing, and 401(k) Plans, 1985-97

                                                     Percent of full-time participants
Savings and Thrift Plans         1985     1986      1988      1989        1991       1993   1995   1997
Type of formula
Immediate full vesting             25       26        27        30         31         34     33     29
Cliff vesting* with full
     vesting after                 12       20        20        24         31         29     25     30
  1-2 years                         3        5         3         2          2          2      1      3
  3-4                               2        7         7        11          9          9      5      6
  5+                                7        8        10        12         19         18     18     21
Graduated vesting** with
      full vesting after           28       25        32        30         35         33     24     33
   <4 years                         4        2         4         4          3          5      3     10
   5                               16       15        21        19         21         18     12     15
   6-9                              4        4         3         5         10         10      8      9
   10+                              4        4         4         2         ---        ---    ---    ---
Other                              35       29        21        16         ---        ---    ---    ---

Deferred Profit Sharing Plan     1985     1986      1988      1989       1991      1993     1995   1997
Immediate full vesting            NA        29        22        37         40        18       37     29
Cliff vesting* with full
     vesting after                 NA        2         2        12         18         21     22     30
  1-2 years                        NA        2        ---       ---        ---        ---     2      3
  3-4                              NA        1        ---        4          1          6      2      6
  5+                               NA        1         2         8         16         15     17     21
Graduated vesting** with
      full vesting after           NA       66        73        50         41         55     34     33
   <4 years                        NA       ---        1         2          2          2      1     10
   5                               NA        3         7         6          4         16      4     15
   6-9                             NA       14        29        28         37         37     28      9
   10+                             NA       49        35        15         ---         1      1     ---
Other                              NA        4         2         1         ---        ---    ---    ---
Table 23 (continued)

401(k) Plans                                       1993             1995               1997

Immediate full vesting                                   34            39                  34
Cliff vesting* with full
    vesting after                                        26            24                  27
  1-2 years                                               2             1                   3
  3-4                                                     8             5                   5
  5+                                                     16            18                  19
Graduated vesting** with
     full vesting after                                  37            27                  32
  <4 years                                                4             3                  11
  5                                                      18            13                  13
  6-9                                                    14            10                   9
  10+                                                    ---           ---                 ---
Other                                                    ---           ---                 ---

  *A cliff vesting schedule requires an employee to satisfy specific service conditions in order
to become 100% vested. ERISA defined 10 years as the maximum requirement for this form of
vesting. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 required single-employer plans to convert to a 5-year
schedule is using cliff vesting; this provision was to be adopted by most plans during 1989, with
slightly later dates for collectively bargained plans.
  **Graduated vesting schedules give an employee rights to a gradually increasing share of
accrued pension benefits, eventually reaching 100% at specified age and/or service points.
 Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
 Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988† figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling
frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for
1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 24

Employee Contributions in Savings and Thrift and 401(k) Plans, 1985-97

                                                                                                       Percent of participants
Savings and Thrift Plans                                             1985         1986          1988        1989           1991         1993         1995         1997
Type of formula
Basis of maximum contribution, if allowed/required:
  Specified dollar amount                                                 2            2           2            1             1            2            1              1
  Fraction of earnings                                                  97           98           95           97            93           91           83             89
     <5%                                                                ---            1           1            2             5            5            2              2
     6-9                                                                  5          10            8            9             7           10            5              4
     10                                                                 17           13           13           12            12           19           10              7
     11-14                                                              21           20           19           20            11           15           13             15
     15                                                                   8            9          14           17            20           19           21             33
     16                                                                 32           29           24           21            22           16           18             17
     17-19                                                                8            8           9            9            10            4            7              8
     20+                                                                  6            7           6            7             5            2            6              3
  Other                                                                   1          ---           3            2             5            7           16             10
Tax status of contribution, if allowed/required:
  Pretax contribution
      Not allowed                                                       35           25           15            8             2          NA            NA             NA
      Allowed                                                           65           75           85           92            98          NA            NA             NA

                                                                                                       Percent of participants
                                                                     1985         1986          1988        1989           1991         1993         1995         1997
401(k) Plans
Basis of maximum contribution, if allowed/required:
  Specified dollar amount                                              NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             2            1              1
  Fraction of earnings                                                 NA           NA            NA           NA           NA            91           83             87
     <5%                                                               NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             5            4              4
     6-9                                                               NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             8           10              5
     10                                                                NA           NA            NA           NA           NA            19           12             11
     11-14                                                             NA           NA            NA           NA           NA            15           13             11
     15                                                                NA           NA            NA           NA           NA            19           20             31
     16                                                                NA           NA            NA           NA           NA            16           12             11
     17-19                                                             NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             4            7              7
     20+                                                               NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             2            5              3
  Other                                                                NA           NA            NA           NA           NA             7           16             12
Tax status of contribution, if allowed/required:
  Pretax contribution
      Not allowed                                                      NA           NA            NA           NA           NA           NA            NA             NA
      Allowed                                                          NA           NA            NA           NA           NA           NA            NA             NA

   Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and
 "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished
data from the BLS for 1988? Figures. A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling frame
changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 25

Employer Contributions in Savings and Thrift Plans, 1985-97


                                 Percent of full-time participants
Employer matching* contributions   1985       1986      1988      1989   1991   1993   1995     1997

Specified dollar amount                  9        7        5        4       1    NA     NA       NA
Fraction of salary up to:
  <5%                                   12       28       35       36      39     40    NA       NA
   6%                                   52       54       47       47      43     46    NA       NA
   >7%                                  14       11       11       12      14     15    NA       NA

    *Employees may contribute a percentage of salary up to a maximum; ceilings on employer
matching contributions are generally lower.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988† figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling
frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for
1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 26

Provisions of Deferred Profit Sharing Plans, 1986-97


                                                   Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula                        1986     1988   1989        1991      1993    1995      1997

Employer contributions:
(1) Based on stated formula              59        55       60       52       40      62         62
   Fixed % of profits                    NA        16       10       10       11      28         20
   Variable % of profits                 NA        12       18       24       15      25         27
   Other formulas                        NA        27       33       17       15      12         15

(2) No formula                            41       45       40       48       60      38         38

Allocation of profits to employees:
   Equally to all                          1        1        1        2        7       6         18
   Based on earnings                      61       74       64       52       52      56         49
   Based on earnings and service          10       12        9       13       11       7          8
   Other                                   8       13       26       33       30      31         24

Loans from employee's accounts:
  Permitted                               25       32       19       27       23      33         32
  Not permitted                           75       68       81       73       77      67         68

  Note: Data exclude supplemental / pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
  Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-1997" and unpublished data from the BLS for 1988? Figures. A
comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBS sampling
frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more industries than before, so data for
1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 27A

Provisions for Withdrawal of Employer Contributions Prior to Retirement,
Disability or Termination of Employment: Savings and Thrift Plans,
1985-97


                                                        Percent of full-time participants
Type of formula               1985     1986     1988†       1988         1989      1991     1993   1995   1997

No withdrawals permitted        20        18       29          28         29         50       51     43     48

Withdrawals permitted           80        82       71          72         71         50      47     43     52
  For any reason                61        56       42          41         37         24      29     16     18
    No penalty                  30        19       15          14         17         16      NA     NA     NA
    Some penalty                30        37       26          25         18          8      NA     NA     NA

  For hardship reason*          19        26       29          30         34         26      18     28     35
     No penalty                 14        21       21          22         27         17      NA     NA     NA
     Some penalty                3         5        6           7          7          9      NA     NA     NA

   *Commonly expressed hardship reasons include purchase or repair of primary residence,
death or illness in the family, education of an immediately family member, or suddent uninsured loss.
   †In a few cases, the Bureau of Labor Statistics tabulated 1988 results using a sampling frame
similar to that employed in previous years. For comparability purposes, these figures have been
presented, where available, under columns headed "1988†", whereas tabulations from 1988
and 1989 otherwise employ the new, larger survey sampling frame.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1981-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBC sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 27B

Loan Provisions of 401(k) Plans: 1993-97


                                  Percent of full-time participants
                                   1993              1995             1997

Loans Permitted                       43              49               51
  Hardship only                        3               4                4
  Any reason                          39              44               44

Not permitted                         56              46               40
Not determinable                       1              15                9

   *Many plants offer more than one form of cash distribution so sums of
individual items exceed total.
    Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal
totals because of rounding. NA means data not available, and "---"
means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1985-97." A comparable
 Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not conducted in 1987. The EBC
sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely
comparable with previous years' tabulations.
Table 28

Method of Distribution of Account at Retirement: Savings and Thrift Plans, 1985-97


                                                Percent of full-time participants
Type of distribution       1985      1986     1988   1989         1991     1993     1995              1997

Cash distribution*            99       99        97       97        99       NA       NA                  NA
  Lifetime annuity            29       25        25       28        30       30       17                  25
  Installments                59       52        49       52        52       48       30                  41
  Lump sum                    99       98        95       96        99       98       85                  91

   *Many plants offer more than one form of cash distribution so sums of individual items exceed total.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBC sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 29

Method of Distribution of Account at Retirement: 401(k) Plans: 1993-97


                                             Percent of full-time participants
Type of distribution                          1993                1995                1997

Cash distribution
  Lifetime Annuity                               34                   21                 27
  Installments                                   49                   34                 41
  Lump Sum                                       98                   92                 91

   *Many plants offer more than one form of cash distribution so sums of individual items exceed total.
   Note: Data exclude supplemental pension plans. Sums may not equal totals because of
rounding. NA means data not available, and "---" means less than 0.5 percent.
   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium
and Large Firms, 1985-97." A comparable Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) was not
conducted in 1987. The EBC sample frame changed in 1988 to include smaller firms and more
industries than before, so data for 1988 and later are not precisely comparable with previous
years' tabulations.
Table 30A

401(k) Plans: Investment Choices: 1993-97


                                       Percent of full-time participants
                                1993                1995                   1997
                         Ee              Er Ee                 Er Ee              Er
Investment Choices

Employee permitted to
  choose investments:    86               58   83              64   86            65
    1-2 choices          11                8   4                3   3              2
    3 choices            23               13   15              11   11             8
    4 choices            28               16   26              16   21            14
    > 5 choices          25               22   37              35   31            24




Note: Because of rounding, sums may not equal totals.

   Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits
in Medium and Large Firms, 1993-97."
Table 30B

Saving and Thrift Plans: Investment Choices, Investment Types, and Frequency of Investment Changes: 1989-97


Investment Choices                     1989                 1991                      1993                  1995             1997
                                      Ee         Er        Ee          Er        Ee          Er        Ee          Er   Ee          Er
Employee permitted to:
   Choose Investments                 90         53         91        62         86          58        74          58   87          65
  1-2 choices                         25         22         15        16         12          7         3           3    2           2
  3 choices                           36         40         32        33         21          13        13          10   11          3
  4 choices                           23         20         29        25         30          17        21          13   21          14
  >5 choices                          15         16         20        22         24          21        28          26   47          34

Types of Investment Choices
  Company stock                       60         50         50        36         43          49        40          27   42          25
  Common stock                        79         83         87        90         68          49        59          48   69          50
  LT interest-bearing sec.            32         37         44        46         42          28        48          36   59          43
  Diversified stock/bond              26         31         26        27         42          33        41          31   54          40
  Guaranteed Investment               64         59         71        70         43          30        25          20   20          15
  Money market                        35         41         38        43         26          20        30          25   35          28
  CD                                  3          4          2         2          1           1         4           2    3           2

Frequency of Investment Changes
  Total with choice allowed          NA          NA        NA         NA         86          58        74          58   87          65
    - Anytime                        NA          NA        NA         NA         25          19        38          32   47          36
    - Specified No.                  NA          NA        NA         NA         56          37        31          21   32          22
          1/yr                       NA          NA        NA         NA         4           2         3           2    2           1
          2-4/yr                     NA          NA        NA         NA         44          28        20          15   22          17
          >5/yr                      NA          NA        NA         NA         8           6         8           4    8           4
    - Other                          NA          NA        NA         NA         19          2         6           5    7           6


Note: Because of rounding, sums may not equal totals.

Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Firms, 1993-97."
