                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH AND THE
                              WELFARE EFFECTS OF THE EURO

                                          Michael B. Devereux
                                             Charles Engel
                                              Cedric Tille


                                           Working Paper 7382
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7382


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 1999




The authors thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for useful comments.
Michael Devereux and Charles Engel thank the SSHRC and the National Science Foundation for a grant to
the National Bureau of Economic Research, respectively. The views expressed in the paper are those of the
authors and are not necessarily reflective of views at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal
Reserve System or the NBER.

© 1999 by Michael B. Devereux, Charles Engel, and Cedric Tille. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rate Pass-through and the
Welfare Effects of the Euro
Michael B. Devereux, Charles Engel,
and Cedric Tille.
NBER Working Paper No. 7382
October 1999
JEL No. F3, F4




                                                ABSTRACT

        This paper explores the implications of the European single currency within a simple sticky price
intertemporal model. The main issue we focus on is how the euro may alter the responsiveness of consumer
prices to exchange rate changes. Our central conjectures is that the acceptance of the euro will lead
European prices to become more insulated from exchange-rate volatility, much the way U.S. consumer
prices already are. We show that this has profound consequences for both the volatility and levels of
macroeconomic aggregates in both the U.S. and Europe. We find that European welfare is enhanced, and,
more surprisingly, that the U.S. shares in Europe’s good fortune. Alternative assumptions about how
pricing behavior will change lead to different conclusions, but in all cases we can derive specific implications
for expected levels and volatility of macroeconomic variables.


Michael B. Devereux                                                  Charles Engel
Department of Economics                                              Department of Economics
1873 East Mall Bu Tower                                              University of Washington
Vancouver, BC 997 V6T 121                                   Seattle, WA 98195
devm@unixg.ubc.ca                                                    and NBER
                                                                     cmengel@u.washington.edu

Cedric Tille
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Fl.
New York, NY 10045
cedric.tille@ny.frb.org
Introduction



        The implementation of the single currency in Europe, to take full effect in January

2002, has received a great deal of attention from the public, the press and the academic

literature. Much of the academic literature has discussed the question of whether Europe is an

`optimal currency area', in the sense of Mundell (1961) and McKinnon (1963).2 This literature

has assumed that the main effect of the adoption of the euro is to fix permanently the currency

exchange rates in Europe. The emphasis has been on the incremental increase in the stability

of the exchange rate system when the single currency is finally fully adopted.

        Another strand of the academic literature shares the popular view that the adoption of

the Euro is a more fundamental change. For instance, this literature has explored the role of

the euro as an international currency (see Hartmann (1996) and Portes and Rey (1998)).

While at present world trade and financial flows are carried out predominantly in US dollars,

the relative importance of the dollar may diminish as the euro becomes more widely

acceptable in international transactions. The euro may become a `vehicle currency' which

competes with the US dollar, just as the US dollar in a previous epoch competed with (and

eventually replaced) the use of sterling.

        We focus on one aspect of the adoption of the euro as an international currency that

has heretofore been neglected, but which has potentially significant effects for

macroeconomic stability. When Europe becomes integrated into a single large currency area,

approximately equal in size to the U.S., it is likely that Euro consumer prices will become as

insulated in the short run from exchange-rate changes, as indeed U.S. prices have been, since

the dollar became the major vehicle currency. It is easy to understand this shift from a

transactions-cost perspective. Take the situation of a retail firm that markets US goods in

Europe. When there are a dozen European currencies within the EMU, the firm faces two


2
 See for instance Eichengreen (1992), Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993), De Grauwe (1994), Obstfeld
and Peri (1998).




                                               1
types of costs when exchange rates fluctuate. On the one hand, there are menu costs from

altering the price that consumers pay, as the exchange rate changes. This encourages the firm

to keep prices stable in consumers’ currencies. But if prices are set in the consumers’

currencies, and the firm is purchasing goods directly from US exporters, who set their prices

in dollars, its profits will be exposed to exchange-rate volatility. With a dozen European

currencies, the firm selling U.S. goods in Europe would need a dozen pricing decisions, and a

dozen exchange-rate hedging operations. These transactions costs would tend to tilt firms

toward stabilizing prices in dollar terms, which would mean that the prices consumers pay

would be more sensitive to changes in the dollar exchange rate.

           When Europe is consolidated into a single-currency area, the accounting costs for

pricing in the European consumers’ currency are reduced considerably. For example, it is

more likely that U.S. exports will be invoiced in euros. (Currently, there is an asymmetry such

that U.S. exports to Europe are heavily invoiced in dollars, but European exports to the U.S.

are also invoiced in dollars. See ECU Institute (1995).) Giovannini (1988) observes that the

currency of export price invoicing is important for the pass-through of exchange rate changes

to goods prices. But even if U.S. export price invoicing does not change, multinational

marketers are more likely to view Europe as a single marketing area and will develop pricing

plans in terms of euros.3 The importance of the euro as a payment and invoicing currency

has recently been recognized by the European Central Bank:

           ``..increasing use of the euro as a payment/vehicle and pricing/quotation currency

..could make the euro area Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) less sensitive, in

the short run, to US dollar exchange rate movements. … If euro area exports and imports are

increasingly invoiced in euro, the short-term effects of exchange rate changes on the goods

and services trade balance should be generally reduced4 ”

           We explore this issue within an international macro model with sticky nominal prices,

so that the currency of denomination of imported consumer goods has real effects on

3
    Much as IKEA sets dollar prices for the entire U.S. market (see Haskel and Wolf (1999)).




                                                    2
macroeconomic aggregates and welfare. Our central conjecture is that the introduction of the

euro will insulate European consumer goods prices from exchange rate changes. As a

consequence, the introduction of the euro will affect the volatility of real money balances, and

in turn macro aggregates such as consumption, in Europe. There are two effects that work in

opposite directions. First, the impact of European money shocks on the European real money

supply is magnified after the adoption of the euro. Pre-euro, when prices of imported U.S.

goods are more responsive to exchange-rate changes, there is an automatic stabilizer in effect.

If there is, for example, an increase in the money supply in Europe, European currencies

depreciate, raising the price that Europeans pay for U.S. goods. The real money supply rises

by less than the nominal money supply. That cushioning effect vanishes if euro prices do not

respond to exchange rate changes. Working the other way, U.S. money shocks also are

directly transmitted to the aggregate price level in Europe, pre-euro, through exchange rates.

That channel of real monetary instability is eliminated to the extent that euro prices are

unresponsive to dollar exchange-rate movements.

          If European and U.S. monetary shocks are about equal in size, and less than perfectly

correlated, the introduction of the euro will increase real monetary instability in Europe.

Intuitively, pre-euro there is a sort of diversification effect when European prices respond

quickly to the exchange rate. The variance of a weighted sum of European and U.S. money

shocks determines European real money volatility. Some of the European monetary variance

is dissipated through exchange-rate changes, while the exchange rate transmits some of the

U.S. monetary variance. But when the exchange-rate effect on European prices diminishes,

the diversification effect dwindles. In the extreme case of no short-run price response to

exchange-rate changes, European real money variance is determined by the variance of

European money shocks (which is greater than the variance of a weighted sum of European

and U.S. shocks). If this constituted the entire effect of the euro, then European consumers

would be worse off (and U.S. consumers would be unaffected).


4
    European Central Bank (1999).



                                               3
           But there is a second channel through which the euro affects welfare. Our model

follows Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998) in that goods prices are set optimally, taking into account

the stochastic environment that is faced by the firms. This implies that the introduction of the

euro will alter not just the volatility of macroeconomic aggregates, but through the adjustment

of goods prices, change the expected values of these aggregates (see Devereux and Engel

(1998)). We find that the introduction of the euro increases expected aggregate consumption

in Europe, through a relative-price stabilizing effect. As Rogoff (1996) has noted “short-term

exchange volatility point(s) to financial factors such as changes in portfolio preferences,

short-term asset price bubbles, and monetary shocks. Such shocks can have substantial effects

on the real economy in the presence of sticky nominal wages and prices.” In particular, before

the advent of the euro, prices paid by consumers for imported goods are excessively volatile.

They respond to exchange rates changes which, in the short run, do not reflect real demand

and supply factors, but rather are reacting as asset prices to financial market shocks. We find

that when prices are stabilized in euros and unresponsive in the short run to exchange rate

fluctuations, the elimination of the volatility of relative prices of imported to domestically-

produced goods enhances expected consumption and welfare.

           Since our model is utility based, we can ask how the euro affects expected utility of

U.S. and European consumers. We find for Europeans that the positive effects from the

reduction in relative-price volatility outweigh the increase in real monetary volatility. Some

simple numerical calibrations indicate that the gains to Europe from the introduction of the

euro are substantial when compared, for example, to the gains that might accrue from

elimination all monetary variability.

           A common view of the coming of the euro is that while Europe will gain, the U.S.

must be a loser.5 On the contrary, we find that the U.S. shares in Europe’s good fortune. The

channels that reduce relative price volatility and insulate Europe from U.S. monetary shocks

are reflected in increased asset prices. To the extent that Americans are diversified


5
    For example, Portes and Rey (1998) and Bergsten (1999).



                                                   4
internationally – our model assumes full diversification for simplicity – their portfolio of

assets will also increase in value.

        We briefly explore the implications of alternative assumptions about how pricing

might change. We examine the possibility that, to the contrary of our leading assumption,

U.S. prices may become more sensitive to exchange rate changes (while European prices

either remain as sensitive, or become less responsive.) Our welfare conclusions in some

circumstances change substantially depending on the pattern of pricing behavior.

        The paper is organized as follows. The next section develops the basic model. Section

2 derives our central positive results, the welfare impact being discussed in section 3. Section

4 discusses a variant of the model where US firms are constrained to set identical dollar prices

for domestic sales and exports. Section 5 allows pre-euro Europe to have floating exchange

rates. Section 6 discusses alternative changes in pricing practices that may follow from the

euro. A numerical example is presented in section 7, and conclusions follow.



1. The Model



        Our framework consists of a general equilibrium model in which the world is made of

two regions, the United States and Europe. Each region is populated by a continuum of

households. We normalize the world population to 1, and assume that households over the

[0, n) interval are residents of the United States, while households over the [n,1] interval live

in Europe. There also exists a continuum of firms in both regions, with the number of firms in

each region equal to the number of households. Within each region, firms are owned by the

domestic households. Our framework is characterized by monopolistic competition: each firm

is the sole producer of a particular brand, which is an imperfect substitute for the other

available brands. Firms therefore enjoy a degree of monopoly power in pricing.

        Throughout the analysis, there is only one currency used in the United States, namely

the US dollar. By contrast, there are initially several currencies in use in Europe, which are




                                               5
replaced by a unique currency, the euro. To simplify the exposition, we consider Europe as

one region, and present our results in terms of European wide per capita values. We could

instead write the model by considering a number N of European countries. Note however that

once the euro has been introduced, all European countries have the same currency and are

identical. Furthermore, in the main part of our analysis, we assume that pre-euro European

countries follow a fixed exchange rate regime. This implies that the economic situation is the

same in all European countries,6 and nothing is lost by focusing on European wide aggregates.

        In each country, there is a monetary authority, and the money supply fluctuates

stochastically. Before the introduction of the euro, each European country has its own

monetary authority, whose behavior may be constrained by the requirements of fixed intra-

European exchange rate. With the set-up of the single currency area, European money supply

is taken over by the European Central Bank.



        1.1. Households

        Households obtain utility from consumption and the liquidity services provided by

holdings of real balances, but incur disutility from working. The objective of household x,

living in region i at time t is to maximize her intertemporal utility given by:

                              ∞       1                                         M ( x )  
(1.1)         U it ( x) = Et ∑ β s −t        (Cis ( x) )1− ρ − ηLis ( x) + χ ln is i  
                               s =t  1 − ρ                                     Pis  

where β ∈ (0,1) is the discount factor, ρ > 0 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,

and η and χ are positive scaling parameters. C i (x) is a consumption basket defined below,

Li (x) is the number of hours worked, M i (x) denotes the holdings of domestic currency and

Pi k is the price of one unit of the basket consumed in region i, expressed in terms of region k

currency (k = eur denotes a price in the European currency, whereas k = dol denotes a price in


6
 Our analysis does not consider the case of asymmetric shocks across European countries. In such a
case, the economic situation wouldn’t be homogeneous within Europe.




                                                    6
US dollars). This is a quite a special utility function, with a linear cost of effort. But it has the

appeal that it allows us to derived closed form solutions for consumption and welfare in the

face of uncertainty in money supply and differences in pricing arrangements across countries.

        The consumption basket C i (x) is a composite of goods produced in the United

States and goods produced in Europe:


                           Ci ( x) =
                                            1
                                                 1− n
                                                      (Ci1 ( x) )n (Ci 2 ( x))1−n
                                       n (1 − n)
                                         n




where C ij (x) is the consumption by household x, living in region i, of the goods produced in

region j. We denote the United States as region 1 and Europe as region 2. The elasticity of

substitution between goods from different regions is equal to unity. Each region specific

basket C ij (x) is in turn a basket across the different brands produced in that region:

                                                                                        λ

                           C i1 ( x) = n                                       dv 
                                             −1                                             λ −1
                                                      ∫0 (Ci1 ( x, v))
                                                       n             λ −1
                                                  λ                         λ
                                                                                 
                                                                                                    λ

                           C i 2 ( x) = (1 − n) λ ∫ (C i 2 ( x, v) ) λ dv 
                                                −1  1                λ −1                               λ −1

                                                  n                      

where C ij ( x, v) is the consumption by household x, living in region i, of the brand produced

by firm v in region j. The elasticity of substitution between brands produced within a region is

λ , which we assume to be greater than 1.



        Consumption allocation

        The optimal allocation of a given overall consumption basket C i (x) across the

various available brands is given by:

                                                       −λ                                   −λ
                                  1  Pi1i (v)       Pi1i (v)                                   Pi i C i ( x)
                    C i1 ( x, v) =  i  C i1 ( x) =  i 
                                  n  Pi1            Pi1                                             Pi1i
(1.2)                                                       −λ                                       −λ
                                       1  Pi i2 (v)                Pi i2 (v)                           Pi i C i ( x)
                    C i 2 ( x, v ) =                 C    ( x ) =  i 
                                     1 − n  Pi i2 
                                                         i2
                                                                     Pi 2                                     Pi i2




                                                             7
where Pijk (v) is the price, expressed in region k currency, charged in region i for brand v

produced in region j. Pijk is the price index, expressed in region k currency, charged in region

i for goods produced in region j. The price indexes are written as:

                                                         1                                    1
                          1 n                           1− λ
                                                                     1 1 k 1−λ               1− λ
                     P =  ∫ Pi1k (v)1−λ dv 
                       k
                                                                 P =
                                                                   k
                                                                          ∫ Pi 2 (v) dv
                                                                    1 − n n
                      i1                                          i2
(1.3)                      n   0
                                              
                                       k 1− n
                     Pi = ( Pi1 ) ( Pi 2 )
                       k      k n




         Optimal Inter-temporal choice


         We now turn to the conditions describing the optimal inter-temporal choice of

households. We assume that there are complete asset markets, so that residents of each

country can purchase state-contingent nominal bonds.7 As all households are identical within

each region, we can drop the x index and interpret the variables as per-capita variables. The

optimal risk-sharing condition between regions can be derived as:

                                                         ρ
                            S12 t P2eur    C       
(1.4)                             dol
                                      t
                                        =  1t     
                              P1t           C 2t    

where S12 is the exchange rate between the US dollar and the European currency (number of

US dollar per unit of European currency), the latter being a basket of European currencies

before the introduction of the euro, and the euro itself thereafter. (1.4) shows that

consumption will differ across the two regions only to the extent that there are changes in the

real exchange rate. Intuitively, the optimal risk sharing implies that an additional unit of any




7
  As Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998) emphasize, the structure of the utility functions ensures that
consumption risk is completely shared when the law of one price holds. But in general, as we see
below, the law of one price will not hold. In the absence of complete markets, this would imply a time
varying distribution of wealth among countries, and movements in the current account. To incorporate
an endogenous wealth distribution with incomplete markets would enormously complicate the analysis
of the world equilibrium, probably without giving a lot of further insight the issues addressed here.
The redistributive effect of financial markets without risk sharing is likely to a relatively minor factor,
from a welfare perspective. It is for this reason that as a first pass at this problem, one is justified in
ignoring market incompleteness.



                                                             8
currency has the same marginal utility regardless of the nationality of the household receiving

it. We can compute the money demand from household x as:

                          M it ( x)       χC itρ
(1.5)                               =
                           Piti       (1 − Et d it +1 )

where Etdit+1 is the inverse of the gross nominal interest rate, and dit+1 given by:

                                              C it−+ρ1 Piti
                          d it +1 ( x) = β
                                              C it− ρ Piti+1

The labor supply reflects the trade-off between consumption and leisure and is written as:

                            Wit
(1.6)                                 ρ
                                          =η ,
                          Piti C it

where Wit is the nominal wage rate.



        1.2. Government

        The government in each country issues money and makes transfers to residents.

Money supply in the United States is set independently of European money supplies.

European money supplies are identical if intra-European exchange rates are initially fixed.

Seignorage revenue is repaid to households as a lump sum transfer, Tit :

                          M it = M it −1 + Tit .



        1.3. Firms and retailers

        1.3.1 Structure of the distribution channel

        We assume that goods produced by firms reach the consumers in two steps. In a first

step, firms sell their goods to retailers in both countries at wholesale prices. In a second step,

retailers in each country sell the goods purchased from domestic and foreign firms to the

consumers living in the country, charging retail prices. The distinction between firms and

retailers allows us to separate the invoicing of exports from the degree to which consumer

prices are affected by exchange rate fluctuations. We consider that there is a representative



                                                           9
retailer in each country that behaves competitively. The retailer doesn’t incur any cost in

addition to the wholesale cost of the goods she buys, and her profits are repaid to the

households in her country as a lump sum transfer.



        1.3.2. Demand and profits

        The demand faced by a retailer for a particular brand v is obtained by aggregating the

consumption demands (1.2) across all households in the region. As the retailers simply carry

the goods from the firms to the consumers, the demand faced by a US and European firm is

given by:

                 Y1 (v) = Y11 (v) + Y21 (v)
                                            −λ                                        −λ
                             P dol (v)  P1dol C1             P21eur (v)                P2eur C 2
                        = n  11 dol              + (1 − n )  eur 
                             P11          P11dol             P21                        P21eur
(1.7)
                 Y2 (v) = Y12 (v) + Y22 (v)
                                            −λ                                        −λ
                             P dol (v)         P1dol C1             P22eur (v)         P2eur C 2
                        = n  12 dol                     + (1 − n )  eur 
                             P12                P12dol              P22                 P22eur

where Yi (v) is the total output of the firm producing brand v and located in country i. It

consists of the goods sold in the United States, Y1i (v) , and the goods sold in Europe, Y2 i (v) .

An important feature of (1.7) is that the demand is determined by the consumer (retail) prices,

denoted by P. The wholesale prices charged by the firms, that we denote by Q, do have an

indirect impact on (1.7) as they affect the retail prices. But pattern of consumption is affected

by the exchange rate only if there is some pass-through to retail prices. The presence of pass-

through to wholesale prices is not sufficient for this to occur.

        We assume that firms use a linear production function through which one hour of

labor yields one unit of output. Denoting the profits of a firm producing brand v in region i by

Π i (v) , we write:

                 Π 1 (v) = [Q11dol (v) − W1 ]Y11 (v) + [Q21dol (v) − W1 ]Y21 (v)
(1.8)
                 Π 2 (v) = [Q12eur (v) − W2 ]Y12 (v) + [Q22eur (v) − W2 ]Y22 (v)




                                                        10
where Qijk (v) is the wholesale price, expressed in the region k currency, charged by firm v,

located in region j, for its goods shipped to the retailer in region i. Total profits are the sum of

profits from the United States market and profits from the European market. Note that profits

are separable across markets, so that if the firm can set different prices in different markets, its

choice for the price charge in the United States is unaffected by conditions in Europe.



         1.3.3. The currency of price setting

         Prices must be set prior to the realization of shocks. We consider that firms always set

the wholesales prices in their own currency, for sales to both the domestic and foreign

retailers. By contrast, retailers can set the retail prices either in the consumers currency, in

which case they bear the exchange rate risk, or in the currency used by the firm, in which case

the exchange rate risk is passed through to the consumers.8 Because of the complexities of

dealing with multiple menu costs, we do not attempt to directly model the optimal choice of

currency of price setting for retail firms. The intuition developed in the introduction, and the

excerpt from the European Central Bank bulletin strongly suggests however, that the euro will

lead European marketers to stabilize the prices of imported goods in euro’s. Therefore, we

investigate the impact of the euro in the post-adjustment phase, in which a substantial degree

of pricing of U.S.-manufactured goods in Europe has switched from dollar-denomination to

euro-denomination. More specifically, pre-euro, the European retailer sets the retail prices of

imported goods in dollar terms, but once the euro is introduced retail prices are set in euro.

Therefore, the effect of the euro is to reduce the sensitivity of European consumer prices to

fluctuations in the exchange rate. The euro does not affect the pricing of goods sold in the US,

where imported retail goods are set in dollar terms, before and after the euro.9

         Our distinction between firms and retailers allows us to separate the invoicing of

exports from the sensitivity of consumer prices to exchange rate fluctuations. Therefore,

8
 Such a distinction is irrelevant for domestic sales, as the consumers and the firm use the same
currency.




                                                  11
consumer prices can be stabilized in local currency, even though exporters invoice their goods

in their own domestic currency10. Table 1 summarizes the currency in which prices are set, as

well as the degree of exchange rate pass-through.



                                  Table 1: Currency of Pricing

                        Wholesale prices (Q), before and after the euro

           Region                     Region               Currency           Pass-through to

       of production             of consumption                                    retailer

        United States                 Europe               US dollar             Complete

           Europe                 United States         European cur.            Complete

                                Retail prices (P), before the euro

           Region                     Region               Currency           Pass-through to

       of production             of consumption                                  consumer

        United States                 Europe               US dollar             Complete

           Europe                 United States            US dollar                Zero

                                 Retail prices (P), after the euro

           Region                     Region               Currency           Pass-through to

       of production             of consumption                                  consumer

        United States                 Europe                 Euro                   Zero

           Europe                 United States            US dollar                Zero



        As retailers behave competitively, their expected discounted profits are zero. The

retail prices, conditional on the wholesale prices, are then obtained from the zero profit


9
 For evidence on this, see Engel and Rogers (1996).
10
  Our set-up is therefore consistent with the observation of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1999) that the terms
of trade is negatively correlated with the exchange rate. While there is no exchange rate pass-through
on consumer prices when retailers set them in the local currency, prices paid by the retailers for the
imported goods react to fluctuations of the exchange rate as wholesale prices are set in the producers
currency. Therefore the wholesale terms of trade is negatively correlated with the exchange rate.



                                                  12
condition. The objective of the firms is to maximize their expected discounted profits.

Retailers and firms are owned by the domestic residents,11 implying that the expected profits

are evaluated using the households’ contingent nominal interest rate.



         Before the euro

         The US retailer chooses prices in US dollars for the brands she sells. The price for

domestic brand v is written as P11dol (v) , and the price for imported brand v is P12dol (v) . As

shown in the Appendix, the expected profits on each brand are zero, which leads to the

following retail prices:

                                                                            Et −1 S12 t C11t− ρ
                  P11dolt (v) = Q11dolt (v)     P12dolt (v) = Q12eurt (v)
                                                                             Et −1C11t− ρ

The domestic retail price is identical to the wholesale price, and the retail price for an

imported brand is the wholesale price corrected by the expected exchange rate, adjusted for

the marginal utility of income.

         The European retailer chooses a price in US dollars for imported brands, P21dolt (v) ,

that is converted to European currency to obtain the consumer price. She also chooses a price

in European currency, P22eurt (v) , for European brands. The Appendix shows that the retail

prices are simply equal to the wholesale prices:

                  P21dolt (v) = Q21dolt (v)     P22eurt (v) = Q22
                                                               eur
                                                                  t (v )


         We now turn to the optimization problem of the producing firms themselves. A US

firm chooses two different wholesale prices, both denominated in US dollars. One, Q11dol (v) ,

                                                     dol
is charged to the domestic retailer, and the other, Q21  (v) , is charged to the European retailer.

The firm chooses the wholesale prices by taking into account their impact on retail prices and




11
   This is done without loss of generality: the assumption of complete markets, reflected in the optimal
risk sharing condition (1.4), implies that the firms’ optimal choices are unaffected by the country of
residence of their owners.



                                                  13
the demand by consumers. As shown in the Appendix, the resulting retail prices are written as

(all firms being identical, the v index can be omitted):

                                       λ Et −1 [W1t C11t− ρ ]
(1.9)                     P11dolt =
                                      λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

                                     λ Et −1 [W1t C 21−t ρ ]
(1.10)                    P dol
                                  =
                                    λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ
                           21t



         Equations (1.9) and (1.10) indicate that in general the firm will not set prices at their

certainty equivalent level ( λ (λ − 1) − E t −1W1t ). Focusing on (1.9), the covariance between the
                                        1




US wage and C1t− ρ affects the price. Intuitively, the firm maximizes the expected value of
             1




nominal profits, weighted by the consumer’s marginal utility of money. In general, the firm

chooses a price which represents the best trade-off between the states in which it would want

to set a high price ex post against those states in which it would want a low price ex post. The

term C1t− ρ captures the total demand facing the firm, evaluated at the consumer’s marginal
      1




utility of money. If the covariance between W1t and C1t− ρ is negative, the marginal cost tends
                                                     1



to be low in states when the firm’s demand evaluated at the marginal utility of money is high.

But these are the states about which the firm’s owner cares most. In such states, the firm

would set a low price ex-post if it could. Prices being pre-set, the firm sets a price that is

below the certainty equivalent value, so as to more closely approximate the ex post profit

maximizing pricing policy for the states it cares most about. The same intuition can be used to

explain the pricing equation (1.10).

         A European firm chooses two different wholesale prices in European currency:

 eur                                                eur
Q22 t (v ) , charged to the European retailer, and Q12 t (v ) , charged to the US retailer. The


optimization leads to the following retail prices:

                                       λ Et −1 [ S12tW2t C11t− ρ ]
(1.11)                    P12dolt =
                                      λ −1      Et −1C11t− ρ

                                     λ Et −1 [W2t C 21−t ρ ]
(1.12)                    P eur
                                  =
                                    λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ
                           22 t




                                                     14
         A similar intuition can be given for the pricing equations (1.11)-(1.12) as was given

for equation (1.9). All firms being identical within a region, per capita employment (output)

in the United States and Europe can be written from (1.7) as:

                                        P1tdol C1t           S12 t P2eur
                                                                      t C 2t
                          L1t = Y1t = n      dol
                                                   + (1 − n)         dol
                                          P11t                     P21t
(1.13)
                                              P1tdol C1t            P2eur
                                                                      t C 2t
                          L2 t = Y2t = n           dol
                                                         + (1 − n )
                                                P12 t                 P22eurt



         After the euro

         The introduction of the euro does not affect the prices chosen by the US retailer.

Similarly, the European retail prices for domestic goods are determined using the same rule as

before. The only change occurs for the European retail prices of US goods, which are now set

in euro instead of US dollars. The zero profit condition leads to the following retail price:

                                                      Et −1 S12−1t C 21−t ρ
                          P21eurt (v) = Q21dolt (v)
                                                       Et −1C 21−t ρ

         Turning to the producing firms, the optimization problem of a European producer is

unchanged, and the resulting retail prices for European goods in the US and Europe remain

determined by (1.11) and (1.12). Similarly, the retail price of US goods in the US is still given

by (1.9). The change of the pricing rule for imports by the European retailer affects the

                                                        dol
optimal export wholesale price charged by the US firm, Q21t (v ) . The Appendix shows that


the optimization by the US firms results in the following expression for the imports retail

price in Europe:

                                       λ Et −1 [ S12−1tW1t C 21−t ρ ]
(1.14)                    P21eurt =
                                      λ −1      Et −1C 21−t ρ

European employment is given by (1.13), whereas US employment becomes:

                                             P1dol
                                               t C1t            P2eur
                                                                  t C 2t
(1.15)                    L1t = Y1t = n          dol
                                                     + (1 − n )
                                               P11t               P21eurt




                                                        15
2. The impact of the euro on consumption and employment

        2.1. Monetary shocks and consumption determination

        We assume that monetary shocks are the only source of volatility in the model, and

the money supply follows a random walk (with drift), so that for each region i we have


                          Et                    =µ .
                                  M it
                                        M it +1   i



        In addition, we assume that M it follows an independent, log-normal distribution, for

each i.12 Letting lower-case letters be logs, this implies that:

                          mit +1 = mit + ν it +1

where ν it has mean − ln µ i + 0.5σ ν i and variance σ ν i . In order to focus on the impact of the
                                    2                  2




euro solely through currency of pricing, we consider that the growth rate and volatility of

money shocks is unaffected by the euro, and is identical in the US and Europe: so that

µ1 = µ 2 = µ , and σ v21 = σ v22 = σ v2 . In the pre-euro situation, the exchange rate pegging

between European countries implies that money supplies are equalized across countries. As

money supplies are log normal, all variables in our models follow a log normal distribution.

Throughout the paper, lower case letters denote logs ( z = ln Z ) and the variances /

covariances across log variables are denoted by: σ zy = E[ zy ] − E[ z ]E[ y ] .

        Under these assumptions, it is easy to verify from the money demand equations, (1.5)

that the nominal discount factor E t d it +1 , is constant in each region and equal to βµ 13. This

means that consumption in each country is a function only of the real money supply:

                                    1 − µβ M it
(2.1)                     C itρ =
                                       χ   Piti

12
  None of the main results depend on the fact that monetary shocks are independent across countries
under flexible exchange rates. This assumption merely simplifies the exposition.




                                                      16
Using (1.4) it is then immediate to show that

                                     M 1t
(2.2)                       S12t =
                                     M 2t

          Before the introduction of the euro, US consumer prices are entirely predetermined.

By contrast, European consumer prices are affected by monetary shocks through the exchange

rate pass-through on imports from the US. Putting (2.1) and (2.2) together, we obtain:

                                                           1
                           1 − µβ                      ρ
                                                                         1
                                      M 1t
(2.3)              C1t =                               ∝ ( M 1t ) ρ
                           χ ( P11t ) ( P12t )
                                   1 n     1 1− n
                                                         
                                                           1
                            1 − µβ  M 1nt M 21−t n       ρ
                                                                                 1

(2.4)              C 2t =                                ∝ ( M 1nt M 21−t n ) ρ
                            χ ( P21t ) ( P22t )
                                    1   n     2 1− n
                                                           

where ∝ denotes a relation of proportionality. US consumption is entirely insulated from

European money shocks, because the retail prices for imports from Europe are set in dollars.

But European consumption responds to US money shocks through exchange rate adjustment.

          After the introduction of the euro, US consumption is still determined by (2.3),

whereas European consumption is insulated from US money shocks:

                                                               1
                                     1 − µβ M 2t         ρ
                                                                             1

(2.5)                       C 2t =                       ∝ ( M 2t ) ρ
                                     χ P21t P22t
                                             n  1− n
                                                           



          2.2. Consumption volatility

          The major results of the analysis are presented in Table 2, and detailed in the

Appendix. We start with the variance of log consumption in the US and Europe. Before the

introduction of the euro, European consumption must be less volatile than US consumption.

This reflects the cushioning role of the exchange rate pass-through on real variables. A

monetary expansion in Europe increases the nominal balances of European consumers. But it


13
     Although money supply shocks do affect consumption, they do so in a way that leaves the term
Et [C itρ Piti ][C itρ+1 Piti+1 ] −1 unaffected. Thus, the nominal interest rate is not affected by random walk
money shocks, given the specification of preferences used.



                                                     17
also leads to a depreciation of the European currency, which partially reduces the purchasing

power of European consumers through imported inflation. This effect disappears with the

introduction of the euro, as retail prices for imports from the US are now set in euro so there

is no exchange rate pass-through to consumers. Table 2 shows that the introduction of the

euro increases the volatility of European consumption, while leaving US consumption

volatility unchanged.

        On this measure alone, it would seem that the introduction of the euro would make

Europeans worse off, while having no implications for US welfare. But welfare cannot be

measured only by consumption variance. This is because the stochastic properties of

exchange rate regimes also has implications for the expected values of consumption and

output, as discussed in Devereux and Engel (1998). In order to do a full welfare analysis, we

must therefore compute the expected values of consumption and employment.



        2.3. Expected consumption

        Before the euro

        We can use the pricing equations (1.9) and (1.10), the risk-sharing relationship (1.4),

the labor supply equation (1.6) and the definitions of the price index (1.3) to write the two

equations which implicitly determine E t −1C1t and E t −1C 2t (see the Appendix for the detailed

derivation):

                               λη Et −1C1t
(2.6)                    1=
                              λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

and

                                                             n                                 1− n
                             λη  Et −1 [ S121−tn C 2t ]         Et −1 [ S12− nt C 2t ] 
(2.7)                    1=                                                           
                            λ − 1  Et −1C 21−t ρ                E      C
                                                                        t −1 2 t
                                                                                 1− ρ
                                                                                           



These equations can be solved by utilizing the fact that since the money supply follows a log

normal distribution, then so will consumption.




                                                   18
        Table 2 shows that in both regions an increase in consumption volatility increases

expected consumption if ρ > 1 . To highlight the intuition behind this result, we point out that

from labor supply (1.6) the nominal wage in the United States is proportional to C1ρt . Then,

from (1.9), we see that if ρ > 1 , the marginal cost is negatively correlated with the firms

marginal utility-discounted demand C1t− ρ , and firms set their prices below the certainty
                                    1



equivalent values. Since consumption is proportional to real balances, low prices result in

higher consumption.

        Expected consumption in Europe however is negatively related to exchange rate

volatility. For both US and European producers, exchange rate volatility increases the

variance of marginal cost, given C 2t . This induces them to raise their prices charged for sales

in Europe relative to those in the US ( P11dolt < P21dolt ), thereby reducing expected European

consumption. The presence of this additional channel in Europe therefore implies that

expected consumption is lower in Europe than in the United States before the euro, as shown

in Table 2.



        After the euro

        After the introduction of the euro, the European retail price for imports from the US is

given by (1.14) instead of (1.10). The expected US consumption is still determined by (2.6).

As shown in the Appendix, European expected consumption is determined by:

                               λη Et −1C 2t
(2.8)                    1=
                              λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ

which replaces (2.7). Table 2 shows that expected consumption is not affected in the United

States. By contrast, the effect of exchange rate volatility on European expected consumption

disappears, as US exporters now set their prices in euro. The removal of the direct impact of

exchange rate volatility reinforces the effect of the higher European consumption volatility,

and the introduction of the euro boosts expected consumption in Europe.




                                                    19
        2.4. Expected employment

        Expected employment can be computed by combining (1.13) and (1.15) with our

results for expected consumption. The Appendix establishes that expected employment is the

same for the United States and Europe, and is given by the following equation, both before

and after the introduction of the euro:

                                            λ −1
(2.9)             Et −1 L1t = Et −1 L2t =        [nEt −1C11t− ρ + (1 − n) Et −1C 21−t ρ ]
                                             λη

Table 2 shows that the introduction of the euro reduces expected employment, in both

countries. Expected employment in each region is just the sum of US and European

household’s consumption of that region’s good. Expected employment falls because expected

European consumption of both good 1 and 2 (which is proportional to E t −1C 2−t ρ ) falls.
                                                                            1



        At first glance this seems paradoxical; expected composite consumption in Europe

rises, but expected consumption of each element in the composite falls. But it important to

remember that composite consumption is not a linear function of the consumption of each

region’s good. We can derive the following relation between the aggregate consumption

index and the consumptions of each type of good:


         Et −1C 2t =
                            1
                                 1− n
                                      (Et −1C 21t )n (Et −1C 22t )1− n exp − n(1 − n) Var (c21t / c22t )
                       n (1 − n)
                        n
                                                                                 2                        

Before the introduction of the euro, exchange rate fluctuations affect the relative price of

domestic and imported consumption, since Var ( c21t / c22t ) = σ s2 . This depresses expected

composite consumption. The introduction of the euro eliminates this effect. While the

expected consumption of each good falls, this is more than offset by the removal of the effects

of exchange rate volatility (which increases the volatility of consumption of domestic and

imported goods), so that expected composite consumption rises.

        Figure 1 illustrates the point, with domestic and imported consumption on the

horizontal and vertical axis, respectively. Indifference curves connect all possible pairs of




                                                      20
domestic and imported consumption giving the same overall consumption basket. Figure 1

presents two such curves, C = C A and C = C B , with C B giving higher utility than C A .

The figure contrasts two cases. In the first case, exchange rate volatility is large, and the

economy can be either at point A or at point B, the aggregate consumption basket being equal

to C A at either point. The expected consumption of domestic and imported goods is given by

C dom (C A ) and C imp (C A ) respectively. The second case is characterized by a lower

exchange rate volatility, and the economy can be at point C or at point D. At either point, the

aggregate consumption basket C B is larger than in the previous case. But the expected

consumption of each good, C dom (C B ) and C imp (C B ) , is smaller.



3. The welfare effects of the euro



        We now examine the impact on welfare. Expected utility depends upon consumption,

real money balances, and labor supply. But following recent literature (e.g. Corsetti and

Pesenti, 1998), we focus on the expected utility of consumption and labor supply alone,

abstracting from the role of real balances. The Appendix shows that the expected utility for

the US and Europe is given by:

                                           1                  λ −1
(3.1)                    Et −1U 1t = Ψ1        Et −1C11t− ρ −      (1 − n) Et −1C 21−t ρ
                                          1− ρ                 λ

                                            1                   λ −1
(3.2)                    Et −1U 2t = Ψ2         Et −1C 21−t ρ −      nEt −1C11t− ρ
                                           1− ρ                  λ

             λ + n(λ − 1)( ρ − 1)               λ + (1 − n)(λ − 1)( ρ − 1)
where Ψ1 =                        > 0 ,and Ψ2 =                            > 0.
                     λ                                      λ

        How does the introduction of the euro affect expected utility? To see the effects, we

use the following decomposition, due to the properties of the log-normal distribution

                                                                ρ ( ρ − 1) 2 
(3.3)                    Et −1C it1− ρ = ( Et −1C it )1− ρ exp            σ ci 
                                                                     2         




                                                   21
For the US, the introduction of the euro affects neither expected consumption nor

consumption volatility, and E t −1C1t− ρ is unchanged. The effect of the euro on E t −1C 2−t ρ is
                                   1                                                     1




more complex. The increase in E t −1C 2t tends to lower E t −1C 2−t ρ , as ρ > 1 , whereas the
                                                                1



higher consumption volatility goes the other way. Table 2 shows that the former effect is

stronger and E t −1C 2−t ρ is reduced by the introduction of the euro.
                     1



        It follows from (3.2), that the introduction of the euro increases European utility.

Since E t −1C 2−t ρ falls, the expected utility of consumption rises, and by the same token, the
              1



fall in expected employment also raises expected utility. Thus Europeans must gain. How

about expected utility in the US? While expected consumption and consumption variance in

the US is unchanged, the fall in expected employment must also raise expected utility in the

US. Thus, the introduction of the euro raises welfare in both Europe and the US!

        Our model therefore shows that the introduction of the euro is not a zero-sum game in

which any European gain would be mirrored by a loss for the United States. Instead, both

regions benefit. Therefore, paradoxically, the role of the US dollar as the world currency is

actually detrimental for US welfare, when the alternative is a world where consumer prices

are stabilized in local currencies.



4. The law of one price for US exports



        In the pre-euro environment, US firms were free to choose different wholesale prices

for their sales to the domestic and foreign retailers. This assumption might be questioned. For

example anti-dumping laws could make it difficult for US firms to set different prices in a

given currency. We could alternatively assume that US firms must set the same US dollar

wholesale price for both retailers ( Q11dolt (v) = Q21
                                                    dol
                                                      t (v ) ). The Appendix presents the analysis


under this alternative setup, and the results are summarized in Table 3. The results regarding

consumption volatility are unchanged. Compared to the baseline model, the pre-euro expected




                                                 22
consumption is lower in the United States and higher in Europe. The introduction of the euro

will then increase expected consumption in both regions. It also reduces effort in both regions.

Interestingly, the welfare impact is the same in Europe and the US, as E t −1C1t− ρ = E t −1C 2−t ρ
                                                                              1               1



both before and after the euro, and it is lowered by the introduction of the euro. Then, from

(3.1) and (3.2), we can again show that both regions benefit, hence the main message of the

paper remains unaltered.



5. Exchange rate flexibility in pre-euro Europe



        We have so far assumed that European countries pegged their exchange rates vis a vis

one another in the lead-up to the launching of the euro. This is a fairly accurate description of

the reality, but it interesting to ask how the situation would differ if intra-European exchange

rates were flexible before the euro. As in the previous section, we would envisage that there

are conflicting effects. On the one hand, exchange rate volatility stabilizes domestic

consumption when imported goods are priced in the foreign currency. But on the other hand,

exchange rate volatility depresses expected consumption.

        To explore these separate effects, we can analyze a version of our model where the

world consists of three countries: the United States, of size n, Germany, of size n2 and France,

of size n3=1-n- n2. The analysis is outlined in the Appendix, and the results are presented in

Table 4. The introduction of the euro now has two effects. In addition of the effect through

pricing of goods that we have analyzed so far, the euro brings a fixed exchange rate regime at

the intra-European level.

        The intra-European exchange rate regime has no effect on the volatility and expected

level of US consumption. Table 4 shows that expected employment is higher in the pre-euro

era, relative to the baseline model of Table 2. The positive welfare impact of the euro on US

residents is then larger when the intra-European exchange rate is initially flexible.




                                                23
        For Europe, the situation is more complex. Assuming that the intra-European

exchange rate fluctuations are passed-through to consumer prices before the euro,14 Table 4

shows that the flexible intra-European exchange rate reduces expected consumption in Europe

in the pre-euro era. As this is only partially offset by the lower volatility of consumption, a

change towards a fixed exchange rate is beneficial for European residents. Thus, E t −1C1t− ρ is
                                                                                        1




unaffected by the introduction of the euro, whereas E t −1C 2−t ρ is reduced, the later effect being
                                                            1



stronger than in the baseline model. From (3.1) and (3.2) we see that the benefits of the

introduction of the euro are actually stronger when the intra-European exchange rate is

initially floating. Intuitively, the benefits from the introduction of the euro per se are

reinforced by the benefits from pegging the intra-European exchange rate.



6. Alternative assumptions regarding the currency of pricing



        So far we have assumed that the euro would alter the pricing behavior of the

European retailer, inducing her to set imported retail prices in euro. Perhaps however the

influence of the euro will lead the US retailer, instead of her European counterpart, to adjust

her pricing practices. What would be the situation if the US retailer sets the retail prices for

imports from Europe in euro, thereby passing the exchange rate fluctuations through to US

consumers?

        In this alternative scenario, the results are in fact very different. The derivations

proceed as before, save for the fact that US consumption is now exposed to exchange rate

risk. The analysis is detailed in the Appendix and the results are presented in Table 5. As

consumer prices are effected by the exchange rate in both countries, the introduction of the

euro reduces consumption volatility in the United States and leaves it unchanged in Europe.

The expected consumption level is determined by (2.7) for Europe and by a similar relation


14
  As the situation is symmetric across European countries, firms end up choosing the same price, in
their currency, for exports and domestic sales.



                                                 24
for the United States. The Appendix shows that the PPP holds, and consumption is always

equalized across the two regions. Now, as shown in Table 5, the introduction of the euro does

not affect expected consumption in Europe, but reduces it in the United States. Expected

employment is higher as E t −1C 2−t ρ is unchanged and E t −1C1t− ρ increases. (3.1) and (3.2) then
                                1                             1



lead us to conclude that the introduction of the euro has a detrimental welfare effect, both for

Europe and the United States. It is especially detrimental to US residents, as the reduction of

expected consumption is added to the cost of higher effort.

        Therefore, if the post-euro world is characterized by complete exchange rate pass-

through to consumer prices, the introduction of the euro has an adverse effect worldwide. In

such a case, the United States indeed does benefit from the dominant role of the dollar in the

pre-euro era.



7. A numerical illustration



        We now illustrate our findings by computing the magnitude of the effects on

consumption, output and welfare. In order to focus on the role of price setting, we reasonably

assume that the United States and Europe have the same size (n=0.5). We set the standard

deviation of money shocks to 3.5% ( σ v = 0.035 , σ v = 0.001225 ), and compute the effects
                                                    2




for various values of ρ > 1 , which is the empirically relevant range. For brevity, we focus on

the baseline case where the euro induces US firms to set their prices for European

consumption in euro instead of US dollars.

        Figure 2 presents the percentage change in expected consumption brought by the

introduction of the euro. Expected consumption isn’t affected in the United States and is

increased in Europe. If ρ = 2 , the euro boosts expected consumption by 0.02% in Europe.

Figure 3 illustrates the reduction in expected employment, which is identical in both regions.

If ρ = 2 , the introduction of the euro reduces expected employment by 0.004%.




                                                25
        Figure 4 presents the welfare gain. To facilitate the interpretation of the results, we

express the gain as a percentage of the gain that would result from removing monetary

volatility entirely ( σ v = 0 ). We can see that the gain is quite sizable: if ρ = 2 , the
                        2



introduction of the euro brings a gain equal to 27.9 % of the gain from completely removing

monetary variability for Europe. The corresponding figure for the United States is 10.2 %.

        Another perspective on the welfare gain from the euro is to compute the reduction in

money volatility that would bring the same welfare gain, without the euro, as the gain brought

by the euro, for a given volatility. We can show that if ρ = 2 , the benefit from the

introduction of the euro for Europe is equivalent to a 15 % reduction in the standard deviation

of monetary shock worldwide. The corresponding figure for the United States is a 5 %

reduction of the standard deviation.



8. Conclusions



        This paper has shown that the introduction of the euro could have important positive

and normative effects for both Europe and the rest of the world. In the case where the euro

causes a change in the retail pricing of U.S. imports in Europe, our central conjecture, the

advent of the euro causes a rise in the expected value of consumption in both the US and

Europe, and a rise in welfare. This result holds whether the pre-euro situation was one of

fixed exchange rates or floating exchange rates, within the European economies.

        There are substantial additional implications of the euro that could be explored within

the same type of model. Clearly, a substantial change in the currency of pricing may have

important business cycle consequences. Betts and Devereux (1999) show how changes in

price setting can alter international macroeconomic transmission in substantial ways. The

main point that we wish to make in this paper is that there may be important and previously

unforseen consequences of the European single currency, when we take account of the

potential endogeneity of the currency of price setting in a world of sticky prices.



                                               26
References


Bayoumi T. and B. Eichengreen (1993) ``Shocking Aspects of European Monetary

       Unification'', in The Transition to Economic and Monetary Union in Europe, F.

       Giavazzi and F. Torres, eds, Cambridge University Press.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 1998, Does exchange rate stability increase trade

       and capital flows, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, working paper no. 9818.

Bergsten, C. Fred, 1999, American and Europe: Clash of the titans?, Foreign Affairs 78, 20-

       34.

Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux (1999) ``The International Effects of Monetary and

       Fiscal Policy in a Two Country Model'', forthcoming in Maurice Obstfeld, Guillermo

       Calvo, and Rudiger Dornbusch, ed. Essays in Honor of Robert A. Mundell, MIT

       Press.

Devereux, Michael, B. and Charles Engel (1998) ``Fixed versus floating exchange Rates: how

       price setting affects the optimal choice of Exchange rate regime'', NBER Working

       Paper 6867.

De Grauwe, Paul (1994) The Economics of Monetary Integration, Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, B. (1992) ``Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area'', in European Economic

       Integration: The View from Outside, Eds S. Borner and H. Grubel, Macmillan.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 1998, Welfare and macroeconomic interdependence,

       Princeton University, working paper.

European Central Bank, 1999, Monthly Bulletin, August 1999.

ECU Institute, 1995, International currency competition and the future role of the single

       European currency, Kluwer Law International.




                                              27
Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996, How wide is the border?, American Economic

        Review 86, 1112-1125.

Friedman, Milton, 1953, The case for flexible exchange rates, in Milton Friedman, ed., Essays

        in Positive Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Giovannini, A. (1988) ``Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices'', Journal of International

        Economics.

Hartmann, Philipp, 1996, The future of the euro as an international currency, working paper,

        London School of Economics.

Haskel, Jonathan, and Holger Wolf, 1999, Why does the law of one price fail? A case study,

        working paper, Georgetown University.

Helpman, Elhanan, 1981, An exploration in the theory of exchange-rate regimes,

        Journal of Political Economy 10, 263-283.

Mundell, Robert A., 1961a, A Theory of optimum currency areas, American Economic

        Review 51, 509-517.

McKinnon, R. A. (1963) ``Optimum Currency Areas'', American Economic Review, 53, 717-

        725.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1999, New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy

        Models, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 7313.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, Risk and exchange rates, National Bureau of

        Economic Research, working paper no. 6694.

Obstfeld, M. and G. Peri (1998) ``Regional Nonadjustment and Fiscal Policy: Lessons for

        EMU'', NBER d.p. 6431.

Portes, R. and Helene Rey (1998) ``The Emergence of the Euro as an International Currency'',

        Economic Policy 26, 305-32.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, The purchasing power parity puzzle, Journal of Economic Literature

        34, 647-668.




                                             28
                                                      Table 2 : Main results

                                           Before the euro                                        After the euro

Consumption volatility

United States                                         1 2                                                    1 2
                                            σ c21 =      σv                                        σ c21 =      σv
                                                      ρ2                                                     ρ2

Europe                                          n 2 + (1 − n) 2 2                                 σ c22 =
                                                                                                             1 2
                                                                                                                σv
                                      σ c22 =                  σv
                                                      ρ2                                                     ρ2

Expected consumption

United States                              ρ −1 2             ρ −1                             ρ −1 2             ρ −1 
                         Et −1C1t = Φ exp      σ c1  = Φ exp  2 σ v2         Et −1C1t = Φ exp      σ c1  = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                           2                  2ρ                               2                  2ρ     

Europe                                        ρ − 1 2 n(1 − n) 2                                   ρ −1 2             ρ −1 
                         Et −1C 2 t = Φ exp        σ c2 −       σ s12          Et −1C 2 t = Φ exp      σ c1  = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                              2             2ρ                                     2                  2ρ     
                                     ρ − 1  1            n(1 − n)  2 
                         = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n)  −                σ v 
                                      ρ     2               ρ        

                −1 / ρ
   λη 
Φ=     
   λ −1
                                                     Table 2 (contd.)

                                        Before the euro                                         After the euro

Employment

United States                          ρ −1                                                              ρ −1 
                     Et −1 Lt = Φ exp  2 σ v2                                          Et −1 Lt = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
And Europe                             2ρ                                                                2ρ     
                                                  n(1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 2  
                               × n + (1 − n) exp                    σ v 
                                                         ρ2             

Expected ‘power’

consumption

United States                                             ρ −1                                                 ρ −1 
                               Et −1C11t− ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp  2 σ v2                    Et −1C11t− ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                          2ρ                                                   2ρ     

Europe                                         ρ − 1 n(1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2    2                                  ρ −1 
                   Et −1C 21−t ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp        +                   σ v    Et −1C 21−t ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                    ρ         ρ2                                                  2ρ     
                                                      2
                                                2                           
            Table 3 : Pre-euro situation under the constraint Q11dolt (v) = Q21
                                                                             dol
                                                                               t (v )


Expected Consumption

United States                                                   ρ −1 1           
                                              Et −1C1t = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n) 2 σ v2 
                                                                ρ 2              

Europe                                                   ρ − 1  1          n(1 − n)  2 
                                     Et −1C 2 t = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n) 2  −        σ v 
                                                          ρ     2             ρ       

Employment

United States and Europe                                  ρ − 1 ( ρ − 1) 2              
                                        Et −1 Lt = Φ exp       +          n(1 − n) 2 σ v2 
                                                          2 ρ      ρ
                                                                2      2
                                                                                          

Expected power consumption

United States                                                   ρ − 1 ( ρ − 1) 2            2 2
                                                                                                    
                                     Et −1C11t− ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp       +          n (1 − n )  σ
                                                                                                
                                                                2 ρ      ρ2
                                                                      2                           v
                                                                                                

Europe                                                                ρ − 1 ( ρ − 1) 2            2 2
                                                                                                          
                                     Et −1C   1− ρ
                                                     =Φ   1− ρ
                                                                 exp       +          n (1 − n )  σ
                                                                                                      
                                                                      2 ρ      ρ2
                                              2t                            2                           v
                                                                                                      
                     Table 4 : Pre-euro situation under a flexible intra-European exchange rate

Expected Consumption

United States                                                                                 ρ −1 
                                                                            Et −1C1t = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                                                              2ρ     

Europe                                                    ρ − 1  1        n(1 − n) ( ρ − 1)n 2 n3 n 2 n3  2 
                                       Et −1C 2t = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n)  −       −              −       σ v 
                                                           ρ     2           ρ          ρ 2
                                                                                                        ρ      

Employment

United States and Europe
                                                      ρ − 1                   n(1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 (1 − ρ ) 2 n 2 n3  2  
                                    Et −1 Lt = Φ exp  2 σ v2  n + (1 − n) exp                   +                  σ v  
                                                      2ρ                            ρ2                ρ2             

Expected power consumption

United States                                                                                       ρ −1 
                                                                         Et −1C11t− ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                                                                    2ρ     

Europe                                                                       ρ − 1 n(1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 (1 − ρ ) 2 n2 n3  2 
                                            Et −1C   1− ρ
                                                            =Φ   1− ρ
                                                                        exp        +                +                 σ v 
                                                                                  ρ         ρ                 ρ
                                                     2t                             2         2                 2
                                                                             2                                          
         Table 5 : Post-euro situation under pricing in the producer currency

Expected Consumption

United States and Europe                           ρ − 1  1        n(1 − n)  2 
                                 Et −1C1t = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n)  −        σ v 
                                                   ρ  2               ρ  

Employment

United States and Europe                               ρ − 1 ( ρ − 1) 2            
                                     Et −1 Lt = Φ exp       +          n(1 − n) σ v2 
                                                       2 ρ      ρ
                                                             2      2
                                                                                     

Expected power consumption

United States and Europe                                     ρ − 1 ( ρ − 1) 2            
                                  Et −1C11t− ρ = Φ 1− ρ exp       +          n(1 − n) σ v2 
                                                             2 ρ      ρ
                                                                   2      2
                                                                                           
                                        Figure 1
                                  Consumption Aggregate


Imported consumption



                 B




Cimp (CA)                     D




Cimp (CB)
                     C = CA
                                                C
                                                                       C = CB > CA


                                                                   A


                                                            Domestic consumption

                                  Cdom (CB)     Cdom (CA)
                         Figure 2: Percentage change in expected consumption

            0.035%


            0.030%


            0.025%


            0.020%
E t-1 C t




                                                                                   Europe
                                                                                   US
            0.015%


            0.010%
                                                           US
            0.005%


            0.000%
                     1         1.5      2        2.5      3        3.5         4
                                                 ρ
                          Figure 3: Percentage change in expected employment
                                            (USA and Europe)

            0.000%
                      1          1.5        2         2.5        3         3.5   4


            -0.002%



            -0.004%
E t-1 L t




            -0.006%



            -0.008%



            -0.010%
                                                       ρ
          Figure 4: Welfare gain (% of gain from removing volatility)

50%

45%

40%

35%

30%
                                                                        Europe
25%
                                                                        US
20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
      1      1.5        2          2.5        3         3.5         4
                                   ρ
Appendix to M. B. Devereux, C. Engel, and C. Tille:

“Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Effects of the Euro”

A. Retailers’ price setting

        Before the euro

        The representative US retailer chooses prices in US dollar for domestic brands,

P11dolt (v) , and imported brands, P12dolt (v) . The goods are purchased from the manufacturers

at a unit cost of Q11dolt (v) US dollar for a domestic brand, and Q12eurt (v) units of European

currency for a European brand. The retailer incurs no additional extra cost. Using (1.2)

the expected profit, using the representative consumer discount factor, are written as:

                    n                                         −λ
                                            P11dolt (v)  P1tdol C1t                 
                      [  dol        dol
                                              ]
                    ∫ P11t (v) − Q11t (v)  dol                         dv          
                    0                                                                
                                                                      dol
                                              P 11  t             P11t
        nEt −1 d 1t                                                 −λ               
                     1 dol                            P12dolt (v)  P1dol           
                          [               eur
                                                     ]
                    + ∫ P12t (v) − S12t Q12t (v)  dol 
                                                                          t  C
                                                                            dol
                                                                                1t
                                                                                   dv 
                     n                                P12t             P12t        

where d1t = [ βC1−t ρ P1dol      −ρ     dol −1
                        t −1 ][C1t −1 P1t ] . The retail market being competitive, the above


expected profits are equal to zero. This implies that the expected profits on each brand are

zero. If not, another retailer would enter the market and focus solely on the brand where

she could make a positive profit. The zero expected profit condition on each brand

implies that:

                                                                                Et −1 S12 t C11t− ρ
(A.1)             P11dolt (v) = Q11dolt (v)         P12dolt (v) = Q12eurt (v)
                                                                                 Et −1C11t− ρ

The retail price of a domestic brand is equal to its wholesale price, and the retail price of an

imported brand is equal to the wholesale price in foreign currency, times the expected exchange

rate adjusted for the marginal utility of income.




                                                          1
        The representative European retailer sells domestic brands, for which she chooses

a retail price in European currency, P22eurt (v) , and pays a wholesale price in European

           eur
currency, Q22 t (v ) . She also sells imported brands, for which she pays a wholesale price



in US dollar, Q21dolt (v) . As explained in the text, she sets the retail price in US dollar,

P21dolt (v) , and passes the exchange rate fluctuations to the consumer. The discounted

expected profits are:

                            n                                                   −λ
                                                          S12−1t P21dolt (v)  P2eur               
                                 −1
                                      [
                            ∫ S12 t P21t (v) − Q21t (v)  −1 dol 
                                       dol         dol
                                                                      ]                  t C 2t
                                                                                        −1
                                                                                                 dv 
                            0                                                                      
                                                                                             dol
                                                          12 t 21t 
                                                                S   P                S     P
        (1 − n) Et −1 d 2 t 
                                                                                       12 t 21t
                                                                         −λ                         
                             1 eur                     P22eurt (v)  P2eur                        
                                  [
                            + ∫ P22 t (v) − Q22 t (v)  eur 
                                                eur
                                                                ]              t   C
                                                                                  eur
                                                                                      2t
                                                                                         dv         
                             n                         P22 t               P22 t                 

where d 2 t = [ βC 2−tρ P2eur      −ρ       eur −1
                          t −1 ][C 2 t −1 P2 t ] . The expected zero profit condition for each brand


implies that the retailer simply passes the wholesale price through to consumers:

(A.2)             P21dolt (v) = Q21dolt (v)                P22eurt (v) = Q22
                                                                          eur
                                                                             t (v )


        After the euro

        The situation of the representative US retailer isn’t changed, and her prices are

given by (A.1). The European retailer now sets the retail price of imported brands in euro,

P21eurt (v) . The expected profits are then:

                            n                                            −λ
                                                          P21eurt (v)  P2eur             
                              [
                            ∫ P21t (v) − S12 t Q21t (v)  eur 
                                 eur         −1   dol
                                                                      ]          t C 2t
                                                                                        dv 
                            0                                                             
                                                                                   eur
                                                          21t 
                                                              P                 P
        (1 − n) Et −1 d 2 t 
                                                                                  21t
                                                                        −λ                 
                             1 eur                                                      
                                  [                             ]
                                                           eur                eur
                                                         P     (  v )      P      C
                            + ∫ P22 t (v) − Q22 t (v)  eur 
                                                eur       22 t               2t     2t
                                                                                eur
                                                                                       dv 
                             n                         P22t               P22 t         

The retail prices are then computed as:

                                              Et −1 S12−1t C 21−t ρ
(A.3)             P21eurt (v) = Q21dolt (v)                               P22eurt (v) = Q22
                                                                                         eur
                                                                                            t (v )
                                               Et −1C 21−t ρ


                                                                      2
B. Firms’ price setting

        Before the euro

        A US firm chooses two wholesale prices in US dollar: Q11dolt (v) for sales to

domestic retailers and Q21dolt (v) for exports. Using (1.7), (1.8), (A.1) and (A.2), the

objective of the firm is to maximize:

                                                                              −λ
                                                              Q dol (v) 
                          nEt −1 d1t Q  [    dol
                                            11t                  ]
                                                   (v) − W1t  11tdol 
                                                                                   P1dol
                                                                                     t C1t

                                                                                     P11dolt
                                                              P11t 
                                                                                               −λ
                                                                          S −1 Q dol (v) 
                          + (1 − n) Et −1 d1t Q      [   dol
                                                         21t             ]
                                                               (v) − W1t  12t−1 21tdol 
                                                                                                    P2eur
                                                                                                       t C 2t
                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                                    S12t P21dolt
                                                                          S12 t P21t 

Recalling that Q11dolt (v) , Q21dolt (v) and the variables for time t-1 are not affected by time t

shocks, the first order condition with respect to Q11dolt (v) is written as:

                                                          λ Et −1 [W1t C11t− ρ ]
(B.1)                     Q11dolt (v) = P11dolt =
                                                         λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

                                                 dol
which corresponds to equation (1.9). Turning to Q21t (v ) , we recall that the situation is



identical across US firms ( Q21dolt (v) = P21dolt (v) = P21dolt ) and write the first order condition as:

                                            λ Et −1[W1t C1−t ρ ( P1tdol ) −1 P2eur
                                                                               t C 2 t S12 t ]
                          Q   dol
                                    (v ) =
                                           λ − 1 Et −1[C1t ( P1t ) P2t C 2t S12t ]
                                                         −ρ      dol −1 eur
                              21t




Using the optimal risk sharing condition (1.4) we obtain equation (1.10):

                                                          λ Et −1 [W1t C 21−t ρ ]
(B.2)                     Q21dolt (v) = P21dolt =
                                                         λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ




                                                                 3
          A European firm chooses two wholesale prices in European currency, one for

exports, Q12eurt (v) , and one for sales to domestic retailers, Q22
                                                                 eur
                                                                    t (v ) . Using (A.1) and (A.2),


Its objective is to maximize:

                                                                                                    −λ
                                                          1             Et −1 S12t C11t− ρ 
                                        [
                           nEt −1 d 2 t Q   eur
                                            12 t          ]
                                                   − W2t  dol Q12 t (v)
                                                                 eur

                                                                          Et −1C11t− ρ 
                                                                                            
                                                                                                          P1dol
                                                                                                            t C1t

                                                                                                            P12dolt
                                                          P12 t
                                                                                         −λ
                                                                          Q eur (v) 
                           + (1 − n) Et −1 d 2 t Q  [   eur
                                                        22 t             ]
                                                               (v) − W2t  22teur 
                                                                                              P2eur
                                                                                                t C 2t

                                                                                                P22eurt
                                                                          P22t 

Recalling that in equilibrium all firms make the same choice, the first order condition

with respect to Q12eurt (v) is written as:

                                            λ Et −1 [W2t C 2−tρ ( P2eur    −1 dol
                                                                       t ) P1t C1t ]
                           Q eur
                                    (v ) =
                                           λ − 1 Et −1 [C 2−tρ ( P2eur   −1 dol
                             12 t
                                                                   t ) P1t C1t ]


Combining this result with the optimal risk sharing condition (1.4), we write:

                                             λ Et −1[ S12tW2t C11t− ρ ]
                           Q12eurt (v) =
                                            λ − 1 Et −1 [ S12t C11t− ρ ]

Using (A.1) we obtain equation (1.11):

                                                         λ Et −1 [ S12tW2t C11t− ρ ]
(B.3)                      P12dolt (v) = P12dolt =
                                                        λ −1      Et −1C11t− ρ

                                                eur
From the first order condition with respect to Q22 t (v ) and (A.2), we obtain equation


(1.12):

                                                         λ Et −1 [W2t C 21−t ρ ]
(B.4)                      Q22eurt (v) = P22eurt =
                                                        λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ

          After the euro

          The introduction of the euro does not change the situation of European firms, and

(B.3) and (B.4) remain valid. A US firm however faces a different situation, as the



                                                                4
European retailers to whom its goods are sent now set the retail prices in Euro. The

wholesale price for domestic sales is still given by (B.1), whereas the wholesale price for

exports is now given by:

                                                  λ Et −1[ S12−1tW1t C 21−t ρ ]
                                Q21dolt (v) =
                                                 λ − 1 Et −1[ S12−1t C 21−t ρ ]

Combining this result with (A.3) leads to equation (1.14):

                                                             λ Et −1[ S12−1tW1t C 21−t ρ ]
(B.5)                            P  eur
                                          (v ) = P  eur
                                                          =
                                                            λ −1     Et −1C 21−t ρ
                                   21t             21t




C. Expected consumption

          Before the euro

          To derive equation (2.6), we use the labor supply relation (1.6) to write

W1t = ηP1tdol C1ρt , and W2t = ηP2eur ρ                  ρ
                                  t C 2 t = ηS12 t P1t C1t . Combining with (B.1) and (B.3), we
                                               −1 dol




derive:

                                                                 λη Et −1C1t
                                 P11dolt = P12dolt = P1tdol
                                                                λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

Since P1dol
        t   = ( P11dolt ) n ( P12dolt )1− n , we obtain equation (2.6):

                                       λη Et −1C1t
(C.1)                           1=
                                      λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

To get equation (2.7), we rewrite equation (B.2) recalling that W1t = ηP1tdol C1ρt

              ρ
= ηS12t P2eur           eur
          t C 2 t and P2 t  = S12− nt ( P21dolt ) n ( P22eurt )1− n

                                                                             λη Et −1 [ S121−tn C 2t ]
                                  P21dolt = ( P21dolt ) n ( P22eurt )1− n
                                                                            λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ

                                ρ
Similarly, we use W2 t = ηP2eur
                            t C 2 t to write (B.4) as:




                                                                     5
                                                eur 1− n    λη Et −1 [ S12− nt C 2t ]
                        P  eur
                                 = (Pdol   n
                                           ) (P    )
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ
                          22 t      21t        22 t




Combining the last two results leads to (2.7):

                                                             n                                 1− n
                            λη  Et −1 [ S121−tn C 2t ]          Et −1 [ S12− nt C 2t ] 
(C.2)                   1=                                                            
                           λ − 1  Et −1C 21−t ρ                Et −1C 2 t
                                                                                 1− ρ
                                                                                           

         (2.6) and (2.7) can be linearized to derive the expected consumption. We recall

the property of the log-normal distribution:

                        x = ln( X ) → N ( µ , σ 2 ) ⇒ E[ X a ] = exp[aµ + 12 a 2σ 2 ]

(2.6) can then be written as:

                                        1  λη  ρ − 2 2
                        Et −1c1t = −     ln    +    σ c1
                                        ρ  λ −1  2

Recalling that σ c21 = ρ −2σ v2 from (2.3), we derive:


                                                  1                ρ −1 
                        Et −1C1t = exp  Et −1c1t + σ c21  = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                  2                2ρ     

where Φ = [(λη ) /(λ − 1)]−1 / ρ . Following similar steps, (2.7) can be rewritten after some

algebra as:

                                        1  λη  ρ − 2 2 n(1 − n) 2
                        Et −1c 2t = −    ln    +    σ c2 −     σ s12
                                        ρ  λ −1  2         2ρ

From (2.2) and (2.4), we know that σ c22 = (n 2 + (1 − n) 2 ) ρ −2σ v2 and σ s12 = 2σ v2 , and

write:

                                                     1      
                        Et −1C 2 t = exp  Et −1c 2t + σ c22 
                                                     2      
                                             ρ − 1  1        n(1 − n)  2 
                                   = Φ exp  2  − n(1 − n)  −         σ v 
                                             ρ  2               ρ  




                                                       6
        After the euro

        Expected US consumption can be obtained from (B.1) and (B.3) which remain

valid after the introduction of the euro. Following the same steps as above, we show that

the euro has no effect on expected US consumption:

                                           ρ −1 
                         Et −1C1t = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                           2ρ     

                                                                                      ρ
Turning to European consumption, we use the labor supply (1.6) to write W2 t = ηP2eur
                                                                                  t C 2t



and W1t = ηP1tdol C1ρt = ηS12t P2eur ρ
                                 t C 2 t . We can rearrange (B.4) and (B.5) to obtain:



                                                λη Et −1 [ P2eur
                                                             t C 2t ]
                         P21eurt = P22eurt =
                                               λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ

European consumer prices being preset, we use (1.3) to derive (2.8):

                               λη Et −1C 2t
(C.3)                    1=
                              λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ

which is similar to (C.1). Following similar steps as for the US, we derive:

                                          1  λη  ρ − 2 2
                         Et −1c 2 t = −    ln    +    σ c2
                                          ρ  λ −1  2

Recalling that σ c22 = ρ −2σ v2 from (2.5), we obtain:


                                                       1                ρ −1 
                         Et −1C 2 t = exp  Et −1 c 2t + σ c22  = Φ exp  2 σ v2 
                                                       2                2ρ     




D. Expected employment




                                                        7
        Before the euro

        We derive the expected employment levels by combining (1.13) with our

solutions for retail prices (1.9)-(1.12), the labor supply (1.6) and the optimal risk sharing

condition (1.4). Expected employment in the United States is computed as:

                                          P1dol
                                            t E t −1C1t            Et −1 S12t P2eur
                                                                                 t C 2t
                          Et −1 L1t = n         dol
                                                        + (1 − n )           dol
                                              P11t                        P21t
                                       λ −1
                                   =        Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                                        λη

Turning to expected European employment, we write:

                                        P1dol
                                          t E t −1C1t           Et − 2 P2eur
                                                                         t C 2t
                          Et −1 L2t = n       dol
                                                      + (1 − n)         eur
                                            P12t                      P22t
                                       λ −1
                                   =        Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                                        λη

        After the euro

        We undertake similar steps, replacing (1.10) by (1.14) and using (1.15) for US

employment. European employment is computed as above, whereas US employment is

given by:

                                          P1tdol Et −1C1t            Et −1 P2eur
                                                                             t C 2t
                          Et −1 L1t = n           dol
                                                          + (1 − n )        eur
                                               P11t                       P21t
                                       λ −1
                                   =        Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                                        λη

Expected employment is always the same across regions, and is always given by the

same formula. Of course, the value of the terms in the formula is not the same before and

after the euro.




                                                       8
E. Welfare



        In our setup, the real effects of monetary shocks occur entirely in the short run.

From (1.1) and (2.9), we write the expected per capita welfare in country i as (omitting

the real balances):

                                1
                Et −1U it =        Et −1C it1− ρ − ηEt −1 Lit
                              1− ρ
                                   1                   λ −1
                               =       Et −1C it1− ρ −        Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                                 1− ρ                    λ

Simple algebra leads to equations (31.)-(3.2).



F. The law of one price for US exports



        This Appendix derives a version of the model where US firms are constrained to

set the same US dollar wholesale price for domestic sales and exports before the

introduction of the euro ( Q21dolt (v) = Q11dolt (v) ). (2.3) and (2.4) remain valid, and the pre-

euro consumption volatility is still given by Table 2. The post-euro setup is identical as

before, and the pre-euro analysis of European firm is unchanged.




                                                        9
          Price setting

          The situation of the retailers is unchanged, and they set their prices as in

Appendix A. A US firm chooses a unique US dollar wholesale price, Q11dolt (v) , charged to

all retailers. Using (A.1) and (A.2), its objective is written as:

                                                                        −λ
                                                         Q dol (v)          P1dol
                                                                                 t C1t            S12 t P2eur
                                                                                                           t C 2t
                                                                                                                  
                     Et −1 d1t (Q     dol
                                     11t    (v) − W1t )  11tdol             n   dol
                                                                                       + (1 − n )         dol     
                                                         P11t               P11t                     P11t      

The first order condition can be written as:

                                                                 −ρ
                                              λ Et −1W1t C1t ( P1tdol ) −1 [nP1tdol C1t + (1 − n) S12t P2eur
                                                                                                          t C 2t ]
                Q  dol
                         (v ) = P dol
                                           =
                                             λ − 1 Et −1C1t ( P1t ) [nP1t C1t + (1 − n) S12t P2t C 2t ]
                                                           −ρ   dol −1
                  11t            11t                                         dol                       eur




Using the optimal risk sharing condition (1.4) we write:

                                                             λ Et −1W1t [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
(F.1)                            Q11dolt (v) = P11dolt =
                                                            λ − 1 Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]



          Expected consumption

          We use the labor supply in the United States (1.6) to write W1t = ηP1tdol C1ρt , and

combine it with (F.1) to get:

                                             λη Et −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ C1ρt ]
                     P    dol
                                =P   dol

                                            λ − 1 Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                         11t        1t



                                                                               1− ρ −1
                                          t (λη )(λ − 1) ( E t −1C1t )( E t −1C1t ) . Recalling
                                                        −1
From Appendix C, we know that P12dolt = P1dol

that P1dol
       t   = ( P11dolt ) n ( P12dolt )1− n , we obtain:

                                                                                  n                        1− n
                         λη  Et −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ C1ρt ]                    Et −1C1t      
(F.2)                1=                                                                           
                        λ − 1  Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]                         1− ρ
                                                                                        Et −1C1t      




                                                                 10
which determines US consumption. To obtain the corresponding equation for European

consumption, we start by combining (F.1) with the labor supply ( W1t = ηP1tdol C1ρt

              ρ
= ηS12t P2eur                                                  eur
          t C 2 t ) and the definition of the European CPI ( P2 t  = S12− nt ( P11dolt ) n ( P22eurt )1− n ) to

get:

                                                                λη Et −1[(nC11t− ρ C 2ρt + (1 − n)C 2t ) S121−tn ]
                     P11dolt = ( P11dolt ) n ( P22eurt )1− n
                                                               λ −1     Et −1 (nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ )

                                                                                                                              1− ρ −1
From Appendix C we know that                                        P22eurt = (λη )(λ − 1) −1 ( Et −1 [ P2eur
                                                                                                          t C 2 t ])( E t −1C 2 t ) .


Combining this with the previous result, we derive:

                                                                                           n                                 1− n
                        λη  Et −1 [(nC11t− ρ C 2ρt + (1 − n)C 2t ) S121−tn ]                  Et −1 [C 2 t S12− nt ] 
(F.3)               1=                                                                                             
                       λ − 1     Et −1[nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]                            E      C  1− ρ
                                                                                                      t −1 2 t           

(F.2) and (F.3) are non-linear in logs, but can be approximated as a first order expansion around a

steady state with zero volatility. The numerator of the first term in (F.2) can be approximated as:

ln{E t −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ C1ρt ]}
= ln{n exp[ E t −1 c1t + 12 σ c21 ]
        + (1 − n) exp[ ρE t −1 c1t + (1 − ρ ) E t −1c 2t + 12 ρ 2σ c21 + 12 (1 − ρ ) 2 σ c22 + ρ (1 − ρ )σ c1c2 ]}
≅ (n + (1 − n) ρ ) E t −1c1t + (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) E t −1 c 2 t + 2 (n + (1 − n) ρ 2 )σ c21
                                                              1



  + 2 (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 σ c22 + ρ (1 − n)(1 − ρ )σ c1c2
    1




Similarly, the denominator can be approximated as:

ln{E t −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]}
= ln{n exp[(1 − ρ ) E t −1 c1t + 2 (1 − ρ ) 2 σ c21 ] + (1 − n) exp[(1 − ρ ) E t −1 c 2 t + 2 (1 − ρ ) 2 σ c22 ]}
                                 1                                                          1



≅ n(1 − ρ ) E t −1 c1t + (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) E t −1 c 2t + 2 n(1 − ρ ) 2 σ c21 + 2 (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 σ c22
                                                       1                     1




The terms in (F.2) can then be written as:




                                                                     11
                                                                        n
                Et −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ C1ρt ] 
            ln             1− ρ             1− ρ
                                                      
                t −1
                 E      [ nC1t    + (1 − n )C 2t   ]   
                                {
                      ≅ n ρEt −1c1t + (1 − n) ρ (1 − ρ )σ c1c2 + 12 (n + (1 − n) ρ 2 − n(1 − ρ ) 2 )σ c21                   }
                                            1− n
                E C                   
            ln t −1 11−tρ                                {
                                                   = (1 − n) ρEt −1c1t + 12 (1 − (1 − ρ ) 2 )σ c21   }
                Et −1C1t               

We can then take a log approximation of (F.2) as:

       λη 
0 = ln      + ρEt −1c1t + n(1 − n) ρ (1 − ρ )σ c1c2 + 12 ρ [2 − ρ − 2n(1 − n)(1 − ρ )]σ c1
                                                                                          2

       λ −1

which we solve as:

                              ρ −1 2                                      
            Et −1C1t = Φ exp      σ c1 − ( ρ − 1)n(1 − n)(σ c21 − σ c1c2 )
                              2                                           

where Φ = [(λη ) /(λ − 1)]−1 / ρ .

            The numerator of the first component of (F.3) can be approximated as follows:

            ln{Et −1 [(nC11t− ρ C 2ρt + (1 − n)C 2t ) S12
                                                       1− n
                                                          t ]}

            ≅ (1 − n) Et1 s12t + n(1 − ρ ) Et −1c1t + (nρ + (1 − n)) Et −1c 2t
                   + 12 (1 − n) 2 σ s212 + 12 n(1 − ρ ) 2 σ c21 + 12 (nρ 2 + (1 − n))σ c22
                   + nρ (1 − ρ )σ c1c2 + n(1 − n)(1 − ρ )σ s12c1 + (1 − n)(nρ + (1 − n))σ s12c2

We can then write the two elements of (F.3) as:

                                                                    n
    E [(nC11t− ρ C 2ρt + (1 − n)C 2t ) S12    1− n
                                                 t ]
                                                     
ln t −1             1− ρ             1− ρ
                                                     
                                                     
          E t−1 [ nC1 t   + (1 − n )C 2 t   ]       
     (1 − n) Et1 s12 t + ρEt −1c 2t + 2 (1 − n) 2 σ s212 + 12 (nρ 2 + (1 − n) − (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) 2 )σ c22 
                                           1

≅ n                                                                                                        
       + nρ (1 − ρ )σ c1c2 + n(1 − n)(1 − ρ )σ s12c1 + (1 − n)(nρ + (1 − n))σ s12c2                       
                                1− n
    Et −1 [C 2t S12− nt ]                       ρEt −1c 2t − nEt1 s12t + 12 n 2σ s212 + 12 (1 − (1 − ρ ) 2 )σ c22 
ln            1− ρ
                                      = (1 − n)                                                                     
    Et −1C 2t                                   − nσ s12c2                                                         

which allows us to take a log linear approximation of (F.3) as:




                                                                            12
                λη 
         0 = ln         + ρEt −1c 2t + 2 n(1 − n)σ s12 + 2 ρ (2 − ρ )σ c2
                                          1              2     1               2

                λ −1
              − n 2 (1 − n)(1 − ρ )(σ s12c2 − σ s12c1 ) + n 2 ρ ( ρ − 1)(σ c22 − σ c1c2 )

Which we solve to obtain:

                            ρ −1 2                                                   
                            2 σ c2 − ( ρ − 1)n (σ c2 − σ c1c2 )
                                               2   2
                                                                                      
         Et −1C 2t = Φ exp                                                           
                           − n(1 − n) σ 2 + n (1 − n)(1 − ρ ) (σ                     
                                               2

                                                                 s12 c2 − σ s12 c1 ) 
                                2ρ                   ρ
                                         s12
                                                                                     



         Expected employment

         Expected US employment can be computed as:

                                   P1tdol Et −1C1t            Et −1 S12 t P2eur
                                                                             t C 2t
                   Et −1 L1t = n           dol
                                                   + (1 − n )            dol
                                        P11t                         P11t
                                                                                             ρ 1− ρ
                              λ −1          1− ρ          1− ρ nE t −1C1t + (1 − n ) E t −1C1t C 2 t
                            =      Et −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C 2t ]
                               λη                               Et −1 [nC1t + (1 − n)C1ρt C 21−t ρ ]
                                λ −1
                            =        Et −1 [nC11t− ρ + (1 − n)C 21−t ρ ]
                                 λη

which is of the same form as in (2.9) in the baseline model. Table 3 presents the values of

expected consumption, employment, and ‘power’ consumption under the alternative

setup.




G. Exchange rate flexibility in pre-euro Europe




                                                          13
        In this extension, we assume that before the introduction of the euro, the exchange

rate between the French franc and the Deutsche Mark floats. The post-euro situation is

unchanged from the baseline model. We assume that European retailers entirely pass the

exchange rate fluctuations through to consumers. The retail prices in Germany and

France are therefore equal to the wholesales prices charged by the producer, times the

relevant exchange rate. The household problem is similar as the one presented in section

1.1, with the consumption basket now defined as:

                        Ci ( x) =    n
                                         1
                                         n2   n3
                                                   (Ci1 ( x))n (Ci 2 ( x) )n (Ci3 ( x))n
                                                                            2          3

                                    n n n2    3


The analysis of the model is similar to the one presented in the main text. Assuming

µ i = µ ∀i for simplicity, we can show that S1it = M 1t M it−1 for i = 2, 3. Consumption in

the United States is still given by (2.3). As there is complete exchange rate pass-through

at the intra-European level, consumption in France and Germany is proportional to the

worldwide nominal balances:

                                                                   1
                                                                   ρ
(G.1)                   C 2t and C 3t ∝ ( M M M )   n
                                                   1t
                                                         n2
                                                         2t
                                                              n3
                                                              3t


From (G.1), we can compute the consumption volatility. It is equal to its value in Table 2

for the United States, and its value in Europe is:

                                                        n 2 + n22 + n32 2
(G.2)                   σ c22 = σ c23 = σ c2c3 =                       σv
                                                              ρ2



        Price setting

        We now turn to the optimal price setting for each firm. A US firm sets its

wholesale prices in US dollar, without any constraint of their being equalized across



                                                         14
markets. Retailers in US and Europe then simply pass the wholesale prices through to

                                                                                    −1
retail prices, up to the exchange rate ( P11dolt (v) = Q11dolt (v) , P21DM
                                                                         t (v) = S 12 t Q 21t (v ) ,
                                                                                          dol




P31FFt (v) = S13−1t Q31dolt (v) ). A US firm maximizes:

                                                                               −λ
                                                               P 1 (v ) 
                                       [
                            nEt −1 d1t Q      dol
                                             11t                  ]
                                                    (v) − W1t  11tdol 
                                                                                    P1tdol C1t
                                                                                      P11dolt
                                                               P11t 
                                                                                             −λ
                                                                     S −1 Q21dolt (v) 
                            + n2 Et −1 d1t Q  [     dol
                                                    21t               ]
                                                          (v) − W1t  12 t DM          
                                                                                                  P2DM
                                                                                                    t C 2t

                                                                                                    P21DM
                                                                     P21t                             t
                                                                                             −λ
                                                                     S13−1t Q31dolt (v) 
                            + n3 Et −1 d1t Q  [     dol
                                                    31t   (v) − W1t  ]       FF         
                                                                                                  P3FF
                                                                                                    t C 3t

                                                                                                    P31FFt
                                                                     P31t               

After some algebra, the optimal prices can be written as:

                                                            λη Et −1 [ P1dol
                                                                         t C1t ]
                            P11dolt = Q11dolt (v) =
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                                                                                ρ 1− ρ
                                                            λη Et −1 [ P1dol
                                                                         t C1t C 2 t ]
                            P21dolt = Q21dolt (v) =
                                                           λ −1       Et −1C 21−t ρ
                                                                           ρ 1− ρ
                                                       λη Et −1 [ P1dol
                                                                    t C1t C 3t ]
                            P  dol
                                     =Q dol
                                               (v ) =
                                                      λ −1       Et −1C 31t− ρ
                              31t       31t




        A German firm sets three wholesale prices in DM: one for its sales to the US, Q12DM
                                                                                          t (v ) ,


                               DM                                            DM
one for its sales in Germany, Q22 t (v ) , and one for its sales to France, Q32 t (v ) . The retail price


in the US is similar to (A.2):

                                             Et −1[ S12 t C11t− ρ ]
                  P12dolt (v) = Q12DMt (v)
                                                Et −1C11t− ρ

The German firm maximizes:




                                                                 15
                                                                                                     −λ
                                                1             Et −1 [ S12t C11t− ρ ] 
                          [
                nEt −1 d 2 t Q DM
                              12 t                    ]
                                     (v) − W2t  dol Q12 t (v)
                                                       DM

                                                                   Et −1C11t− ρ 
                                                                                      
                                                                                                          P1dol
                                                                                                            t C1t

                                                                                                            P12dolt
                                                P12 t
                                                                             −λ
                                                       Q DM (v) 
                                 [
                + n2 Et −1 d 2 t Q   DM
                                     22 t                  ]
                                            (v) − W2t  22tDM 
                                                                                  P2DM
                                                                                    t C 2t

                                                                                    P22DM
                                                       P22t                           t
                                                                                      −λ
                                                       S S −1 Q DM (v) 
                + n3 Et −1d 2t Q [   DM
                                     32 t                 ]
                                            (v) − W2t  12t 13t FF32t   
                                                                                            P3FF
                                                                                              t C 3t

                                                                                              P32FFt
                                                            P32 t      

The optimal prices can be written as:

                                       λη Et −1 [ P1tdol C1t ]
                          P12dolt =
                                      λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                                                            λη Et −1 [ P2DM
                                                                         t C 2t ]
                          P DM
                                     =Q      DM
                                                    (v ) =
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ
                           22 t              22 t


                                                               λη Et −1 [ S13t S12−1t P3FF
                                                                                         t C 3t ]
                              t = Q32 t (v ) =
                          P32DM    DM

                                                              λ −1         Et −1C 3t1− ρ




        A French firm faces a similar situation, and maximizes:

                                                                                                    −λ
                                                1             E [ S C 1− ρ ] 
                          [
                nEt −1 d 3t Q  FF
                              13t                     ]
                                     (v) − W3t  dol Q13FFt (v) t −1 13t 1− 1ρt 
                                                                                                         P1dol
                                                                                                           t C1t

                                                                                                           P13dolt
                                                P13t              Et −1C1t     
                                                                                     −λ
                                                       S13t S12−1t Q23FFt (v) 
                                 [
                + n 2 Et −1 d 3t Q   FF
                                     23t    (v) − W3t    ]   P23DM
                                                                               
                                                                                           P2DM
                                                                                             t C 2t

                                                                                             P23DM
                                                                   t                           t
                                                                           −λ
                                                      Q FF (v) 
                + n3 Et −1 d 3t Q[   FF
                                     33t                  ]
                                           (v) − W3t  33tFF 
                                                                                P3FF
                                                                                  t C 3t

                                                                                  P33FFt
                                                      P33t 

The optimal prices can be computed as:

                                                      Et −1 [ S13t C11t− ρ ]    λη Et −1 [ P1tdol C1t ]
                          P13dolt = Q13FFt (v)                               =
                                                          Et −1C11t− ρ         λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                                                          λη [ Et −1 S12t S13−1t P2DMt C 2t ]
                          P FF
                                     =Q     FF
                                                  (v ) =
                                                         λ −1                    1− ρ
                           23t              23t
                                                                      Et −1C 2t
                                                           λη Et −1[ P3FF
                                                                       t C 3t ]
                          P33FFt = Q33FFt (v) =
                                                          λ − 1 Et −1C 31t− ρ




                                                                 16
        Expected consumption

        From the solutions for P11dolt , P12dolt and P13dolt we can establish that US expected

consumption is still given by (2.6). As US actual consumption is still determined by (2.3),

its variance is identical as in the baseline model. It is then straightforward to show that

the pre-euro expected US consumption is given by Table 2, and is therefore unaffected by

the intra-European exchange rate regime.

        Turning to Germany, we can write:

                                                                          λη Et −1 [ S12n2t S13n3t C 2t ]
                  P21dolt = ( P21dolt ) n ( P22DM  n2   FF n3
                                                t ) ( P23t )
                                                                         λ −1      Et −1C 21−t ρ
                                                                          λη Et −1[ S12− (t1− n2 ) S13n3t C 2t ]
                      t = ( P21t ) ( P22 t ) ( P23t )
                                       DM n2     FF n3
                  P22DM       dol n

                                                                         λ −1        Et −1C 21−t ρ
                                                                      λη Et −1[ S12n2t S13−(t1− n3 ) C 2t ]
                  P  FF
                            = (P    dol   n
                                          ) (P  DM     n2
                                                      ) (P    FF
                                                                   )n3

                                                                     λ −1        Et −1C 21−t ρ
                    23t            21t         22 t          23t




which implies:

                            λη
        Et −1C 21−t ρ =
                           λ −1
                                (Et −1 S12n2t S13n3t C 2t ) (Et −1 S12−(t1− n2 ) S13n3t C 2t ) (Et −1 S12n2t S13−(t1− n3 ) C 2t )
                                                           n                                  n2                                 n3




We can solve this equation as:

                                     1  λη  ρ − 2 2 n 2 (1 − n 2 ) 2 n3 (1 − n3 ) 2
                  Et −1c 2t = −        ln         +   σ c2 −      σ s12 −        σ s13
                                     ρ  λ −1        2        2ρ           2ρ
(G.3)
                                    n n
                                   + 2 3 σ s12 s13
                                      ρ

        Turning to France, we can show that:

                                                                      λη Et −1 [ S13n3t S12n2t C 3t ]
                  P  dol
                            = (P    dol   n
                                          ) (P  DM     n2
                                                      ) (P    FF
                                                                   )n3

                                                                     λ −1     Et −1C 31t− ρ
                    31t            31t         32 t          33t


                                                                          λη Et −1[ S13n3t S12−(t1− n2 ) C 3t ]
                      t = ( P31t ) ( P32 t ) ( P33t )
                                       DM n2     FF n3
                  P32DM       dol n

                                                                         λ −1       Et −1C 31t− ρ
                                                                          λη Et −1[ S13− (t1− n3 ) S12n2t C 3t ]
                  P33FFt = ( P31dolt ) n ( P32DM  n2   FF n3
                                               t ) ( P33t )
                                                                         λ −1       Et −1C 31t− ρ


                                                                    17
which implies:

                           λη
        Et −1C 31t− ρ =
                          λ −1
                               (Et −1 S13n3t S12n2t C 3t ) (Et −1 S13n3t S12−(t1− n2 ) C 3t ) (Et −1 S13−(t1− n3 ) S12n2t C 3t )
                                                          n                                  n2                                 n3




We can solve this to obtain:

                                     1  λη  ρ − 2 2 n 2 (1 − n 2 ) 2 n3 (1 − n3 ) 2
                  Et −1c3t = −         ln        +   σ c3 −       σ s12 −        σ s13
                                     ρ  λ −1       2        2ρ            2ρ
(G.4)
                                      n n
                                    + 2 3 σ s12 s13
                                        ρ

From (G.2)-(G.3)-(G.4), expected consumption is the same in Germany and in France, as

is consumption volatility. From the optimal prices we then conclude that the law of one

price holds at the intra-European level, i.e. the French Franc price is the same for sales in

France and exports to Germany. This implies that PPP holds at the intra-European level,

and (1.4) implies that consumption is always the same in France and Germany.

        In addition, we can show that expected employment in France and Germany is given by

(2.9). Table 4 presents the values of expected consumption, employment, and ‘power’

consumption under the alternative setup.



H. Alternative assumptions regarding the currency of pricing



        The baseline analysis assumes that the introduction of the euro leads to a change

of pricing behavior for European importers, making the European retail prices less

sensitive to fluctuations in the exchange rate. However, it could be the case that European

importers do not change their pricing practice but US importers adjust theirs and pass

exchange rate fluctuations through to consumers. Under this alternative, consumer prices




                                                                  18
in the United States can change due to the exchange rate fluctuations US and European

consumption levels are then proportional to worldwide money supply:

                                                                           1
                                                                1− n       ρ
(H.1)                     C1t and C 2 t ∝ ( M M             n
                                                           1t   2t     )

This implies that consumption volatility is the same in both regions:

                                                     n 2 + (1 − n) 2 2
(H.2)                     σ c21 = σ c22 =                           σv
                                                           ρ2



        Optimal prices

        Retailers set the retail prices to be equal to the wholesale prices, adjusted by the

exchange rate. The situation for a US producer is unchanged by the euro, and the optimal

prices are given by:

                                                            λη Et −1 P1tdol C1t
                          P   dol
                                     =Q       dol
                                                    (v ) =
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                             11t             11t


                                                            λη Et −1 S12t P2eur
                                                                            t C 2t
                          P21dolt = Q21dolt (v) =
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C 2t 1− ρ




A European firm maximizes:

                                                                               −λ
                                                   S Q eurt (v) 
                           [
                nEt −1 d 2 t Q  eur
                                12 t                   ]
                                       (v) − W2 t  12 t 12
                                                         dol     
                                                                                    P1tdol C1t
                                                                                      P12dolt
                                                   P12t         
                                                                                    −λ
                                                                 Q22  (v ) 
                                         [                      ]
                                                                   eur
                                                                                         P2eur
                                                                                           t C 2t
                + (1 − n) Et −1 d 2t P         eur
                                              22 t   (v) − W2 t  teur 
                                                                 P22 t                   P22eurt

After some algebra, the optimal prices are written as:

                                               λη Et −1 S12−1t P1tdol C1t
                P12eurt = Q12eurt (v) =
                                              λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                                            λη Et −1 P2eur
                                                       t C 2t
                P eur
                        =Q   eur
                                    (v ) =
                                           λ − 1 Et −1C 21−t ρ
                 22 t        22 t




                                                                19
        Expected consumption

        From the optimal prices, we can write:

                                                            λη Et −1[ S121−tn C1t ]
                 P11dolt = ( P11dolt ) n ( P12eurt )1− n
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ
                                                            λη Et −1 [ S12− nt C1t ]
                 P12eurt = ( P11dolt ) n ( P12eurt )1− n
                                                           λ − 1 Et −1C11t− ρ

which implies:

                                                           n                              1− n
                     λη  Et −1 S121−tn C1t                    Et −1 S12− nt C1t   
                 1=                                                             
                    λ − 1  Et −1C11t− ρ                       Et −1C1t
                                                                             1− ρ
                                                                                      

Taking logs, we obtain:

                                    1  λη  ρ − 2 2 n(1 − n) 2
(H.3)            Et −1c1t = −        ln    +    σ c1 −     σ s12
                                    ρ  λ −1  2         2ρ

        Turning to European consumption, (2.7) remains valid and we write:

                                    1  λη  ρ − 2 2 n(1 − n) 2
(H.4)            Et −1c 2t = −       ln    +    σ c2 −     σ s12
                                    ρ  λ −1  2         2ρ

From (H.2)-(H.3)-(H.4), we see that expected consumption is the same in the US and

Europe. This implies that the law of one price holds, as the US dollar price set by a US

firm is the same for domestic sales and exports. We can show that expected employment

is the same in both regions and is given by (2.9). Table 5 presents the values of expected

consumption, employment, and ‘power’ consumption under the alternative setup.




                                                                      20
