I. Introduction

         Medicare is the federal entitlement program that provides comprehensive health

insurance coverage to individuals age 65 and older and certain disabled people. In 1995,

total Medicare expenditures reached $187 billion dollars, with expected annual growth of

ten percent (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1997; Wilensky, 1995). With

passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, reforms are being implemented to address

the program’s financial condition and to expand beneficiary coverage options with the

creation of Medicare Part C, otherwise known as Medicare+Choice.

         Under Medicare+Choice, several types of coordinated care plans are eligible to

contract with the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) to provide coverage to

Medicare beneficiaries.1 This expands and modifies the Medicare HMO risk-contracting

program begun in 1985. Under this program, an HMO entering into a “risk contract”

receives a fixed monthly payment equal to 95% of an actuarial measure of the average

cost of providing care to a beneficiary in the traditional Medicare program adjusted for

geographic and demographic differences. This is called the Adjusted Average Per Capita

Cost, or AAPCC. In return, the HMO is responsible for providing all covered services

and takes full financial responsibility for the actual costs generated.2

         In addition to expanding the types of organizations eligible to enter contracts,

Medicare+Choice also differs from the preceding system with respect to the payment

methodology. Though organizations participating in Medicare+Choice still receive a



1
  Medicare+Choice also permits fee-for-service insurers and religious fraternal benefit society plans to
contract with HCFA.
2
  Additional regulations capped net revenues for risk-contracting HMOs. If an HMO exceeded the limit,
then the firm would be required to take a lower payment rate or pass the savings onto the beneficiaries in
the form of supplementary benefits or lower out-of-pocket costs. Premium rebates were prohibited. See
(Zarabozo and LeMasurier, 1996) for discussion of TEFRA guidelines.
fixed monthly payment to provide coverage for Medicare beneficiaries and bear the

financial risk associated with the costs of providing care, a different methodology has

been adopted for calculating this payment. Under Medicare+Choice, an organization’s

payment is based on the largest of three rates, which include the following: a minimum

payment amount (which for 1998 is $367 per month); a blended rate, which consists of

the area-specific rate and an input-price adjusted national rate; and a minimum

percentage increase which uses the AAPCC rate in 1997 as the base (www.hcfa.gov,

1998).

         There has been considerable growth in recent years in both the number of HMOs

offering Medicare products and HMO Medicare beneficiary enrollment. Table 1

summarizes HMO participation in the Medicare risk market for the years 1990 to 1995. 3

During this period, the number of HMOs participating in Medicare risk contracting

nearly doubled, from 66 to 114. As HCFA makes the transition into Medicare+Choice,

effective implementation of this program depends on participation by coordinated care

organizations, enrollment by beneficiaries, and a payment methodology that yields

savings to Medicare that would not be realized under the traditional program.

         The purpose of this paper is to directly examine two of these implementation

issues: the decision by organizations to participate in the Medicare market and the factors

that influence the number of beneficiaries who enroll in these institutions. Given the

infancy of the Medicare+Choice program, we focus our analysis on HMO participation

and enrollment decision-making as a way to identify insights that may apply more

broadly to contracting organizations under this new program.




                                                                                          2
        Two studies have examined HMO entry into the Medicare market. Adamache

and Rossiter (1986) examine the determinants of HMO participation in the National

Medicare Competition demonstration, modeling this decision as a function of an HMO’s

organizational, market, and performance characteristics, and then estimating a binary

probit model.4 Their results suggest that the AAPCC rate, federal qualification by an

HMO, and prior experience with Medicare beneficiaries positively affect an HMO’s

probability of participation. Porell and Wallack (1990) model the problem similarly,

using a different market definition and data set. The authors’ findings confirm previous

results, with additional results suggesting that stronger utilization controls and favorable

financial performance by an HMO also increase the probability of entry into the

Medicare market. However, both of these studies fail to directly address HMO

production in the commercial enrollee market and how this may affect a firm’s decision

regarding Medicare, given the potential for important cost or demand linkages between

these products. Furthermore, they also fail to consider the impact of what has become an

important part of conventional Medicare – the price of supplemental Medicare insurance.

        In this paper, we develop a model of HMO behavior that explicitly considers the

linkage between an HMO’s production in the commercial enrollee market and its

decision to participate and produce in the Medicare market.             We estimate the model

using data from 1990 to 1995, which reflects a time period of significant growth and

change in the HMO industry. The remainder of this paper is divided into the following

sections. Section II presents the model. A discussion of the data and measures are

3
  Table 1 was constructed using data from a national sample of HMOs in the United States. Therefore, the
number of risk-contracting HMOs reported in Table 1 is smaller than the number reported by HCFA for
this time period.




                                                                                                       3
contained in Section III. Section IV outlines a set econometric estimation issues. Section

V reports the results and provides a discussion of the findings. Section VI identifies

potential policy implications and contains concluding remarks.

II. Model

        In this section, we develop a profit-maximization model of HMO behavior. The

primary objective for doing so is to examine how the Medicare price (the AAPCC

payment rate), the price of substitutes for an HMO Medicare product (specifically the

price of a supplemental Medicare insurance policy), and a firm’s production in its private

(commercial enrollee) market, influence its decision-making with respect to the Medicare

market.

        We employ the following set of assumptions. First, we consider the populations

demanding each of these products to be separate, since only Medicare beneficiaries are

eligible to enroll in a Medicare product, while most commercial enrollees are labor force

participants and their families. Second, we assume that the products are distinguishable

from one another by the fact that coverage under the traditional Medicare program and

hence, Medicare products, is typically broader than that required for private products

produced by federally qualified HMOs (Zarabozo and LeMasurier, 1996). Third, we

assume that all HMOs produce a positive quantity of the private product. Finally, we

allow for the possibility of demand complementarities for a firm’s private and Medicare

products.




4
 The National Medicare Competition demonstration occurred in 1982, and included 52 risk-contracting
plans. See Langwell and Hadley (1982) and Langwell and Hadley (1986) for discussion.


                                                                                                      4
Private demand

          Let an HMO face a separate demand function for each of its products, and let an

HMO’s demand function for its private product be specified as the following:

Q p = θ 0 − θ 1 Pp + θ 2 X p + θ 3Qm , θ i ≥ 0 ∀i                                                      (1)

where the private quantity (Qp) depends on the price charged for the private product ( Pp ),

Xp, which represents a set of exogenous factors that shift demand for the private product,

and the firm’s Medicare enrollment (Qm).5

Medicare demand

          We specify the “potential” market demand for an HMO’s Medicare product to be

some function of the demographic composition of the Medicare population, a set of

exogenous factors that shift HMO Medicare market demand (Xm), and commercial

enrollment. Individual firm demand is some proportion of this “potential” or residual

market demand ( QmR ), such that:

    Qm ≤ QmR .                                                                                         (2)


We specify individual firm demand as the following:

Qm = m1 z + m2 X m + m3 Q p                                                                            (3)

where z represents the quality level of the Medicare product chosen by the firm, Xm is a

vector of exogenous factors that shift HMO Medicare market demand (such as the price

of supplemental Medicare insurance), and Qp is a firm’s private quantity.6 We assume


5
  This specification does not explicitly model strategic interaction by firms in the private market. Assume
this represents a reduced form residual demand curve with γ capturing factors that shift rivals’ demands as
well as the firm’s own demand.
6
  This specification also does not explicitly model strategic interaction among firms in the Medicare
market. It subsumes rivals’ actions and should be considered a reduced form specification. We assume


                                                                                                          5
that Qm is not directly under the control of the firm, but rather is influenced by the quality

of the product (z), which is set by the firm.

Medicare price

        In contrast to the private market, the Medicare price is set administratively by the

Health Care Financing Administration, rather than being determined as a function of

quantity. Under federal guidelines, the price of the Medicare product ( Pm ) is set equal to

95% of the AAPCC, which is an actuarial measure of the average cost of providing care

to a beneficiary enrolled in the traditional Medicare program, adjusted for age, sex,

geographic, Medicaid eligibility, and institutional status differences.

Costs

        The firm faces the following cost function associated with its production of the

private and Medicare products::

C = C1Qm + C 2 Q p + C 3Q p Qm + C 4 Qm2 + C 5 Q p2 + C 6 zQm + C 7 z + C8 z 2 .                         (4)



Total cost is a function of the private and Medicare quantities and the quality level

chosen by the firm. The third cost parameter, C3 , captures those costs associated with

the joint production of the private and Medicare products.

        The last two terms in the cost function specification capture the fixed cost

associated with production of a Medicare product, where this cost is strictly increasing

with the level of quality chosen by the firm. HMOs may incur fixed costs for such

things as new equipment purchases, facility renovation for easier accessibility by the




that HMOs only seek to enroll beneficiaries from the traditional Medicare population and not those
beneficiaries who are already enrolled in other HMOs.


                                                                                                     6
elderly, development of geriatric programs, marketing, or administrative services related

to the risk contract application process and compliance with government regulation.

Entry Decision

       Based on the above assumptions, the decision for an HMO to enter the Medicare

market is a function of the variable profit and fixed cost associated with production of a

Medicare product. Entry by the firm will occur when, for a given level of quality, the

following condition holds:

( Pm − C1 − C3Q p − 2C4Qm − C6 z )Qm −(C7 z + C8 z 2 )≥0 .                                 (5)

Using this condition, we can assess how changes in the price, costs, or private enrollment

affect a firm's probability of entry into the Medicare market. For example, if the

Medicare price increases, this increases a firm’s variable profit, and will increase its

likelihood of participation. Second, if variable or fixed costs increase, this will decrease

the probability of entry by the firm, ceteris paribus. Finally, the probability of

participation depends on the presence of complementarities. If there are demand or cost

complementarities, then an increase in a firm’s private enrollment (Qp), will serve to

increase its probability of participation in the Medicare market.

       To examine how these factors affect a firm’s probability of entry into the

Medicare market, we construct a binary dependent variable, OFFER, defined as the

following:

       = 1 if Qm > 0
OFFER 
      = 0 if Qm = 0

and designate the model as the following:

Prob( OFFER = 1) = β 1 + β 2 Pm + X m β 3 + X p β 4 + (COST ) β 5                          (6)




                                                                                               7
where the decision to offer a Medicare product is a function of a constant, the Medicare

price, Medicare demand shifters, private demand shifters, and factors that shift an

HMO’s costs (COST). This equation is a reduced form specification derived

from the preceding entry condition.

Profit-Maximization Problem

             We assume that HMOs seek to maximize profits.7 The firm’s problem is then:

Max π = Pp Q p + Pm Qm − C1Qm − C 2 Q p − C 3Q p Qm − C 4 Qm − C 5 Q p − C 6 zQm − C 7 z − C8 z 2
                                                                      2          2
                                                                                                              (7 )
     Qp, z


subject to:
(1) Qm ≥ 0
(2) Q p − Qm ≥ 0
(3) QmR − Qm ≥ 0

where an HMO chooses its private quantity and level of quality to maximize profit

subject to the three constraints. Constraint (1) reflects an HMO’s choice to participate in

the Medicare market. Constraint (2) reflects federal guidelines that require HMOs not to

have more than 50% of their total enrollment from Medicare enrollees. Constraint (3)

requires that no individual firm’s demand for its Medicare product exceed its residual

market demand.8

             Table 2 outlines four possible cases of HMO behavior under various

combinations of slack and binding constraints. Case I includes all HMOs that have


7
  Profit-maximization is the appropriate assumption, even for non-profit HMOs, provided that the HMO
seeks to maximize the income of a decisive set of agents, or that the residual claimants can agree on
maximizing their joint gain (Pauly, 1987; Danzon, 1982). A separate model for non-profit HMOs is
required only if something which affects demand (e.g., output) also appears in the HMO’s objective
function. Since this is uncertain, we do not believe there is a need for a special model of non-profit HMOs
(Wholey et al, 1995). In our data set, approximately 70% of HMOs have for-profit status.

8
    See Appendix 1 for the first-order and second-order conditions of the profit-maximization problem.


                                                                                                          8
chosen to operate in the private market only. HMOs that fall into Case II participate in

both the private and Medicare markets, and are constrained by the 50/50 rule. Case III

includes HMOs that participate in both markets and that are constrained by demand in the

Medicare market. This suggests that an individual firm’s demand equals its residual

market demand, and therefore, no further increases in quality can increase firm demand.

Finally, Case IV includes those HMOs that operate in both markets and are neither

constrained by the 50/50 rule, nor constrained by demand. Cases I, III, and IV appear to

be the most empirically plausible. Descriptive statistics from the data reveal that less

than two percent of all operational HMOs are constrained by the 50/50 rule, and

therefore, fall into Case II.

        To examine the determinants of an HMO’s private and Medicare enrollment, we

use the first order conditions of the profit-maximization problem to specify the

enrollment equations below. Specifically, we solve for Q p and Qm individually from

first order conditions (1) and (2), and impose an assumption of linearity. These single

equation, implicit solutions are expressed as the following:

  Qm = α 1 + α 2 Pm + X mα 3 + (COST )α 4 + α 5 Q p                                             (8)

  Q p = ω1 + ω 2 Pm + X pω 3 + (COST )ω 4 + ω 5 Qm .                                            (9)

Here, an HMO’s Medicare quantity is a function of the Medicare price, Medicare demand

shifters, factors that shift cost, and private quantity, while a firm’s private quantity is a

function of the Medicare price, private demand shifters, factors that shift cost, and a

firm’s Medicare quantity.

        Appendix 2 outlines a set of comparative static predictions that are used to assess

how changes in the Medicare price and factors that shift private and Medicare demand



                                                                                                  9
affect an HMO’s behavior regarding private and Medicare enrollment. Using our

predictions, we can distinguish between Case III (firms are demand constrained) and

Case IV (firms are unconstrained), and utilize this information in relating our empirical

results back to theory. Furthermore, we use combinations of predictions to test for the

presence of complementarities in production.

       Table 3 reports these predictions, where the parameters identified are those

specified in equations (8) and (9). We can distinguish between the demand constrained

and unconstrained cases using the parameter on the Medicare price in the Medicare

quantity equation. Finding a zero effect suggests that the firm is demand constrained,

while finding a positive effect, suggests that the firm responds to an increase in price and

is therefore, unconstrained by demand. To test for complementarities, we use the signs

on the parameter estimates for Qp, Qm, and Pm in the Medicare and private enrollment

regressions, respectively. Finding a positive effect suggests the presence of

complementarities.

III.    Empirical Specification

Data

       We used the InterStudy HMO Census to identify the population of HMOs in the

United States from 1990 to 1995. The InterStudy Census describes the organizational

structure of HMOs in terms of model type, profit status, headquarters location, and

federal qualification. In addition, the Census indicates changes in ownership

(organizational name changes, mergers) and plan terminations.

       We matched the InterStudy data with information obtained from forms that

HMOs file with state regulators. The state filings include financial information,




                                                                                            10
enrollment figures, and utilization statistics. We obtained these from Health Care

Investment Analysts (HCIA) , who code the data, and sell them in machine readable

format. We matched 2564 (80.2%) of the 3197 HMOs identified in the InterStudy

Census with HMOs in the HCIA data. Matches did not occur for a variety of reasons:

financial forms were not available from some states (ie: Hawaii); some national firms

filed the same statement in all states in which they operated; and some forms were

missing for unknown reasons. We were more likely to have data for independent

practice association (IPA) HMOs than non-IPA HMOs, for federally-qualified HMOs,

and for firms affiliated with a national HMO. We were less likely to have data for HMOs

affiliated with a non-HMO based national firm (ie: insurer) and for firms associated with

Blue Cross Blue Shield. Fifty-two observations for which private enrollment was

identified as being zero were excluded from the final empirical analysis.

       County-level data from the Area Resource File were used to construct

demographic and economic market measures. The Health Care Financing Administration

was the source for data on the Adjusted Average Per Capita Cost, and data on

supplemental Medicare insurance policy premiums were obtained from a report issued by

the Families USA Foundation and supplemented through direct correspondence with the

American Association of Retired Persons.



Unit of Analysis

       The HMO is the unit of analysis for this study. HMOs frequently operate in

multiple geographic markets and so HMO market measures were developed through a

process consisting of several steps. In the first step, the counties in which the HMO




                                                                                        11
operates were obtained from InterStudy Censuses (1990 to 1995). Second, in a recent

InterStudy survey, HMOs were asked to list enrollment by Metropolitan Statistical Area

(MSA). We were able to allocate enrollments to MSAs and use county population

weights to allocate enrollment within MSAs that span over more than one county.

Residual enrollment not included in these MSAs was allocated over the counties served

by the HMO that are not in MSA counties where the HMO allocated enrollment. In the

third step, market characteristics (e.g., input prices) were created for each HMO, using a

weighted average of the county-level variables over all counties where the HMO

operates. Weights were calculated as the HMO’s estimated enrollment in a county

divided by its total enrollment over all counties it serves. For example, if an HMO

operates in two counties with enrollments of 10,000 and 30,000, and the average nurse

wage rate is $12 and $16 respectively, then the nurse wage rate for the HMO market is

[(1/4)*12+(3/4)*16] = $15 (Wholey et al, 1995).

Variables

       As stated in the theoretical section, firms choose the quantity of the private

product and level of quality for the Medicare product in order to maximize profits. While

we do not have any empirical measures for quality, a firm’s quantity of Medicare

enrollees is a function of quality, and is observable. The product that an HMO produces

is defined as a member month of health care coverage, with the private and Medicare

quantities denoted as Qp and Qm, respectively.    We use the AAPCC county base rate for

the aged as our measure of the Medicare price.

Factors affecting Medicare demand (δ):




                                                                                         12
          We control for differences in the demographic composition of markets by

including the proportion of the population 65 to 74 years of age and the proportion 75

years of age and older. Approximately 70% of beneficiaries purchase supplemental

Medicare (Medigap) insurance to cover services not included in the traditional Medicare

benefits package, as well as out-of-pocket costs, such as co-insurance and deductibles

(Zarabozo and LeMasurier, 1995). An HMO Medicare product frequently includes a set

of benefits that are comparable to a combination of traditional Medicare and a

supplemental Medicare policy. In markets where Medigap premiums are high, an HMO

Medicare product may be perceived as an attractive substitute. In 1992, supplemental

Medicare insurers were required by federal law to limit their selection of policies to ten

standardized packages (National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 1996). We

use annual premiums for AARP/Prudential supplemental Medicare insurance (Package

A) to proxy for the price of a supplemental Medicare policy (Dallek, 1996; Smolka,

1996).9,10 To deal with missing premium data, we construct an indicator variable that

takes on a value of one if the premium data is missing and sets the Medigap premium to

zero.11

Factors affecting private demand (γ):


9
  Package A includes coverage for the Medicare Part A coinsurance amount for the 61st-90th day of
hospitalization; coverage for the Part A coinsurance amount for each of the 60 non-renewable lifetime
hospital inpatient reserve days; coverage for 100% of the Medicare Part A eligible hospital expenses;
coverage for three pints of blood; and coverage for the coinsurance amount for Part B services after the
$100 deductible has been met (National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 1996).
10
   AARP/Prudential uses a community rating method to calculate premiums, which means that it does not
charge differentiated prices based on age, health status, or geographic location within a state. We
acknowledge that endogeneity issues may be present if HMOs in the market experience favorable selection,
leading to a costlier traditional Medicare population on which supplemental Medicare insurance premiums
are calculated.
11
   See Greene (1993) for a discussion of this technique. Most of the missing premium data come from
Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, which all received waivers for alternative simplification plans
prior to 1990.


                                                                                                           13
        To capture the effect of income on private demand, we use the percentage of

families below the poverty level. If the freedom to choose one’s physician in the fee-for-

service sector is a normal good, then there should be a positive relationship between

poverty and demand for an HMO’s private product. Second, we include the annual rate

of change in the population under 65 years of age to proxy for the migration of younger

persons into market areas served by HMOs. Third, we include the proportion of the

population, 25 years of age and older, that has obtained at least a four-year college

degree. Fourth, we include the proportion of active physicians in the market who are

pediatricians, which should proxy for the prevalence of pediatric services provided in a

market. Here, we assume that pediatricians’ services are an input to the production of

coverage for the private population only. 12 Finally, we include a set of indicator

variables pertaining to the state regulatory environment for HMOs. These measures

cover such issues as whether subscribers have a policy-making role, whether employers

are required to offer an HMO option for their employees’ health coverage, whether HMO

rates must have state approval, and whether HMOs are required to have an open

enrollment period.13

Factors affecting HMO cost structure (COST):

        While we do not observe empirical measures to differentiate among the cost

parameters, we do employ a set of measures to capture various input prices. Nurse and

administrative wage rates from the fee-for-service sector will be used to measure labor

costs, based on the assumption that these measures are highly correlated with an HMO’s


12
   Note that while we considered including measures of HMO competition and market penetration for the
private enrollee population, we chose not to because of endogeneity issues.
13
   To deal with missing regulations data, we again adopt the indicator variable technique discussed in
Greene (1993).


                                                                                                     14
corresponding labor costs. Hospital inpatient price per diem and the price of an office

visit of intermediate complexity are both measures from the fee-for-service sector which

should also be highly correlated with input prices faced by HMOs. To control for

differences in health status across markets, we use an average infant mortality measure.

We expect that in markets where the population is less healthy, there will be higher

utilization of services, resulting in higher costs to an HMO. Finally, federal qualification

may be considered to lower an HMO’s fixed cost of offering a Medicare product, since

those HMOs that are federally qualified have already incurred some of the administrative

costs associated with entering a risk contract.

HMO characteristics affecting both demand and costs:

       An HMO’s age may be an indicator of the acceptance of the HMO concept in a

market. Also, over time, HMOs may gain experience and organizational knowledge in

the provision of care, leading to more efficient production. Ownership (for-profit or non-

profit status) may also affect both demand and cost. Debate continues regarding the role

of for-profit organizations in health care, with some considering profit-seeking behavior

as inappropriate for this industry (Hansmann, 1987). With regard to costs, it is plausible

that the profit motivation may lead managers of for-profit institutions to place greater

emphasis on cost minimization in production. However, an alternative demand-side

argument suggests that individuals frequently associate not-for-profit HMOs with higher

quality of care, and thus may be more likely to enroll in a not-for-profit, than a for-profit

HMO (Wholey et al, 1995). Additionally, HMO model type may suggest differing

production technologies, leading to differing abilities to contain costs. The relationship

between model type and an HMO’s physician panel may also influence demand. A set of




                                                                                           15
dummy variables are included to control for HMO model type (staff, group, network, and

mixed, with IPA as the excluded variable) (Wholey et al, 1996). We also include

indicator variables for whether a firm is affiliated with a national HMO, a national insurer

that is not an HMO, or Blue Cross Blue Shield. Affiliations with these institutions may

affect a firm’s access to capital and organizing expertise, which may in turn, affect its

production decision. Finally, we include a set of dummy variables for each year in our

sample (1990 as the excluded variable) to capture time trends.

IV. Econometric Specification

           We estimate a two-part econometric model for this analysis. In the first part, we

focus on an HMO’s decision regarding its participation in the Medicare risk market. As

discussed in Section II, the decision to offer a Medicare product is modeled as the

following:

Prob( OFFER = 1) = β 1 + β 2 Pm + X m β 3 + X p β 4 + (COST ) β 5 + ε 1 .                   (10)

With repeated observations on the same set of cross-section units, we are concerned

about the presence of unobserved HMO-specific effects. We estimate the participation

regression as a probit within a generalized estimating equations framework, additionally

using a Huber/White/sandwich estimator of variance that allows for within HMO group

correlation and heteroscedasticity across HMOs.14 Table 6 reports the results for this

regression.

           The second part of the model focuses on the factors that determine HMO

enrollment in both the Medicare and private products. The enrollment equations to be

estimated are specified as:


14
     See Appendix 3 for additional discussion of econometric estimation methods.


                                                                                             16
     Qm = α 1 + α 2 Pm + X mα 3 + (COST )α 4 + α 5 Q p + ε 2                                      (11)

     Q p = ω1 + ω 2 Pm + X pω 3 + (COST )ω 4 + ω 5 Qm +ω 6 (OFFER) + ε 3 .                         (12)

Equation (11) is estimated only for firms that participate in the Medicare market, while

equation (12) is estimated for all firms in the sample.15, 16

          We encounter two estimation issues, which include the simultaneity of Q p and

Qm , and the presence of unobserved HMO-specific effects. Instrumental variables

estimation is used to deal with the simultaneity of our enrollment measures. To

instrument for an HMO’s private enrollment, we use our private demand shifters. The

rate of change in the population under 65 years of age reflects the potential growth of the

market for an HMO’s commercial product and should be exogenous with respect to a

firm’s Medicare enrollment. Second, we use the percentage of poor families, asserting

that this measure reflects the income of the non-Medicare beneficiary population. The

ratio of pediatricians to active medical doctors is also used, since this measure should

reflect the potential market demand for pediatric services, which should be used

predominantly by an HMO’s commercial enrollees. Finally, indicator variables capturing

an HMO’s regulatory environment as well as the proportion of the population who have

four or more years of college are also used as private enrollment instruments.

          To instrument for an HMO’s Medicare quantity, we use the AAPCC rate,

supplemental Medicare insurance premiums, and our two demographic measures which

capture the proportion of the population ages 65 to 74 and the proportion 75 years and

15
  We include both OFFER and the Medicare quantity in the private quantity equation because we consider
the decision whether to offer and how much to offer to capture a joint outcome. In estimating the Medicare
enrollment regression, we use the predicted value for OFFER.




                                                                                                         17
older.17,18 These factors should all serve to influence HMO Medicare enrollment, but not

directly affect an HMO’s commercial enrollment. To obtain consistent estimates of our

standard errors, we again use the Huber/White/sandwich estimator of variance.19

           By estimating this model as two separate parts, we have not considered the issue

of selection, whereby HMOs choose whether or not to offer a Medicare product. In

taking this approach, our inferences may be applicable to only those HMOs in the

sample. Given the possibility of selection issues, we also adopt the conventional

approach in the literature and estimate the Medicare enrollment regression with an

inverse Mill’s ratio measure (lambda), constructed using predicted values from the

participation regression. 20 Both specifications are reported in Table 7.

V. Results and Discussion

         Tables 4 and 5 provide definitions and descriptive statistics of the measures

used in this analysis. Missing values for 75 observations reduce the sample size to 2437.

We use all observations to estimate equations (1) and (3). For equation (2), we use only

those observations which have positive Medicare enrollment (N=490).




16
   We also estimate the model using various transformations of the enrollment measures, including the
natural log and the square-root of private and Medicare quantities. The results are qualitatively similar and
the linear model was chosen based on fit.
17
   One issue regarding the use of the AAPCC and Medigap variables as instruments is that that they reflect
general health care costs and health status of the population in a market. It is unclear if expenditure growth
patterns for the Medicare and private populations are the same. In fact, for the time period of the study,
Medicare expenditures were growing significantly faster than private personal health care expenditures
(HCFA Statistical Supplement, 1996). Nor is it clear that health status for the under 65 and Medicare
eligible populations are highly correlated in a given market.
18
    To examine the “quality” of our instruments, we separately ran regressions of our enrollment quantities
on all predetermined variables in the system and then performed joint F-tests on the instruments. In both
regressions, the instruments were jointly significant at the 1% level. See Staiger and Stock, 1997.
19
   See Appendix 3 for an explanation of the Huber/White/sandwich variance estimator.
20
   We specify federal qualification of an HMO to affect the decision to offer a Medicare product, but not to
affect enrollment. This specification enables identification to be based on something in addition to
functional form assumptions.


                                                                                                           18
        Table 6 reports our results from the participation regression, which are generally

consistent with theoretical predictions. Most notably, we obtain a positive and significant

coefficient on the AAPCC measure. In our sample, the average AAPCC payment rate is

$349. Using our estimates, we calculate the average impact of a $35 increase in the

AAPCC increases the probability that an HMO offers a Medicare product by .028. 21

Additionally, the elasticity of the probability of entry with respect to the AAPCC

payment rate (evaluated at the mean) is equal to 1.39, suggesting a large behavioral

response by HMOs.

        Finding this response suggests that the payment rate, which is set to reflect the

predicted costs of providing coverage to beneficiaries, does a poor job of adjusting for

differences in risk between beneficiaries in traditional Medicare and those who enroll in

HMOs. Since the AAPCC rate is constructed to correspond to HMOs earning zero

economic profits in the Medicare market, cross-sectional differences in its value should

not be associated with differential entry. However, finding this effect indicates that areas

with higher AAPCC rates are more profitable, and thus cost differences have not been

accurately adjusted.

        Second, the proportion of the population 65 to 74 years of age and 75 years and

older, are statistically significant with positive and negative coefficient signs,

respectively. This suggests that the demographic composition of the Medicare population

affects an HMO’s participation decision in a way that is consistent with favorable




21
  The average predicted probability for our sample is .198. We find the effect of the AAPCC on an
HMO’s probability of entry to be smaller in magnitude as compared with the findings of Adamache and
Rossiter (1986) and Porell and Wallack (1990).


                                                                                                      19
selection.22 We also find that as the rate of change in the under 65 population increases,

which shifts demand for an HMO’s private product, this decreases the probability of an

HMO offering a Medicare product. Finally, HMOs that have federal qualification,

affiliation with a national HMO organization, and are older are associated with an

increased probability of Medicare market participation.

         Table 7 reports our results from estimation of the enrollment regressions.23 We

find that the results for the Medicare enrollment regression do not change substantially

when the selection correction is included, and that the estimate on the inverse Mill’s ratio

is statistically insignificant. In both the private and Medicare enrollment regressions the

coefficients on the instrumented enrollment measures are positive and statistically

significant, suggesting complementarities in the joint production of a firm’s private and

Medicare products. Given the particular model specification, we are unable to

empirically distinguish between demand and cost complementarities. 24

         With respect to the AAPCC payment rate, we find that it has no significant effect

on Medicare enrollment. Two possible interpretations suggest that either the coefficient

estimate is so imprecisely estimated that we simply can’t discern an effect or that the

coefficient is truly zero, which is consistent with the demand constrained case. In

contrast, we find a positive and significant effect of the price of a supplemental Medicare

insurance policy on Medicare enrollment. This is consistent with the argument that as

supplemental Medicare premiums increase, beneficiaries are likely to consider enrollment

22
   We are cautious in this assertion since this result may be partially due to the fact that the AAPCC
payment measure used in this analysis is not specifically adjusted to reflect the actual demographic
composition of enrollees that an HMO would face.
23
   The standard errors for the Medicare enrollment regression estimated with the selection correction term
will not be exactly correct, since we are using a predicted value of lambda in the specification.




                                                                                                         20
in an HMO as a substitute for the combination of traditional Medicare and a supplemental

policy.

          Relating our empirical results back to our theory, we refer back to the predictions

outlined in Table 3. First, we cautiously conclude that HMO behavior is consistent with

the demand constrained case, given our insignificant effect on a change in the Medicare

price on Medicare enrollment (α2=0). Second, we find support for the presence of

complementarities in production. We find positive and significant relationship between a

firm’s private and Medicare quantities in the enrollment regressions, which suggests

either demand or cost complementarities (α5>0, ω5=0). Additionally, we find a positive

effect of the Medicare price on private quantity, however, because of the imprecision

with which the coefficient is estimated, it provides only marginal support.

Policy Implications

          Participation by coordinated care organizations, beneficiary enrollment, and a

payment methodology that yields savings to Medicare, are three key implementation

objectives for Medicare+Choice. Under this new program, the methodology used to

calculate payments to contracting organizations has changed. In an effort to induce entry

into the Medicare market, one modification in payment policy includes the establishment

of a minimum payment level to organizations located in markets which historically have

experienced low AAPCC payment rates.

          To assess the effect of implementing such a policy, we compute a set of predicted

probabilities of entry into the Medicare market for a subset of HMOs that reflect the

characteristics of the target group affected by the minimum payment policy.

24
  The studies of Wholey et al (1996) and Given (1996), find the presence of diseconomies of scope in the
joint production of private and Medicare products. This suggests our results may be due to demand


                                                                                                      21
Specifically, our subset consists of HMOs that do not offer a Medicare product and that

have AAPCC payments less than the Medicare+Choice minimum payment level.25

Using our probit results, we compute a set of predicted probabilities of entry into the

Medicare market for the minimum, median, and maximum payment rates associated with

this group, with all other regressors held at the sample mean. These results are found in

Table 8. While the predicted probabilities for this set of HMOs are low, ranging from

.0785 to .1373, increasing the payment rate from the minimum in the sample to the

designated Medicare+Choice minimum payment rate increases the predicted probability

of entry by almost 75%.

        Using the payment rate for the purpose of inducing entry raises two additional

issues. First, adopting such a policy may lead to the payment of rents to incumbent

HMOs who are already operating in markets for which the minimum payment rate

applies. Second, there may be factors other than the payment rate which deter entry by

firms. Such issues may include a scarcity of potential enrollees or lack of negotiating

power with providers (Serrato et al, 1995). Given the low probability of entry, these

results further suggest that some of the new alternatives under Medicare+Choice (e.g.,

medical savings accounts) may be more successful in these areas relative to HMOs,

perhaps due to lower fixed costs of entry.

        Rather than using the payment rate to induce entry, an alternative policy tool

would be for the government to individually subsidize the sunk costs of entry for

organizations operating in markets with little or no program participation. Without

having estimated the parameters of the cost function, we are unable to directly calculate


complementarities.




                                                                                          22
firms’ sunk costs using the entry condition identified in Section II. However, using data

from 1995, we calculate an approximation of the upper bound on sunk costs for entry into

the Medicare market under three hypothesized profit rates. Since variable profits must

exceed sunk costs for a firm to enter, an estimate of variable profits serves as an upper

bound on sunk costs. We calculate variable profits as Pm⋅Qm⋅φ, where φ is equal to the

profit per dollar of revenue. We simulate this for various values of φ.

           For this exercise, we subdivide the group of new entrants into three geographic

regions (West, Central, and East), and select the firm with the largest Medicare

enrollment in its first year of participation. Choosing the largest new entrant allows us to

get an upper bound on the sunk costs in each of the regions, presuming that sunk costs are

not decreasing in size. Table 9 reports the estimated sunk costs of entry for each firm

under values of φ equal to .05, .1, and .2 and a calculation of the sunk cost per member

month. With direct information on φ, one could then compare the actual cost of using the

payment rate per beneficiary as a method for inducing plan participation versus direct

subsidization of sunk costs.

           A final, broader policy implication stems from the complementarities result.

Finding empirical support for the presence of demand and/or cost linkages across a firm’s

private and Medicare markets has important ramifications for policy design and

evaluation. First, it suggests that federal policies for this program should take account of

firms’ private market activities when designing Medicare policy related to participation

and enrollment. For example, in locations where there is significant growth in

commercial enrollment, Medicare could decrease payment rates to contracting firms,

25
     We first deflated the 1998 minimum payment level of $367 to 1995 dollars before selecting our subset of



                                                                                                         23
without inducing exit, if indeed there are complementarities which serve to partially

offset the shock. Second, with respect to policy evaluation, if there are linkages between

these markets, then it becomes increasingly difficult to isolate the effect of a policy

intervention on Medicare market activity (e.g., growth in HMO Medicare enrollment)

from changes that result simply due to a firm’s commercial market activities.

Concluding Remarks

        In this paper we have developed a model of HMO behavior to examine both

participation in the Medicare market and HMO Medicare enrollment. We estimate a two

part model using data from HMOs in the United States over the time period of 1990 to

1995, and obtain results that are generally consistent with our theoretical predictions.

Three primary conclusions can be drawn from this research. First, we find evidence to

support the assertion that changes in the payment rate may have direct implications for

participation by firms in the Medicare market. While the specific payment methodology

has been revised with the institution of Medicare+Choice, we believe that the effect of

changes in payment will continue to have a significant effect on participation by

coordinated care plans. Second, while enrollment by Medicare beneficiaries is

dependent on plan participation, it is also a function of the set of insurance alternatives

available to beneficiaries, such as the combination of traditional Medicare and

supplemental insurance policies. By broadening the set of coverage choices available to

beneficiaries, this may subsequently introduce additional issues for regulators with

respect to competitive behavior by contracting plans. Third, we find empirical evidence

in support of a linkage between a firm’s private and Medicare products, giving rise to

additional concerns regarding policy design and evaluation. As HCFA makes the


HMOs. In 1995 dollars, this value equals $341.

                                                                                              24
transition and expands from its risk-contracting program to Medicare+Choice, it is

worthwhile to recognize and integrate lessons learned under TEFRA, specifically

regarding how payment rates and beneficiary options impact implementation strategies

and design of future Medicare policy.




                                                                                       25
Table 1: HMO Medicare market activity

Year                Entry               Exit                Continuing           Total Offer

1990                Not available       Not available       Not available        66
1991                15                  20                  46                   61
1992                32                  10                  51                   83
1993                12                  18                  65                   77
1994                34                  14                  63                   97
1995                25                  8                   89                   114


Table 2: Cases

Case    Regime                  HMO behavior

I       λ>0, ρ=0, σ=0           HMO does not participate in Medicare market

II      λ=0, ρ>0, σ=0           HMO participates in both markets and 50/50 constraint

                                binds

III     λ=0, ρ=0, σ>0           HMO participates in both markets and is constrained by

                                demand

IV      λ=0, ρ=0, σ=0           HMO participates in both markets and is unconstrained

Note: λ, ρ, σ are Lagrange multipliers on constraints (1), (2), and (3), respectively,
from the optimization problem.


Table 3: Predicted effects

                 Demand         Unconstrained       Complementarities in        No complementarities
               constrained        (Case IV)            production                   in production
                (Case III)
Predicted         α2=0               α2>0                    α5>0                        α5=0
                                                             ω2>0                        ω2=0
parameter                                                    ω5>0                        ω5=0

estimates




                                                                                         26
Table 4: Variable Definitions

Variable                          Definition

Offer Medicare                    Indicator variable =1 if HMO offers a Medicare
                                  risk product, 0 otherwise

Medicare member months            Member month of health insurance coverage for a
                                  Medicare enrollee (in 10000s)

Private member months             Member month of health insurance coverage for a
                                  private, commercial enrollee (in 10000s)

AAPCC                             Adjusted average per capita cost base rate (in
                                  hundreds of dollars)

Medigap                           Annual premium for AARP/Prudential Medigap
                                  policy Package A (in hundreds of dollars)

Gapmiss                           Indicator variable for missing Medigap premium
                                  data
Proportion 65-74                  Proportion of population 65 to 74 years of age

Proportion 75 and older           Proportion of population 75 to 84 years of age

% of families in poverty          Percentage of families below the poverty level

Young population change           Estimated rate of change in population under 65
                                  years of age

College                           Percentage of persons age 25 and older with four or
                                  more years of college

Pediatrician to active MD ratio   Proportion of active physicians who are
                                  pediatricians
Subscriber policy-making          Subscribers maintain policy-making role
HMO required option               Employers must offer an HMO option in their
                                  employees’ health benefits package
Rate approval                     State approval for HMO premium rates
Open enrollment                   HMOs required to have an open enrollment period
Missing regulation measures       Indicator variable for missing regulatory data
Physician charges                 Average fee for office visit of intermediate
                                  complexity (in hundreds of dollars)
Nurse wage rate                   Average nurse wage rate

Supervisor wage rate              Average supervisor wage rate

Per diem hospital rate            Average hospital per diem rate (in hundreds of
                                  dollars)

Infant mortality                  5 year average (1988-92) infant mortality rate




                                                                                    27
Table 4: Variable Definitions (continued)

Variable                                    Definition

Federal qualification                       Indicator variable=1 if HMO is federally qualified,
                                            0 otherwise
Age                                         Average age of HMOs in market

Staff HMO                                   Indicator variable =1 if HMO is a staff model, 0
                                            otherwise

Network HMO                                 Indicator variable = 1 if HMO is a network model, 0
                                            otherwise

Group HMO                                   Indicator variable = 1 if HMO is a group model, 0
                                            otherwise

Mixed HMO                                   Indicator variable =1 if HMO is a mixed model, 0
                                            otherwise

National affiliation – HMO                  Indicator variable =1 if HMO is affiliated with a
                                            national HMO firm, 0 otherwise

National affiliation - Other                Indicator variable =1 if HMO is affiliated with a
                                            national non-HMO firm (ie: insurer), 0 otherwise

Blue Cross affiliation                      Indicator variable = 1 if HMO is affiliated with Blue
                                            Cross Blue Shield, 0 otherwise

Profit status                               Indicator variable = 1 if HMO is has for-profit
                                            status, 0 otherwise
1990 Indicator                              Indicator variable =1 if year is 1990, 0 otherwise

1991 Indicator                              Indicator variable = 1 if year is 1991, 0 otherwise

1992 Indicator                              Indicator variable = 1 if year is 1992, 0 otherwise

1993 Indicator                              Indicator variable = 1 if year is 1993, 0 otherwise

1994 Indicator                              Indicator variable = 1 if year is 1994, 0 otherwise

1995 Indicator                              Indicator variable = 1 if year is 1995, 0 otherwise




                                                                                                  28
Table 5: Descriptive Statistics

Variable                          Mean     Standard Deviation
Offer Medicare                    .197            .398
Medicare member months            5.477          34.199
(10000s)
Private member months             98.215         294.45
(10000s)
AAPCC (100s)                       3.49           .754
Medigap (100s)                     3.07          2.099
Gapmiss                            .273           .445
Proportion 65-74                   .069           .012
Proportion 75 and older             .05           .011
% of families in poverty          8.98           3.005
Young population change           -.015           .023
College                           22.19           4.54
Pediatrician to active MD ratio    .068           .011
Subscriber policy-making           .616           .486
HMO required option                 .23           .421
Rate approval                      .783           .412
Open enrollment                    .298           .457
Missing regulations               .086             .28
Physician charges (100s)           .474           .103
Nurse wage rate                   16.28           1.66
Supervisor wage rate              11.63           1.92
Per diem hospital rate (100s)      7.31           1.58
Infant mortality                  9.218           1.46
Federal qualification              .541           .498
Age                                9.91           7.53
Staff HMO                          .062           .241
Network HMO                          .1             .3
Group HMO                          .087           .282
Mixed HMO                          .129           .336
IPA HMO                             .62           .485
National affiliation - HMO          .16           .366
National affiliation - Other       .304            .46
Blue Cross affiliation             .151           .358
Profit status                     .683            .465
1990 Indicator                     .192           .394
1991 Indicator                     .164           .371
1992 Indicator                     .165           .372
1993 Indicator                      .16           .366
1994 Indicator                     .152           .359
1995 Indicator                     .166           .372
N = 2512




                                                                29
Table 6: Participation regression

 Dependent variable: Offer Medicare              Parameter           Standard        Standard
                                                 estimate            error           error with
                                                                                     clustering
 Constant                                           -1.61                1.011       1.07
 AAPCC                                              .358***              .101        .112
 Medigap                                            .0405                .045        .050
 Gapmiss                                            -.336                .272        .272
 Proportion 65-74                                   37.417***            10.87       11.74
 Proportion 75 and older                            -32.42*** (**)       12.04       12.83
 Percentage of families in poverty                  -.0102               .0223       .025
 Young population change                            -3.843* (insig.)     2.019       2.64
 College                                            .0213                .0167       .018
 Pediatrician to active MD ratio                    -.062                5.32        5.21
 Subscriber policy-making                           .168                 .123        .127
 HMO required option                                -.188                .151        .169
 Open enrollment                                    -.02                 .132        .147
 Rate approval                                      -.057                .175        .215
 Missing regulatory observations                    -.1969               .196        .271
 Physician charges                                  .294                 .947        .957
 Nurse wage rate                                    -.091**              .0369       .041
 Supervisor wage rate                               -.0137               .0181       .019
 Per diem hospital rate                             -.015                .0327       .034
 Infant mortality                                   -.1207***            .044        .045
 Federal qualification                              .4734***             .0969       .105
 Age                                                .0395***             .0073       .008
 Staff HMO                                          .306* (insig)        .173        .192
 Network HMO                                        .247*                .135        .144
 Group HMO                                          .326**               .162        .149
 Mixed HMO                                          .3949***             .106        .121
 National affiliation – HMO                         .431***              .129        .130
 National affiliation – Other                       .1                   .116        .135
 Blue Cross Blue Shield affiliation                 -.047                .149        .148
 Profit status                                      .051                 .124        .139
 1991 indicator                                     -.409*               .241        .214
 1992 indicator                                     -.258                .272        .259
 1993 indicator                                     -.428* (insig)       .281        .274
 1994 indicator                                     -.314                .292        .290
 1995 indicator                                     -.341                .3101       .316
 N=2437
* Significant at the 10% level ** Significant at the 5% level *** Significant at the 1% level
Notation in parentheses indicates significance using the standard error with clustering



                                                                                          30
Table 7: Quantity regressions


                                Dependent variable:               Dependent variable:           Dependent variable:
                                Medicare quantity                 Medicare quantity             Private quantity
                                (no selection correction)
                                Parameter      Robust             Parameter   Robust            Parameter     Robust
                                Estimate       Standard           Estimate    Standard error    Estimate      Standard
                                               Error                                                          error
Offer Medicare                  …..            …..                .....       .....             -93.112       319.502
Medicare member months          …..            …..                .....       .....             6.524*        3.968
Private member months           .117***        .033               .1239***    .0398              …..          …..
AAPCC                           -2.39          6.64               .714        8.69              3.463         19.792
Medigap                         6.67**         2.81               7.278**     3.395             …..           …..
Gapmiss                         24.19          17.17              21.02       17.497            …..           …..
Proportion 65-74                897.18         771.62             1317.67     994.8             …..           …..
Proportion 75 and older         -478.22        625.47             -885.65     1014.66           …...          …..
% Families in poverty           …..            …..                .....       .....             -.466         4.065
Young population change         …..            …..                .....       ......            650.03**      327.427
College                         …..            …..                .....       ......            2.497         2.477
Pediatrician to active MD       …..            …..                .....       ......            847.24        611.14
ratio
Subscriber policy-making        …..            …..                .....       ......            25.208        30.116
Required HMO option             …..            …..                ......      ......            2.168         13.207
Rate approval                   …..            …..                ......      ......            -43.563       35.225
Open enrollment                 …..            …..                ......      ......            1.164         19.804
Missing regulations             …..            …..                ......      ......            -51.751       36.099
Physician charges               69.77          71.97              80.55       83.62             -70.678       104.389
Nurse wage rate                 -5.59*         3.19               -7.18       4.79              5.013         4.751
Supervisor wage rate            .044           1.15               .2945       1.37              1.363         3.333
Per diem hospital rate          -.138          2.30               .219        2.24              -2.657        5.111
Infant mortality                -2.60          2.43               -4.203      3.478             -4.969        7.875
Age                             -.034          .704               .18         .786              5.443*        3.301
Staff HMO                       .648           10.81              5.773       16.943            -51.139       37.242
Network HMO                     18.63          13.75              22.855      16.616            -37.349**     16.809
Group HMO                       -24.99*        14.06              -21.616*    13.747            58.338*       33.677
Mixed HMO                       13.20          13.60              18.01       18.78             9.838         49.793
National affiliation - HMO      18.37          12.37              21.046      14.24             17.587        37.005
National affiliation - Other    2.01           8.32               1.845       8.65              13.372        19.001
Blue Cross Blue Shield          -14.94         14.12              -16.21      14.22             27.454        25.531
affiliation
Profit status                    1.823         5.154              2.526        5.99              -13.202       14.151
1991 indicator                   -4.43         13.55              -9.003       17.73             2.467         5.725
1992 indicator                   -2.09         17.59              -4.943       19.95             1.775         14.949
1993 indicator                   -7.024        16.67              -11.33       20.786            20.456        14.382
1994 indicator                   -6.07         16.90              -8.947       19.461            19.912        18.022
1995 indicator                   -12.81        17.84              -15.606      20.44             43.313        25.05*
Lambda                           …..           …..                14.41        28.48             …..           …..
Constant                         20.47         52.96              6.56         59.24             -75.525       79.208
Number of observations           490                              490                            2437
F-statistic                      F(25,168)=2.92                   F(26, 168) = 2.28              F(31, 562) = 3.39
                                 Prob > F = .0000                 Prob > F = .0009               Prob > F = .00000
*   Significant at the 10% level ** Significant at the 5% level    *** Significant at the 1% level


                                                                                                         31
Table 8: Predicted Probabilities for HMO subsample (N=84)

AAPCC Payment Rate                Designation                        Predicted Probability

$251                          Minimum                             .0785
$300                          Median                              .1075
$341*                         Maximum                             .1373
*1998 Medicare+Choice minimum payment level deflated to 1995 dollars.




Table 9: Sunk Costs of Entry Estimates


Geographic         Medicare         Medicare     Profit per dollar   Estimated sunk      Sunk cost per
Region             member           price        of revenue          costs of entry      member month
                   months

West               46578            $381         .05                 $ 887,387           $19.05
                                                 .10                  1,774,621           38.10
                                                 .20                  3,549,243           76.20

Central            115213           $409         .05                  $2,356,105         $20.45
                                                 .10                   4,712,211          40.90
                                                 .20                   9,424,423          81.80

East               83825            $481         .05                  $2,015,991         $24.05
                                                 .10                   4,031,982          48.10
                                                 .20                   8,063,965          96.20




                                                                                             32
References

Adamache, Killard and L. Rossiter, 1986, The Entry of HMOs into the Medicare Market:
     Implications for TEFRA’s Mandate, Inquiry 23, 349-364.

Dallek, Geraldine, 1996, The Crushing Costs of Medicare Supplemental Policies.
       (Families USA Foundation, Washington DC).

Danzon, P.M., 1982, Hospital ‘profits’: The effect of reimbursement policies, Journal of
      Health Economics 1, 29-52.

Given, Ruth S., 1996, Economies of Scale and Scope as an Explanation of Merger and
       Output Diversification Activities in the Health Maintenance Organization
       Industry, Journal of Health Economics 15, 685-713.

Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and A. Trognon, 1984, Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
       Methods: Theory, Econometrica 52, 681-700.

Greene, William H., 1993, Econometric Analysis - 2nd Edition, (Prentice Hall,
      Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey).

Greene, William H., 1997, Econometric Analysis - 3rd Edition, (Prentice Hall,
      Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey).

Hansmann, H., 1987, Economic theories of non-profit organization, in: W. Powell, ed.,
     The nonprofit sector: A research handbook, (Yale University Press, New Haven,
     CT).

HCIA, 1990-1995, HMO data base, Diskette series, User’s manual (Baltimore, MD).

Health Care Financing Administration, 1998, http://www.hcfa.gov

Hellinger, Fred J., 1995, Selection Bias in HMOs and PPOs: A Review of the Evidence,
               Inquiry 32, 135-142.

InterStudy, 1990-1995, InterStudy edge (Interstudy, Excelsior, MN).

Langwell, Kathryn and James Hadley, 1986, Capitation and the Medicare program:
      history, issues, and evidence, Health Care Financing Review 1986 Annual
      Supplement, 9-20.

Langwell, Kathryn and James Hadley., 1982, Evaluation of the Medicare Competition
      Demonstrations, Health Care Financing Review 2, 65-79.

Liang, Kung-Yee and Scott Zeger, 1986, Longitudinal data analysis using generalized
       linear models, Biometrika 73, 13-22.


                                                                                      33
McCullagh, P. and J.A. Nelder, 1983, Generalized Linear Models – Second Edition,
      (Chapman & Hall, New York).

National Association of Insurance Commisioners and the Health Care Financing
       Administration of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996,
       Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare.

Pauly, M.V., 1987, Nonprofit firms in medical markets, American Economic Review 77,
       257-262.

Porell, Frank and Winston Turner, 1990, Biased Selection Under the Senior Health Plan
        Prior Use Capitation Formula, Inquiry 27, 39-49.

Porell, Frank and Stanley Wallack, 1990, Medicare risk contracting: Determinants of
        market entry, Health Care Financing Review 12, 75-84.

Serrato, C., R. Brown, and J.Bergeron, 1995, Why do so few HMOs offer Medicare risk
       plans in rural areas?, Health Care Financing Review 17, 85-97.

Smolka, Gerry. American Association of Retired Persons, Washington DC. Personal
      correspondence, 1996.

Staiger, Douglas and James Stock, 1997, Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
        Instruments, Econometrica 65, 557-86.

StataCorp, 1997, Stata Statistical Software: Release 5.0 College Station, TX:
       Stata Corporation.

United States Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States (117th
       edition), Washington DC, 1997.

United States Department of Commerce, 1996, Area Resource File, Prepared for the
       Bureau of Health Professions by Applied Management Sciences, Available
       through the National Technical Information Service.

United States Department of Health and Human Services, 1996. Medicare and Medicaid
       Statistical Supplement, Health Care Financing Review, 124-133.

United States General Accounting Office, 1997, Medicare HMO Enrollment - Area
       Differences Affected by Factors Other Than Payment Rates, Report to the
       Honorable John F. Kerry, U.S. Senate.

Wholey, Douglas, Roger Feldman, and Jon Christianson, 1995, The effect of market
      structure on HMO premiums, Journal of Health Economics 14, 81-105.

Wholey, Douglas, Roger Feldman, Jon Christianson, and John Engberg, 1996, Scale and



                                                                                       34
       Scope Economies Among Health Maintenance Organizations, Journal of Health
       Economics 15, 657-684.

Wilensky, Gail, December 28,1995, The Score on Medicare Reform – Minus the Hype
      and Hyperbole, The New England Journal of Medicine 333, 1774-1777.

Zarabozo, Carlos and Jean LeMasurier, 1995, Medicare and Managed Care in: P.
      Kongstvedt, ed., Essentials of Managed Health Care, (Aspen Publishers,
      Gaithersburg, MD).

Zarabozo, Carlos and Jean LeMasurier, 1996, Medicare Risk Plans: The Health Plan’s
      View in: P. Kongstvedt, ed., The Managed Health Care Handbook, (Aspen
      Publishers: Gaithersburg, MD).




                                                                                  35
                                            Appendix

Maximization Problem and Comparative Statics

Profit-maximization problem

Max π = Pp Q p + Pm Qm − C1Qm − C 2 Q p − C3 Qm Q p − C 4 Qm − C5 Q p − C6 zQm − C 7 z − C8 z 2
                                                              2         2


 Qp, z


subject to:
(1)Qm ≥ 0
(2)Q p − Qm ≥ 0
(3)QmR − Qm ≥ 0

To solve this constrained optimization problem, we set up a Lagrangian expression:

L= Pp Q p + Pm Qm − C1Qm − C 2 Q p − C3Q p Qm − C 4 Qm − C5 Q p − C6 zQm − C7 z − C8 z 2 + λQm
                                                      2           2


 + ρ (Q p − Qm ) + σ (Qm R − Qm ) = 0

Taking the first order conditions:

 (1)
  ∂L              ∂Pp    ∂Pp ∂Qm         ∂Qm         ∂Qm                      ∂Qm           ∂Qm
      = Pp + Q p       +     ⋅     + Pm         − C1      − C 2 − C3 Qm + Q p        − 2C 4      − 2C5 Q p
 ∂Q p             ∂Q p ∂Qm ∂Q p        ∂Q p        ∂Q p                    ∂Q p         ∂Q p

               ∂Q        ∂Q      ∂Q            ∂Q       ∂Q 
        − C 6 z m + λ m + ρ 1 − m  + σ  mR − m  = 0
               ∂Q p      ∂Q p    ∂Q p          ∂Q p     ∂Q p 
                                              

 (2)
 ∂L       ∂Pp ∂Qm           ∂Qm       ∂Qm           ∂Qm           ∂Qm        ∂Q       
    = Qp       ⋅       + Pm      − C1      − C3 Q p     − 2C 4 Qm     − C 6  z m + Qm 
 ∂z       ∂Qm ∂z             ∂z        ∂z            ∂z            ∂z        ∂z       
                        ∂Q        ∂Q       ∂Qm
      − C 7 − 2C8 z + λ m − ρ m − σ             =0
                         ∂z        ∂z       ∂z



       ∂L
(3)       = Qm ≥ 0
       ∂λ


         ∂L
(4)         = Q p − Qm ≥ 0
         ∂ρ



                                                                                                   36
            ∂L
(5)            = QmR − Qm ≥ 0
            ∂σ

(6) λQ m = 0

(7) ρ (Q p − Qm ) = 0

(8) σ (QR − Qm ) = 0



 ∂2L             ∂Pp        ∂Pp ∂Qm
            =2          +       ⋅    − 2C5 < 0
∂Q p
        2
                 ∂Q p       ∂Qm ∂Q p
The second order conditions can be expressed as the following:

                              2
∂ 2L          ∂Q       ∂Qm
     = −2C 4  m  − 2C6     − 2C8 < 0
∂z            ∂z        ∂z
   2




 ∂ 2L    ∂ 2L   ∂Pp ∂Qm      ∂Qm      ∂Qm
       =      =     ⋅   − C3     − C6      >0
∂Q p ∂z ∂z∂Q p ∂Qm ∂z         ∂z      ∂Q p

To ensure a maximum, the following criteria must hold:

 ∂ 2 L  ∂ 2 L   ∂ 2 L            2 
                                    2
               −         > 0and  ∂ L  < 0 .
 ∂Q 2  ∂z 2   ∂Q p ∂z          ∂Q 2 
 p                                 p 

Predicted Effects:

Firms are demand-constrained (Case III):

When firms are demand-constrained, an individual firm’s Medicare quantity is
determined by the constraint. Firms choose the level of quality (z), that corresponds to
Qm(z, Xm, Qp) =QmR(Xm, Qp), such that z is a function of residual market demand,
Medicare demand shifters, and private quantity. We proceed by substituting residual
market demand for individual firm demand in the profit-maximization problem, taking
the first order condition with respect to private quantity, and then determining the
predicted effects of the Medicare price and demand shifters on a firm’s private and
Medicare quantities. Note, here we make the assumption that there are no diseconomies
of scope in production.


Max π = Pp Q p + Pm QmR − C1QmR − C 2 Q p − C3QmR Q p − C 4 QmR
                                                             2
                                                                − C5Q p2 − C 6 zQmR − C 7 z − C8 z 2
   Qp




                                                                                               37
First-Order Condition:

 ∂π              ∂Pp      ∂Pp ∂QmR          ∂QmR     ∂Q                       ∂QmR 
     = Pp + Q p        +      ⋅        + Pm      − C1 mR − C 2 − C3 QmR + Q p       
∂Q p             ∂Q p ∂QmR ∂Q p           ∂Q p     ∂Q p                    ∂Q p 

                   ∂QmR                  ∂Q           ∂z ∂QmR           ∂z ∂QmR             ∂z ∂QmR
      − 2C 4 QmR          − 2C5Q p − C6  z mR + QmR       ⋅      − C7      ⋅       − 2C8 z     ⋅     =0
                    ∂Q p                 ∂Q p       ∂QmR ∂Q p        ∂QmR ∂Q p           ∂QmR ∂Q p


Case III (assuming no complementarities):

 ∂Q p        ∂Q m
        =0        =0
 ∂Pm         ∂Pm
 ∂Q p        ∂Qm
        >0        =0
 ∂X p        ∂X p
 ∂Q p        ∂Qm
        =0        <0
 ∂X m        ∂X m



Firms are unconstrained (Case IV):

Using first-order conditions (1) and (2) from Appendix 1, we form the total differentials
and derive the predicted effects below.

Recall:

        −1      θ   θ       θ
PP =       Q p + 0 + 2 X p + 3 Qm
        θ1      θ1 θ1       θ1
Qm = m1 z + m 2 X m + m3 Q p




                                                                                        38
(1)

  ∂π   − 2 θ 2                                  θ                       
d         =    +  m3 − C 3 m3 − 2C 5 dQ p +  3 m1 − C 3 m1 − C 6 m3 dz + m3 dPm +
  ∂Q p   θ 1 θ 1                               θ1                     
             θ3                       θ 
              m 2 − C 3 m 2 dX m +  2 dX p + (1 − m3 )dρ − m3 dC1 − 1dC 2 − (Qm + Q p m3 )dC 3
               θ1                      θ1 
                                                                  ∂Q      
             − 2m3 dC 4 − 2Q p dC 5 − zm3 dC 6 + 0dC 7 + 0dC 8 +  mR − m3 dσ + m3 dλ = 0
                                                                  ∂Q p    
                                                                          
(2)

   ∂π   θ                       
                                             (                          )
d   =  3 m1 − C 3 m1 − C 6 m3 dQ p − 2(C 4 m12 + C 6 m1 + C 8 ) dz + m1 dPm + 0dX p
   ∂z   θ 1                     
          (− 2C 4 m1 m2 − C 6 m2 )dX m − m1 dC1 − 0dC 2 − m1Q p dC 3 − 2m1Qm dC 4 + 0dC 5
             − (m1 z − Qm )dC 6 − 1dC 7 − 2 zdC 8 − m1 dρ − m1 dσ = 0


Case IV (assuming no demand or cost complementarities):
 dQ p             dQm
        =0            >0
 dPm              dPm
 dQ p            dQm
        =0            =?
 dX m            dX m

 dQ p            dQm
        >0            =0
 dX p            dX p




                                                                                              39
Econometric Estimation

When one cannot assume that the error terms of observations are independent and
identically distributed, then specifying the appropriate probability density function to do
maximum likelihood estimation may be very complex. One alternative approach is to
specify a quasi-likelihood function, which requires the following two things to occur.
First, one needs to be able to specify the relationship between the mean and the variance
of the dependent variable. And second, the unknown distribution of the dependent
variable must be of the linear exponential family, which includes such distributions as
binomial, normal, and Poisson (Gourieroux, Monfort, and Trognon, 1984; McCullagh
and Nelder, 1983). Once the quasi-likelihood is specified, then the parameter estimates
can be found by solving the corresponding quasi-score functions simultaneously.

For estimation of the participation regression, we use generalized estimating equations
(GEE), which is the multivariate analogue of quasi-likelihood estimation. We specify the
distribution of the dependent variable as binomial. Furthermore, to address the issue of
unobserved firm-specific effects, we specify an exchangeable correlation structure
(corresponding to the presence of random effects), and this “working correlation matrix”
is also incorporated into the maximization problem. Using this method, we are able to
obtain consistent parameter estimates. See Liang and Zeger (1986) and Zeger and Liang
(1992) for additional discussion of GEE. For the enrollment equations, parameter
estimates are calculated using traditional instrumental variables estimation.

The standard errors for both the participation and enrollment regressions are computed
using the method described below, which permits within HMO-cluster correlation and
allows for the possibility that residuals across HMO clusters are not identically
distributed. Here, a cluster includes all observations over the time period of our sample
that correspond to a single HMO.

The Huber/White/sandwich estimator of variance is defined as the following:

               M
υ = qcVˆ (∑ u k(G ) ' u k( G ) )Vˆ
              k =1


u k(G ) =   ∑u
            j∈Gk
                     j




where:

 G k denotes each cluster, k = 1,...M
 Vˆ = ( X ' X ) −1
 u j = ( y j − x j b) xˆ j and is a row vector of scores, where j denotes individual observations in cluster Gk
        N −1 M
 qc =        ⋅     , N = number of observations, M = number of clusters, k = number of regressors
        N − k M −1



                                                                                                   40
Computation of the term in parentheses can be summarized in the following manner.
First, the score (uj) is calculated for each observation within a cluster. Scores are then
summed up over the j observations in a cluster, producing a row vector. The outer
product is then calculated, which results in a matrix of dimension equal to the number of
regressors. One matrix is constructed for each cluster and then these matrices are
summed over the clusters in the sample, giving rise to the matrix in parentheses.

By using this method, we have addressed the problem of obtaining consistent standard
error estimates given the presence of within-cluster correlation, since we rely only on
“between” cluster variation in the computation of this estimator of variance. Additional
discussion may be found in the Stata Reference Manual, 1997.




                                                                                        41
