                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REDISTRIBUTION THROUGH PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT:
                                 THE CASE OF ITALY


                                           Alberto Alesina
                                          Stephan Danninger
                                         Massimo V. Rostagno

                                           Working Paper 7387
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7387


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




We thank Silvia Ardagna, Joerg Decressin, Daniele Franco, Larry Katz, Thomas Krueger, and Sandro
Momigliano for useful suggestions. Alesina’s research is supported by a National Science Foundation grant
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. He is grateful to both organizations for their support.
Danninger was an intern at the International Monetary Fund and Rostagno was a member of the IMF staff,
when the project was initiated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Alberto Alesina, Stephan Danninger, Massimo V. Rostagno. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Redistribution Through Public
Employment: The Case of Italy
Alberto Alesina, Stephan Danninger
and Massimo V. Rostagno
NBER Working Paper No. 7387
October 1999




                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the regional distribution of public employment in Italy. It documents two sets
of facts. This first is the use of public employment as a subsidy from the North to the less wealthy South.
We calculate that about half of the wage bill in the South of Italy can be identified as a subsidy. Both the
size of public employment and the level of wages are used as a redistributive device. The second set of
facts concerns the effects of a subsidized public employment on individuals’ attitudes toward job search,
education, “risk taking” activities etc. Public employment discourages the development of market activities
in the South.


Alberto Alesina                                                   Stephan Danninger
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                Columbia University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                               New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                          smd39@columbia.edu
aalesina@harvard.edu


Massimo V. Rostagno
European Central Bank
D-60311 Frankfurt a. M.
Germany
massimo.rostagno@ecb.int
1 Introduction


Public employment is often used for reasons which have little to do with providing
efficiently public goods and services. Many governments use public employment for
other purposes, including redistribution across income groups or regions, as a way of
reducing unemployment, or for patronage. While these practices are widespread, Italy is
a particularly good example of a country where public employment has been used to
achieve a multitude of goals. In particular, the distribution of public jobs has been one of
the main channels through which public resources have been directed from the richer
North toward the less wealthy South. For this reason Italy is an especially interesting
case.
This paper makes three points: First, it documents the amount of geographical imbalance
in the allocation of public jobs. Second, using survey evidence collected by the Bank of
Italy it highlights various cultural and social consequences of an extensive reliance on
public employment as a source of jobs and income. Third, we evaluate the amount of
redistributive flows achieved with public employment.
Our results are striking. We conclude that about half of the public wage bill in the South
of Italy can be defined as a subsidy. This effect is due to a combination of the size of
public employment and of the wage premium for public employees relative to alternative
occupations. We also show that the reliance on public jobs as a redistributive channel
implies sizeable sociological effects, which can be labeled as a "culture of dependency".
Since public jobs in the South are much more attractive and available than private sector
jobs, educational and attitudinal choices are tilted toward the public sector. Also,
individuals do not want to exit the public sector unless they are not forced to, and this
creates path dependence and rigidities.
In a nutshell, the argument that we suggest and document below is the following. Two
"regions" (North and South of Italy) are bound by a unitary fiscal system, which implies
that public wages are almost identical in nominal terms between North and South.
Opportunities in the private sector are better in the North, so public employment is much




                                            3
more attractive in the South, relative to alternative opportunities. As a result, residents in
the South demand more public employment in order to take advantage of a large income
premium and a greater job security. Over time the South is caught in equilibrium of
dependency in which public jobs are a critical source of disposable income and in which
private opportunities do not materialize.1 This creates a culture that discourages private
activities and entrepreneurship, and that becomes self-fulfilling: the less individuals are
prepared to "face the market", the more they prefer public jobs. Furthermore, it generates
a powerful constituency of public employees and their unions who are typically opposed
to market oriented policies and more flexibility in the labor market. In summary, the
North redistributes to the South in a way that creates negative cultural and social side
effects. But, if this is the case, why is this redistributive system chosen? The answer may
be that redistribution through public employment is less visible than direct transfers,
therefore it is politically less costly and it is more effective at creating patronage and
political benefits for local politicians. In addition, the inefficiency of the Italian welfare
system regarding unemployment protection creates additional incentives to use public
jobs (and disability pensions) as a form of permanent unemployment subsidy.


This is not the first paper that argues that public employment is used as a redistributive
device. To begin with, there is an immense literature on public sector employment, most
of which is focused on the U.S. We cannot even try to review all this literature, so we
refer the reader to the two excellent surveys by Ehrenberg and Schwarz (1986), and
Gregory and Borland (1999). For our purposes, it is noteworthy that the latter, who focus
not only on the U.S. but on the evidence available for other OECD countries as well,
conclude, "public sector employees generally have higher average earnings than private
sector employees". Furthermore, they write "in most countries, some part of this
difference is also attributable to higher rates of pay or rents for public sector employees."
Particularly interesting for our purposes are the results by Borjas (1986) who examines


 See Raffa and Zollo (1993) for a discussion of the difficulties of small private innovative business
ventures in the South.




                                                4
wage variations in US state public employment and attributes three fourth of the
interstate variation to political variables reflecting the demand of different constituencies.
Also, Katz and Krueger (1991) find that in the US while local and state governments are
responsive to local economic conditions, the market for federal employees is set outside
the regional context.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses various theoretical arguments,
which can explain why public employment may be used for reasons that go beyond the
provision of public goods. Section 3 presents our data and illustrates regional disparities
in the distribution of employment. Section 4 discusses the effects of public employment
on a variety of socio-economic behaviors. Section 5 quantifies the rcdistributive flows
through public jobs. The last section concludes.


2 Public employment as a redistributive device

Consider a politician who has to choose between a tax on region I to be used to
redistribute in favor of region 2, and an inefficient public project which taxes region I
and employs individuals of region 2. By "inefficient" we mean a project for which total
costs are inferior to its total benefits. The question is: would the policymaker choose the
second scheme even when the first is less costly from a social point of view?
A model by Coate and Morris (1995), slightly modified by Alesina, Baqir and Easterly
(1997), answers "yes" to this question. The argument is that the indirect redistributive
scheme may hide the real amount of the resources redistributed, so that the second
scheme may win support in region 1 while the second is blocked. The idea is simple:
suppose that a proposal that introduces a tax in region 1 (North) to finance a direct
subsidy to region 2 (South) would not pass, because it is opposed by voters in the North.
Suppose that, instead, the government wants to redistribute toward the South, and assume
that, say, several new forest rangers are hired and disproportionally placed in the South.
This second redistributive policy is less transparent (although perhaps less efficient) and




                                              5
may win approval even in the North, because of the uncertainty about the real needs of
the national parks.
Public employment may also be used as a device to correct labor market imperfections.
When labor markets do not produce full employment, say because of tax distortions and
rigidities, it is politically rewarding to offer public sector jobs. This is particularly the
case when the welfare system (like in Italy) is distorted and ineffective at protecting the
temporarily unemployed. In fact, Rostagno and Utili (1997) describe the shortcomings of
the Italian system of social protection, and conclude that the Italian "welfare state" is
very skewed in favor of retirees, and does not protect in a coherent fashion the
temporarily unemployed. Obviously, while a temporary unemployment subsidy may
create incentives for job search, a permanent employment in the public sector does not,
since public jobs in Italy are virtually for life and can hardly be lost.2
A third argument is that public bureaucracies, once established, become a major political
force that opposes efficiency enhancing reforms. In many countries, and certainly in
Italy, public sector unions are particularly strong and capable of protecting job security, if
not the level of real wages. This protection generates hysteresis: once public
employment increases, it takes a long time to be reduced.
Work in progress by Darminger and Rostagno (1999) incorporates many of the above
elements in a unified framework. They study causes and consequences of a public
dependency culture in an economy with different regional private sector productivity.
The premise of that paper is that the federal government is forced to pursue a uniform
public sector wage policy. As a consequence, government jobs are more attractive in the
less productive region. Therefore, the less developed region at the same time faces very
rewarding public sector jobs and relatively poor opportunities in the private market. This
situation leads to a heavy reliance on public jobs as support for the economy of the South,
which leads to a culture of "dependency", namely the belief that the government has to

2
 A related problem concerns the use of disability pensions in Italy. These pensions have been largely used
especially in the South as permanent unemployment subsidy, with the obvious distortionary effects on
incentives.




                                                    6
provide income and insurance. The propagation of the dependency culture results from
behavioral responses of residents in the less productive region. Faced with bleak private
sector opportunities, they invest some of their resources in strategies that improve their
employment opportunities in the public sector. As a consequence, the kind of skills that
would be useful in private sector employment is not acquired. Also, the local
concentration and geographical proximity of public sectorjobs is important. The more an
individual interacts in social networks with others who are also "specialized" in searching
and maintaining public sector jobs, the more the culture becomes homogenous in this
direction.4 This "culture of dependency" lowers expectations about future employment
possibilities in the private sector and the skills to obtain them. As a result, demand for
public employment expands, while private sector activities contract. The less productive
region enters a vicious circle of declining private sector opportunities and a growing
demand for income redistribution via public employment.
Finally, political patronage is widespread in the South and the allocation of public jobs is
a well-known mechanism of vote buying.


3 The distribution of public employment in Italy

3.1 The data
As   a source for macro-data on regional differences, we draw on various Italian
government statistics. Data on regional production, population, and employment are
taken from publications of ISTAT, Italy's national statistical institute (ISTAT l996a,
ISTAT 1996b). Figures on the regional distribution of public employment are taken from
fi Conto Annuale, an annual publication of the Italian Treasury (1995). Finally our data
for postal and railroad employees have been kindly provided by the Italian Treasury.



 For a review of the literature on public unions see Gregory and Borland (1998) and Freeman and
Ichniowski (1988).
 See Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan (1998) for a recent empirical analysis of the role of social
networks in the propagation of a culture of "welfare" in US communities.




                                                    7
The main data source for our empirical microanalysis (section four) is the Bank of Italy
survey on Household Income and Wealth (BIW). The BIW is a bi-annual household
survey, which covers all regions in Italy and contains a broad range of information on
individual characteristics and economic performance. We use data from two recent
surveys in 1993 and 1995 that contain detailed information on socio-economic factors
relevant to our study. Our micro analysis in section 4 exclusively utilizes information
from the more recent 1995 survey while in section 5 we combine both surveys in order to
increase our sample size.
The 1995 (1993) BIW survey provides information on 23,924 (24,013) individuals
covering a total of 8,135 (8,089) households. A special feature of this survey is that it
contains information on parents and children of the head of the household. This allows us
to track intergenerational links (family ties) and relate it to public sector employment. In
most of our analysis we restrict the sample to respondents between age 15 and 62 for men
and 57 for women, the traditional standard age of retirement.5 Note that the BIW survey
over samples government employees by a factor of two. While over sampling has no
impact on the estimation methods, it does affect the interpretation of some of our results
and we indicate so where necessary.
Table 3.1 lists all the variables used in this paper and their sources. Table 3.2 provides
sample statistics for some of the variables used in our empirical analysis of the BIW
survey 1995.


3.2 Imbalance in the Distribution of Public Jobs
As table 3.3 shows, Italy has a pronounced mismatch between regional economic output
and the use of its public resources. About 55 percent of total output is produced in the
North6, while only 44 percent of the total population resides there. Also, the South of
Italy has a considerably smaller number of labor force participants (51.5 percent

    Recent pension reforms have changed these age limits.
6
          are composed as follows: North: Piedmont, Valle d'Aosta, Lombardy, Trentino, Alto Adige-
    Regions
South Tyrol, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Liguria, Emilia-Romagna. Centre: Tuscany, Umbria, Marche,
Lazio. South: Abruzzo, Mouse, Campania, Puglia, Basilicata, Calabria, Sicily, and Sardinia.




                                                      8
compared to 62.5 percent in the North). The unemployment rate in the South (21.0
percent) is more than double the unemployment rate in the Centre (10.3 percent) and
about three times higher than in the North (6.7 percent)7.
The regional differences in the distribution of public jobs are large. Public civilian
employment per capita is higher in the South than in the North (about 59 public
employees per thousand population in the South versus 49 in the North). As a share of
total employment the difference is even more staggering: 12 per cent of the employed in
the North are in the public sector against 21 per cent in the South. The comparison with
the Centre is clouded by the presence of the national capital in the Lazio region.
Including this region public employment is artificially high in the Centre, excluding the
figures seem low. For this reason we focus mostly on North—South comparisons.
Table 3.3 underestimates the differences between North and South for two reasons. First,
it does not include employees of public and semipublic enterprises. Second, Wagner Law
implies that the size of government (thus of the public employees) increases with income
per capita. Since the South is poorer than the North, Wagner law predicts a smaller
government sector in this region. However, Wagner law ignores the use of government
size as an interregional redistributive device. This is precisely the point we address in
section 5 below.
On the other hand, differences in the age structure of the population in the North and the
South may account for different levels of employment in two large sectors: education and
health. In fact, the fraction of the population below 14 is higher in the South than in the
North (12.4 percent in the North versus 18.8 percent in the South). However, even when
we leave out these two sectors (together or one at a time) the difference between North
and South remains large, roughly the same order of magnitude of Table 338•
Looking at education, it is interesting to note that "class sizes" are similar across the
three sections of Italy, as shown in table 3.3. In secondary schools, class sizes are

 Regional differences are so large that it seems surprising that there is no significant labor mobility from
South to North. Cannari, Nucci, Sestito (1998) show that mobility costs (i.e. housing Cost of relocation) are
very large and make geographical relocation too costly despite large differences in income.




                                                     9
virtually identical. In primary school they are only slightly higher in the South. This
observation implies an additional source of implicit redistribution. Since the South is
substantially poorer than the North, one would expect to observe larger "class sizes" in
the South if education is a normal good. One may argue that redistribution through
education is efficient because of positive externalities arising from education and its
positive effect on growth of the South. In order to evaluate this claim one would need a
measure of the quality of education provided and compare its effect on the growth of the
South relative to the North. Our evidence, discussed below, on the career choices in the
North and in the South raises some doubts about the effect of education in the South as an
engine of growth.
We have also examined the data on various categories of public employment, in order to
investigate whether the North-South difference is prevalent in certain categories rather
than others. We did not find any particular pattern; in every category of public
employment the share of the South was higher than the share of the North if scaled by
population or labor force.9 This is interesting, because it underlines that the high public
employment in the South is not due to a special need in some specific sector, say police
because of high crime rates.
    Looking at public employment region by region we find that, in addition to the North
South differences, some regions have higher public employment than others do. In
particular Valle d' Aosta looks like an outlier relative to other regions of the North. Valle
d' Aosta, a small mountainous region in the Northwest, is one of the five regions with a
"special status" and it is bilingual (Italian and French). Also, within the North, two
regions, Liguria and Emilia Romagna, which have been administered by the left have
higher than average public employment rates.




8
    Obviously the size of the difference as a percentage of the total are similar, but the total employment
figures are lower, since we exclude two large sectors.
  Results and data on this point are available upon request. Different categories were employees in ministry,
education, police, regional and local entities, and provincial administrative service.




                                                     10
3.3 Productivity of public Jobs
It is obviously difficult to measure the productivity of public employees. However
fragments of evidence suggest that the productivity of public employees in the South is
much lower than in the North.
At first glance, the indices of concentration of Italy's police per macro-area that are
reported on table 3.3 are rather inconclusive. The higher density of officers charged with
law enforcement in the Southern regions—with generally poorer records in terms of
safety maintenance—reflects the government's objective to prevent criminal acts.
However, aggregate ratios conceal striking disparities among single regions that are
nevertheless not easy to justify. Some small and relatively crime free regions in the
South, Abruzzo and Mouse, have almost three times as many policemen per number of
misdemeanors and felonies reported to the judiciaries as bordering (crime-ridden) regions
Campania and Puglia, and almost five times those operating in wealthy Lombardia'°.
Tax administration presents a striking picture. In 1996 about 25,000 tax inspectors in the
North administered Lit 213 trillion in taxes accruing to the Central Administration. While
the number of staff devoted to the same tasks in the South was not significantly lower,
taxes collected there amounted to a mere Lit 34 trillion. Hence the average productivity
of the staff employed in tax administration in the northern regions was six times higher
than that in the South. Some of this striking difference can be explained by the fact that
income per capita in the North is higher than in the South, so tax collected per number of
taxpayers is higher. However, every indicator of tax evasion suggests that tax compliance
is lower in the South, despite the large number of tax collectors.
Similarly, the regional concentration of personnel within the national Post Office and the
Railways camot easily be attributed to differences in the demand for postal services and




0
    Abruzzo and Mouse, with less than 4 and less than 3 reported criminal acts per 100 residents between 14
and 65 years of age, respectively, are among the regions with the best records. On the other hand,
Campania and Puglia, with an incidence of slightly less than 6, and Lombardy at 6.5, are among the regions
with the highest incidence of reported criminal acts over prime-age population.




                                                    11
transportation.'1 In the former sector, a northern worker "produces" in a year ten times
the atmual output of her representative Southern colleague. In the transportation sector,
the productivity gap—measured in manpower per units of goods shipped—while less
extreme, is still large. We use goods rather than passengers, because it is difficult to
evaluate the role of transit passengers, travelling from a region to another through many
other ones.t2


3.4 Quality of public services in the North and in the South
Before proceeding we need to evaluate whether the higher incidence of public employees
in the South reflects higher utilization of public services andlor a greater quality of
services provided. Concerning the first question, in the l993' survey of the BIW, the
heads of households were asked to report the use of local public services and to provide a
qualitative evaluation of the services available. Table 3.4 compares the amount of public
services used across regions.
The residents in the North indicate a higher use of the public transportation and the health
services. The Southerners, on the other hand, use more education and childcare facilities,
which is consistent with the different age distribution in the North and in the South of
Italy.
However, when we compare the quality of the provided services, the picture becomes
one-sided. Table 3.5 reports the results from individual evaluations of different types of
public services. In all the public functions (transportation, health services, education, and
municipal services) the residents in the North are more satisfied with the quality of local
services than the residents in the South.



   We measure production of postal services in terms of the number of letters and parcels sent locally. If we
were to include the number of withdrawals from and payments into Postal checking and saving accounts,
the productivity differentials would be even larger.
12
   The Post Office and the Railways used to be administrations within the general government. The railway
company became a stock company in 1992 and the Post Office was turned into an independent public
agency in 1994. As a result the employees of both these entities are not part of the employees of the general
government
13
             anymore.
   These questions were not asked in 1995.




                                                    12
  This result should not be surprising. Putnam (1993) reaches a similar conclusion looking
  at several different measures of efficiency in different regions of Italy. For example,
  Putnam assessed the responsiveness and effectiveness of local bureaucracy in different
  regions of Italy by measuring processing time and quality in response to three specific
 information requests. In the most efficient regions (Emilia-Romagna and Valle d'Aosta,
 both in the North) two of three problems received thorough replies within a week. In the
 least efficient regions (Calabria, Campania, and Sardinia all in the South) none of the
 requests received any attention and only direct inquiry and personal visits lead to a
 response. A variety of other tests performed by this author reached analogous
 conclusions.
 In summary, this evidence suggests that public employment is skewed in favor of the
 South without any benefit in terms of superior satisfaction for the public services
 provided or more frequent use of public services.


 4 Socio- economic consequences of Public Employment

 We now use the 1995 Bank of Italy survey (BIW) to investigate several different socio-
economic implications of the high reliance of public employment as a source of income
in the South.


4.1 Wage differentials
The public sector in Italy pays a relatively uniform wage across regions. Given the large
differences in productivity, costs of living, labor market conditions, and private sector
wages, public jobs are much more advantageous in the South than in the North if
compared to alternative employment opportunities in the private sector. This effect would
be even stronger if the labor unions in the private sector did not enforce, at least up to a
point, a policy of wage equality for the same sector in North and South.




                                            13
We begin by testing whether the public sector has a more equal payment structure across
regions than the private sector.14 Data on income are taken from the BIW 1995 and are
based on reported monthly after tax income. An important caveat is that since earnings
are measured after tax, and given the progressivity of the tax system, this could
understate the North South wage differential. An additional potential problem with
income data is underreported income from non-market activities. Italy has a rather large
gray economy, which primarily supplements income of households in the South. This can
be a potential problem for two reasons. It leads to an overestimation of the North South
income gap, and second it could bias the public/private income comparison. The latter
problem may actually lead to an understatement of the public sector wage premium if
public employees are more active in the gray market. This may in fact be the case since
reduced work hours and relaxed enforcement in public offices allow much time for
"second jobs" in the gray economy. For the calculation of the North-South income
differential we use supplementary information on cost of living indicators (see section 5).
In Table 4.1 column one and two we report estimates from standard wage regressions for
public employees. In column three and four we run comparable regressions for the
private sector. The dependent variable is the log of hourly earnings of full employed
workers and excludes self-employed workers. Hourly wages are obtained by dividing
monthly earnings by 4.35, the average number of workweeks per month. We then divide
this number by reported weekly hours including overtime. The comparison between
private and public sector wages may be slightly affected by the fact that overtime may be
more widespread in the private sector.
Focusing on the regional effects (the left out category is north) we see that public sector
wages are not statistically different between the South and the North. On the contrary the
results for the private sector are quite different. In column three we estimate the same
wage regression for private employees. We focus again on the regional factors. Southern
residents earn on average about 18.9 percent less than their northern counterparts. This

'Note that this finding would be consistent with evidence in the U.S. As pointed out in the survey by
Gregory and Borland (1998) the public sector in the U.S. is more "egalitarian" than the private sector,




                                                 14
result is robust even after we take worker qualifications and industry structure into
account (column three). Note that if one takes into account cost of living differences
between North and South (see below) and productivity differences, this gap is probably
not sufficient to compensate North-South labor market differences.
We now proceed to a more direct evaluation of the public sector wage premium in the
North and South. Given the findings in Table 4.1 we expect that public employees in the
South earn a sizeable wage premium over private sector jobholders.
Table 4.2 reports results from pooled (public and private) wage regressions of full
employed workers. The dependent variable is the log of hourly wage income from full
time employment. Again we focus first on regional wage effects. Income from labor in
the South is 13.6 percent lower than in the North. Also the first column of this table
shows that at a national level public employment pays 19.0 percent more than the average
private sector job'. We now examine whether this benefit differs by region. In column
two and three we decompose this effect by estimating the public sector premium for the
North and for the South. The public employment premium in the North is still positive
but considerably smaller at 12.5 percent. By contrast, in the South of Italy we observe a
public employment premium in excess of 26.0 percent over local private sector
employment. A direct comparison of these two figures suggests that the Southern public
sector wage premium is 13.5 percent (=26-12.5) higher in the South. This difference is
fairly close to an estimate of the difference between cost of living in the North and in the
South (as discussed below in Section 5). This suggests that perhaps the higher public over
private wage premium in the South relative to the same premium in the North is that
while private wages adjust, more or less, to local cost of living, public wages do not.
The other controls in the regression appear quite reasonable. Education implies a wage
premium; years of work experience increase wage but a decreasing rate. Females receive




paying more uniform wages.
  This result is Consistent with the finding by Gregory and Borland (1999).




                                                    15
a lower wage even controlling for education and years of experience and being married
implies a wage premium.16




4.2 Family persistence of public sector jobs
In this section we examine whether there is a tendency for members of the same family to
be in the public sector: that is, we ask whether family ties to the public sector matter. This
is interesting for two reasons. First, if family ties matter, they may indicate that a
"culture" of public jobs is diffused in a family. A child raised in a culture of public job
security may aspire to the same type of career. Furthermore, if these "cultural" effects are
important, they may spill beyond the immediate family to a network of connected
individuals. Second, if family connection matters, it could mean that it is easier to obtain
a public job if a family member can help you get it by means of personal contacts, inside
information, recommendations, favors, etc.
We begin by exploring the influence of the employment history of other family members
on the likelihood of public sector employment. We compare the frequency of public
sector employment between two groups of individuals: i) workers with ties to the public
sector and ii) workers with no ties to the public sector. Table 4.3 considers two types of
family ties: between spouses and children-parents ties. In the tatter category we can
distinguish between two types of children-parents ties: ties between the head of the
household and his (her) parents. and the head of the household and his (her) children.
The spousal tie is affected by a serious problem of reverse causation and may therefore
be biased; in fact, individuals may meet in the workplace and then marry. However, men
and women tend to be in different areas of the public sector; for instance, women are
disproportionately teachers, while very few men work in the education sector. This
problem of reverse causation does not apply to the parent-children relationship.



16
   A wage premium on being married is commonly found in the labor literature; see for instance Polachek
and Siebert (1993). The labor literature has discussed various alternative explanations of this finding.




                                                   16
Table 4.3 reveals how important family ties are for public employment. Children of
public sector employees are almost twice as likely to end up in the public sector, relative
to the others. The effect of spouse tie is strong, but perhaps not easily interpretable, as
discussed above. Note that the effects of family-ties are prevalent in all the three areas. 17
In addition to being less prone to participate in the labor force in general, children of civil
servants appear to have longer unemployment spells if unable to find a public position in
the first place. Table 4.3b documents this latter effect. The conditional probability of
household members— aged 26—40 — of remaining unemployed if not hired by
government tends to rise by 5.9 per cent'3 with the number of close family relatives—
parents and grandparents——who serve, or have served, as bureaucrats.


4.3 Education and career choices
The Italian education system lead youngsters to choose their field of study following a
certain education track in high school, or at the latest, entering college. Since switching
costs across college degrees or high school types are high, we observe rather early in life
the specialization and concentration on a certain career track.
To simplify our analysis we distinguish two types of education paths. We define
business-oriented degrees as those in the natural sciences, mathematics, engineering,
economics and statistics. All the others are defined as non-business degrees. The
distribution of both types of degrees is different across regions. In the North about 68
percent of all graduates with a secondary and tertiary education hold a business type
degree. In the South this figure is 61 percent. Note that this number is not due to the
lower educational attainment in the South since we draw a comparison between skilled
workers. This difference, although not extremely large, is statistically significant.
We next test the educational choices, as related to "ties" to the public sector. We restrict
our analysis to the parental generation to avoid a bias from multiple family observations.

 7
  We can also see that over-sampling of public sector employees (by a factor of two) affects the level of
the reported figures in table 4.3. In order to obtain estimates for employment probabilities of public sector,
the observed frequencies have to be roughly divided by two.
IS Calculation based on average marginal effect derived from Logit estimates.




                                                     17
Regardless of the current employing sector, children of parents who work (or worked) in
the public sector have a stronger tendency to specialize in non-business-oriented degrees.
Table 4.4 shows that about 65 percent of all household heads with a secondary or tertiary
degree hold a business degree. If we divide this group into household heads with and
without ties to the public sector, we find a small but statistically significant lower fraction
of individuals with a business degree among workers with family ties to the public sector,
62 versus 67 percent. Partly, this imbalance may be due to the fact that children are likely
to imitate the education pattern of their parents and therefore choose a school curriculum,
which is more conducive to this type of employment. In fact, as reported in the second
row of table 4.4, the government jobholders have fewer business-oriented degrees.
Interestingly, family ties to the public sector matter also for the career choice of
individuals in the private sector employees (third row). The third row of this table shows
that only about 72 percent of private employees who have parents in the public sector
have a business-oriented degree compared to 78 percent who have no parents in the
public sector. This difference is stronger in the Center and South of Italy.


4.4. Job Search.
Our hypothesis is that job search in the South is mainly directed towards the public
sector; in fact, given the public wage premium in the South, we expect that a worker who
has found a public sector job will hardly ever want to move to the private sector.
Unfortunately, we cannot observe the direction of the job search effort of workers.
However we can observe the on-the-job search effort of different worker types namely,
public and private sector employees.
Columns one to four of table 4.5. report Logit estimates of exerted job search effort
controlling for employing sector and regional level of unemployment rate. The dependent
variable is a dummy variable indicating whether a person has been looking for a job in
the recent past'9. As we can see in column 1, holding ajob in the public sector (variable
Public) significantly reduces search effort. This suggests that public sector jobs are

19
     The sample is restricted to full emp'oyed workers.




                                                          18
secure, and provide a very high level of satisfaction. The t-statistic of this coefficient is
above 8. Also the size of the estimated effect is quite dramatic. The calculation of
marginal effects evaluated at sample means for model 1 show that holding a public job
reduces the on-the-job search effort by 88 percent from a mean search rate of 8 percent.
The public employment effect on job search remains largely unaffected when we control
for the regional level of unemployment.
One can think of several explanations of this finding. The most obvious one is that the
high wage premium for public jobs in the South discourages anyone for looking
elsewhere. In addition to the wage premium, the workload may even be lower in the
public sector than in comparable private sector jobs. Examples of short and relaxed
hours in the public sector abound and are routinely reported in the press. Figure 1 depicts
the distribution of reported hours worked by public sector employees in different regions,
and by private sector workers nation-wide, including overtime. The difference of the
frequencies for public sector compared to private workers is apparent. Almost four out of
ten workers employed in private enterprises declare to work an average of 40 hours or
more in a week, compared to less than 15 percent in the public sector.
An additional possible explanation of the low search effort in the public sector is that the
public sector employment generates skills, which are not useful in the private sector, and,
therefore, significantly reduces alternative employment opportunities. One way to test for
this effect is to utilize the results from our previous section on business type degrees. If
search effort is correlated to marketability of a worker's skills, then people with non-
business type skills should exert less search effort. We test for this effect in column three
of table 4.5. Public sector workers with a business degree do not exert more search effort,
as the insignificant interaction term indicates (Business degree x Public)20. Finally, we
examine in column 4 whether the Southern residents search less than Northerners when
they hold a public sector job. The interaction variable Public x South is borderline
(in)significant at the 10 percent level. This weakly states that Southerners are searching
less on the job than their northern counterparts. This evidence, although not overly

20
     Note that the sample in column three has been restricted to workers with at least a high school degree.




                                                        19
strong, is consistent with the result that public sector jobs are particularly valued in the
South.


4.5 Entrepreneurship.
In this section we examine whether a large dependence on public employment deters the
development of entrepreneurial activities. This may be true for two reasons. First the
availability of secure (and easy) jobs may discourage searching for other options. Second
a diffuse "culture" ofjob security may increase risk aversion and discourage risk-taking
activity. This issue is particularly important for Italy, since its economy relies more than
other OECD countries on small business activities2t.
We define an entrepreneurial activity through the following four categories: 1)
professionals; 2) owner of business: 3) independent worker or craftsman; 4) owner or
assistant in a family business. Table 4.6 reports the empirical results from Logit
estimation where the dependent variable is a binary indicator, equal to one if a respondent
pursues an entrepreneurial activity (as defined above) and zero otherwise. The sample is
limited to heads of households who are older than age 20.
In regression one we estimate entrepreneurship as a function of the level of schooling,
work experience, and two regional variables: regional unemployment rate and the
fraction of public employees in the labor force. We find that education increases the
likelihood of entrepreneurship while the regional variables have no significant impact.
The level of public employment has a negative sign, but its effect is insignificant. In
column two we add information on the regional economic performance (Regional output
over regional population). We find that residents who live in a high productive region are
less likely to undertake an entrepreneurial activity. Probably, low economic activity
encourages self-employment, due to lacking alternative employment opportunities. What
is more interesting in this model is, however, the public employment effect. The

21
  A recent OECD study (1995) reports that Italy has a high number of small and medium sized firms in its
core industries. About 36.8 percent of all employees in Italy work in firms with less than 200 employees
compared to 20.8 percent in Germany, 25.8 percent in France and 34.1 percent in Japan.




                                                  20
below, W the average wage rate currently paid to public employees in the South, and
WB a benchmark wage to be defined below2. We call the expression Q=(Ec — EB)/Ec the
quantity effect and P = (W           W0)IWc the price effect. After rearranging of terms and
substituting for E we obtain the following expression for TR:

                                        TR=WçEç(Q+(1-Q)P).                                           (2)


The main task in determining the quantity effect is to construct a baseline rule for the
level of public employment, which is to identify ER. Since it is not obvious how to
construct this baseline, we provide several different estimates for EB. Also, in order to
highlight the North-South comparison we use only the characteristics of the northern
regions as the determinants for the baseline scenario for the South.23
In order to estimate the price effect, P, we need to compute WB, the "benchmark" salary
for public employees in the South. This task can be tackled from two angles. First, one
can define the benchmark in terms of the wage rate that would be paid if the public wage
policy were to conform to the norm of equalizing regional public compensations in real
terms. Secondly, one can construct an institutional counterfactual and ask which wage
rate would be paid in the Southern region if Italy were not a unified country. A natural
candidate for WB would be, in this case, a measure of the nominal wage prevailing in the
private sector to remunerate labor of comparable quality. We pursue both strategies
below.
In section 5.1 we present a range of different measures of the quantity effect. In section
5.2, we pursue the two different methods to estimate the price component. Finally,
section 5.3 calculates the total monetary transfer from North to South through public
employment.



22
   Note that, when calculating TR, we multiply the excess wage payment (Wc-WB) by the base employment
level EB and not by E. We leave out the amount (Ec-EB) (Wc-WB) from this computation, since this part of
the transfer payment is already accounted for in the first term (Ec — E5) Wc.
23
   Also, the presence of the capital in the Lazio region of the Centre makes the interregional comparison
including the Centre more cumbersome.




                                                   22
estimated coefficient on public employment is negative and significant at the 5 percent
level. Thus, even though a lower productivity level on average \vould tend to encourage
entrepreneurship, the presence of a large public sector tends to offset this effect.
Better access to financial means play an important role in the decision of self-
employment. The intergenerational character of the data set allows us to use two
variables. One measures access to parental wealth proxied by the employment position
(management) of the father of household head. The second variable indicates whether the
father himself was self-employed. The resuhs on these two additional variables are
reported in model three of table 4.6. The propensity of entrepreneurship is significantly
increased by the two family background variables. Both coefficients are positive, as one
would expect. The public the employment effect remains unaffected by the additional
controls.



5 The size of regional redistribution through public employment

We now evaluate the size of the regional redistribution obtained through public
employment. We distinguish between two components. One is the quantity effect, (Q)
namely the "excess" number of public jobs. The other is the price effect, (P) that is the
"wage premium" paid to public employees in the South, to be defined below. Our
estimate of the implicit interregional transfer (TR) through public employment is given
by:




                            TR= (Ec—EB)Wc+EB(Wc--WB)                                   (1)
                                   =   Q W Ec + P Wc ER
                    where, Q     (Ec — Ea)/Ec and P (Wc — Wa)/Wc.

In (1) TR is the implicit monetary value of the interregional transfer, Ec is the current
number of public employees in the South, E a numerical benchmark to be specified




                                              21
5.1 The Quantity Effect


5.1.1 One-dimellsional baseline estimates
The simplest approach for the calculation of Q is to assume that the South should have
the same level of public employment per unit of a particular characteristic as the North.
These one-dimensional public employment rules assume that the appropriate level of
public employment is related to only one specific regional attribute. We present four
alternative attributes: size of labor force, employment, regional output, and regional level
of consumption. The baseline estimates for the North are then calculated as the ratio of
northern public employment over the specific regional characteristics.
In table 5.1 (first row) we report several different baseline estimates derived from
northern regional observations. The baseline estimate in column three for instance is
obtained by dividing the northern public employment by the total northern employment,
and it implies a baseline fraction of 12.1 percent of the employed population.
This number appears to be within reasonable limits. In Germany this figure was 13.5
percent in 1996 and 9.1 percent in the US in 1995.24 The regions of Lombardia and
Veneto in the North are in all categories below these baselines, while the region of
Liguria, and the northern autonomous provinces of Trentino and Alto Adige are above.
All Southern regions have excess public employment according to all four baseline rules.
In the second row of table 5.1 we report estimates of excess public employment for the
South as a whole. Predicted excessive employment is measured as a fraction of the
respective Southern regional public employment. The smaller estimates of excess
employment are based on the labor force and consumption rules, and lie between 32 and
37 percent of total Southern public employment.
These figures appear are lower bounds for two reasons. Estimates are higher when we
take the full economic disparities into account. The employment and output-based rules
imply that 43% to 55% of the public employment in the South is above the baseline

24
  Calculated as the ratio of federal, state, and local public employees over all non-agricultural employees.
Data source: Statistisches Zentralamt Wiesbaden Germany and Economic Report of the President 1998.




                                                    23
limits. Two regions in South, Mouse and Basilicata, have the highest "excessive" public
employment.


5.1.2 Multi dimensional estimates: Wagner regressions
 In this section we estimate a regional model of public employment in the spirit of
Wagner's law2. We construct a provincial data set derived from residential information
in the Bank of Italy survey (BIW, 1993 1995). Each individual in the survey can be
identified by his or her province of residence and reports the sector he of employment
(i.e. private versus public). This information allows us to develop provincial attributes by
calculating provincial population averages. In total we obtain information on 99
provinces which can be mapped to the 20 main regions in Italy2. In order to maximize
the degrees of freedom, we expand our data set and merge data from the 1993 survey
with the 1995 survey. We end up with an average of 484 observations per province: the
lowest number of observations is 36 and the maximum is 3,135. All provincial
characteristics are then derived by calculating weighted means of individual observations
using population weights from the survey27. Income variables are expressed in 1993 Lira.
Given the data problems and the way we have to construct these provincial data, the
results of these Wagner regressions have to be taken as suggestive and indicative.
In table 5.2 we report the regression results for the northern provinces, where the
dependent variables is the fraction of public employment as of total employment. Since
the choice of what is counted as a northern province is somewhat arbitrary we choose two
different definitions presented in the two columns of table 5.2. The more narrow
definition includes only provinces from regions l628. In the second definition we include
also Liguria and Emilia-Romagna.

25
     There is a rich empirical literature testing the time series implications of this proposition. Relatively little
research has been conducted using cross sectional information. One exception is Eberts and Gronberg
(1992).
26
  Among these provinces 43 are part of the North, and 35 are part of the South. The number of provinces
er region varies from 2 to 10.
   Since the 1993 and the 1995 survey contain the same questions, we do not need to modify the variables
we are interested in.
28
   North (1-6): Piedmont. Lombardy, Trentino, Alto Adige-South Tyrol, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia.




                                                          24
The model with the best fit is the narrower defined northern model. The R2 of 0.31 is
about twice as high as in the second model. All the control variables point in the expected
direction. Higher levels of income lead to more public employment. The estimate in
column one implies that provinces with a 10 percent higher level of income employ 9.5
percent more public employees29. This effect is somewhat weaker in the second model.
As additional determinants of public employment we used information on the
employment structure of a province, the fraction of old (older than 70) and young
residents (younger than 15), and the degree of urbanization. We also use as a control the
fraction of employment in the service industries. More employment in this sector implies
greater productivity and smaller firm size, both boosting the demand for tax
administration. It also indirectly measures women's participation and thus the need for
kindergarten and after school services. All of these measures have a positive sign in the
first two columns, and again are weaker in our second model.
We now turn to the estimation of public employment in the South relative to the
benchmark. Predicted levels of public employment are obtained by using the estimates
from table 5.2. However, before we can derive these estimates we need to tackle two
issues. First, the level of income in the South has not been adjusted for differences in the
cost of living. If we evaluate the Wagner model for the North at the nominal level of
income in the South we would overestimate the real income differences and thus
overestimate the level of excessive public employment. This is, because the price level in
the South is lower, and therefore the nominal income of the South underestimates the real
income of the South relative to the North. We correct for this difference by increasing
the level of income by 15 and by 25 percent o. Note that these corrections will lead to
lower estimates of excessive public employment. A second issue is the size difference of
the Southern provinces. In order to obtain a combined estimate for total Southern
excessive public employment we need to weigh the provincial predictions before we can


29
     Evaluated at the mean public employment rate.
30
  In the next section we provide estimates of the difference in cost of living, which are consistent with the
range of these adjustments.




                                                      25
add them up. This is done by applying provincial weights derived from population
weights from the BIW 1993 and 1995.
Table 5.3 below summarizes the results from this exercise. The multivariate model
predicts an excessive employment rate between 37 and 43 percent. These results do not
change substantially if the non-significant explanatory variables of the Wagner
regressions were left out. The regions with the highest levels of excessive public
employment according to this measure are Campania. Puglia, and Calabria and differ
from the one-dimensional estimates. Finally, we can note that regional per capita income
and the rate of excessive public employment are negatively correlated with a coefficient
of -0.33 (-0.21) for model 1(2). This observation hints to the use of public employment
as a redistributive device.
We can now turn back and compare these results with the results we have obtained from
the one-dimensional estimation. The estimates in table 5.3 are in the same range as the
one-dimensional estimates, but vary less. To sum up, one-dimensional estimates of
excessive public employment lie between 33-55 percent of total public employment in
the South. The multivariate estimates lie between 37 and 43 percent.




5.2. The Price Effect


5.2.1 Price Effect 1: Cost of Living Adjustment
First we estimate by how much the public sector would have to reduce wages in the
South in order to equalize pay in real terms, between the North and the South.
Our estimates for regional price differences are derived from cost of living data for Italian
cities. As mentioned above ISTAT, the Italian statistical agency, does not provide price
level indices for different regions. We therefore use data of city price deflators from
1947-1995 in order to calculate the cumulative price divergence between the North and
the South. The assumption we make is that the cost of living difference between the
North and the South was small at the beginning of the period. We use data from six




                                             26
Northern and seven Southern cities31. The accumulated difference of the average price
index amounts to 14.3 percent by 199532.


5.2.2 Price Effect 2: Adjustment to Public-Private Pay Structure
An alternative way to calculate the price effect is to ask which wage rate would be paid in
the Southern region if Italy were not a unified country. A natural determinant for the
Southern baseline wage, W. would be the wage rate that generates the same public-
private sector pay structure as in the North. This comparison would not only account for
differences in the cost of living, but it also takes into account regional differences in
productivity.
We run two types of wage regressions, one for the North in order to determine the base
public-private sector wage structure, and one for the South. Results are reported in table
5.4. We assume that public sector work is similar to the service sector, and therefore the
public-private sector wage comparison should focus upon the service sector. We use the
following service sector industries: banking and insurance, real estate, and personal
services. However, since wages in the banking and insurance sector are to a large extent
set on the national level, the Southern public-private sector comparison is somewhat
biased. For this reason we run a separate set of regressions specifically controlling for the
banking and insurance sector from the private service sector.
In order to determine the Northern pay structure we run a pooled (public and private)
wage regression for full employed northern residents only. We use the same control
variables as above, but also include a dummy for employment in the private service
sector. The left out category is public sector employment. We find that in the North the
private service sector pays on average 7.2 percent (column one) less than the public
sector. When we leave out the banking sector the differential is substantially larger at 18

  Cost of living data have been available for the following cities: North: Turin (Piedmont), Genoa
(Liguria), Trento (Trentino). Triest (Friuli), Bologna (Emilia-Romagna), Venezia (Veneto). South: Campo
Basso (Mouse), Napoli (Campania), Ban (Puglia), Potenza (Basilicata), Regglo Calabria (Calabria),
Palermo. Catania (Sicily).




                                                  27
percent. In other words, employees in the public sector earn more than their private
(service) sector counterparts. We can now compare this finding with estimates from the
South (column three and four in table 5.4). The wage differential between public and
private service sector employees is much larger. On average public employees earn about
24.9% more than their private sector counterparts if we include the banking sector and a
stunning 40.5 percent more if we drop the banking sector.
What we are interested in however is the amount by which the Southern wage would
have to be adjusted in order to end up with the northern pay structure. If the Northern
public-private pay structure were to prevail in the South then our estimates indicate that
public wages would have to adjust downwards by 17.7 percent. These estimates are
slightly lower than the cost of living estimates. If we drop the banking sector from our
comparison then the wage gap increases to 15.6 percent. Again we find that the estimated
wage adjustments are similar to our previous results.



5.3. The total cost of excessive public employment
We are now able to provide an estimate of the cost of excessive public employment. We
recall from earlier that interregional transfer cost is defined as:


                                 TR=WcEc(Q+(l-Q)P)

where Wc Ec is the current expenditure on public employment in the South and Q and P
are the quantity and price effect respectively. The results from section 5.1 indicate that
the excessive rate of public employment in the South, Q, lies between 33-55 percent with
a more narrow range of 37-44 percent from the Wagner estimates. On the other hand the
price effect, P. which measures the excessive payment levels, ranged roughly from 11 to
1 8percent. We can utilize these two pieces of information and calculate the combined

32
   We also derived alternative measures of real income differences from wage regressions of the private
sector. Our estimates are very similar and range between 15-18%. These regression results are available
from the authors upon request.




                                                 28
effect as described in the equation above. Figure 2 below depicts the plane for Q     (1-Q)
P given the range for P and Q.      The   total effect ranges between a minimum at 40.3
percent and a maximum of 63.1 percent of the public sector wage bill for the South. If we
believe that the Wagner regressions provide a more precise estimate for the quantity
effect, then we end up with a range of between 43.1 and 52.5 percent. The precise
meaning of this estimate is that 43-52 percent of the Southern wage bill lies above the
northern benchmark estimates for public employment and public wages.


6. Conclusion
This paper documents that the allocation of public employment in Italy is an important
source of geographical redistribution between regions, in particular between the North
and the South. About half of the wage bill of the South can be thought of as
redistributive, i.e. in excess of what it "should be" relative to various ways of calculating
a benchmark. This amount is the result of a quantity and a price effect. The former is due
to the fact that there are many more public employees in the South relative to the North;
the second arises because, while public wages are very similar across regions, the price
level instead is lower in the South, so that real wages are higher in the South.
The heavy reliance on attractive public jobs in the South leads to a vicious circle, in
which private sector jobs are not sought after. This also implies that for private
entrepreneurs it is expensive to offer jobs as attractive to those offered by the public
sector. The result is that the economy in the South is overly dependent on public jobs that
have the nature of permanent welfare. The problem is compounded by the use (and
misuse) of disability pensions, which are also concentrated in the South and in many
cases are another source of permanent unemployment compensation.
As shown by our analysis of the responses to the Bank of Italy survey, heavy reliance on
public jobs leads to a series of educational choice and attitude toward risk which may self
reinforce a tendency to escape from private markets. If this is true this suggests that this
form of geographical redistribution (public employment) creates perverse incentives.




                                             29
References

Alesina A. and R. Baqir and W. Easterly (1998) 'Redistributive Public Employment"
NBER Working Paper 6746.


Bertrand M. Luttmer, E. and S. Mullainathan (1998), "Network Effects and Welfare
Cultures", NBER Working Paper No. 6832.


Borjas G. (1986) "The Earnings of State Government Employees in the United States",
Journal of Urban Economics, 19(2), March.


Cannari L. and F. Nucci and P. Sestito (1998) "Labor Mobility and the Cost of Housing:
An Empirical Analysis for Italy". rnimeo.


Coate S. and S. Morris (1995) "on the Form of Transfers to Special Interests." Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 103


Danninger S. and M Rostagno (1999) "Does Fiscal Federalism Hurt poor Regions? A
Model of Redistributive Public Employment", work in progress.


Eberts R. and T. Gronberg (1992) Wagner's Hypothesis: A Local Perspective Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper: 9202.


Ehrenberg R. and J. Schwarz (1986) "Public Sector Labor Markets", in: Handbook of
Labor Economics, Ashenfelter and Layard eds., Vol 2.


Freeman B. and C. Ichniowski (1988) When Public Sector Workers Unionize, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.




                                            30
Gregory R. and 5. Borland (1999), "Recent Developments in Public Sector Labor
Markets", in. 0. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), The Handbook Labor Economics, Vol.
3C.1999.


Gundloch, E., Wossman. L. and J. Gemelin (1999), "The Decline of Schooling
Productivity in OECD Countries", unpublished.


ISTAT (1996a) Italy in Figures, Rome.


ISTAT (1996b) Annuario Statistico Annuali 1996, Rome.

Katz A. and R. Krueger l991),'Changes in the Structure of Wages in the Public and
Private Sectors", in: Research in Labor Economics, Ehrenberg, ed., JAI press.


Ministero del Tresoro (1995, 1997): Ii Conte Annuale, Rome Italy.


OECD (1995) OECD Economic Surveys 1994-1995: Italy, Paris France.


Polachek S. and S. Siebert (1993) "The Economic of Earning" Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge UK


Putnam R. (1993) Making Democracy Work - Civic Traditions in Modern Italy,
Princeton University Press.


Raffa M. and G. Zollo (1993) "Technical Skills and Small Innovative Firms in Northern
and Southern Italy", hiternational Contributions to Labor Studies Vol. 0 (3).


Rostagno M. and F. Utili (1997) The Italian Social Protection System — The Poverty of
Welfare, IMF Working Paper 9 8/74.




                                            31
Appendix

Table 3.1 Variable Definitions

Variable                Description                                                 Year Source
Public Employees        Total number of government employees                        1995     Ital. Treasury
                        including national and local employees
Postal Workers          Total number of Postal Workers                              1995     Ital. Treasury
Railroad Workers        Total number of Railroad Workers                            1997     Ital. Treasury
Police                  Total number of police employees                            1995     Ital. Treasury
Tax inspectors          Total number of tax inspectors                              1996     Ital. Treasury
Regional Product        Regional state product                                      1995     ISTAT
Regional U-Rate         Regional unemployment rate                                  1995     ISTAT
Regional Pub-Emp Rate Fraction of public employees in the regional                  1995     ISTAT,
                        labor force (excludes military, postal and                           Ital. Treasury
                        railroad workers)
Class Size              Number of students per session                              1995 ISTAT
Log hourly wages        Log of hourly disposable labor income                       1995 BIW
Highschool Degree       Highest degree: Highschool
College Degree          Highest degree: College                                     1995     31W
Parent Schooling        Years of schooling: Head of Household                       1995     BIW
Business Degree          Dummy: holding a business type degree (for                 1995     BIW
                         a definition see section 4.3)
Years Work Experience Years of reported work experience                              1995    BIW
Firm size: 20-99 Empi    Dummy: Reported Number of Employees                         1995    BIW
Firm size: 100-499 Empi Dummy: Reported Number of Employees                          1995    B 1W
Firm size: >500 EmpI     Dummy: Reported Number of Employees                         1995    81W
White collar             Self described employment type                              1995    BIW
Teacher                  Self described employment type                              1995    31W
Mid management           Self described employment type                              1995    BIW
Top management           Self described employment type                              1995    31W
Big City                 Lives in City> 500.000                                      1995    BIW
Father Manager           Dummy: Father has/had managing position                     1995    31W
Father — Self employed Dummy: Father is/was self employed                            1995    BIW
Family Ties              Dummy: indicates whether parent or other                    1995    BIW
                         family member is/was employed in the
                         public sector
Dependency Rate          Fraction of population younger then 15 and                  1993    81W
                               older than 75.                                        1995
Urbanization Rate              Fraction of population living in city>                1993    BIW
                               50.000                                                1995
Source: ISTAT (1996a,b), BIW (1995), Ii Conte Annuale, Ministero del Tresoro (1995, 1997).
BIW: Bank of Italy Survey on Income and Wealth (1993, 1995).




                                                  32
Table 3.2 Descriptive Statistics of BIW 1995

  Variable                             Mean          Std. D.        Mm           Max
  Region
   North                               0,448         0.497            0           1

   Centre                              0.196         0.397            0           1

   South                               0.354         0.478            0           1

  Household Structure
   Parents (fraction)                  0.640         0.479            0           1

   Children (fraction)                 0.337         0.473            0           1

  Demographics
   Age                                 36.73          13.01          15          62
   Male                                0.520         0.499            0           1

     Married                           0.589         0.491            0           1

     Livesincity>500.000               0.136         0.343            0           1

    School                             9.737         3.805            3          20
    Highschool                         0.363         0.480            0           1

    College                            0.071         0.257            0           1

   Employment Status
    Unemployed                         0.165         0.371            0           1

    Retired                            0.227         0.418            0           1

     Labor force Partici?ation         0.634         0.481            0           1

Source: BIW (1995). Note: Also includes unmarried people living with a parmer.




                                                33
Table 3.3 Regional Economic Performance and Public Employment
                                                            North Centre            Centre         South
                                                                                 w/o Lazio
Regional Product over National Product (GDP)                 55.1       20.5            10.6        24.3
Regional Population over total Population                    44.4       19.2            10.1        36.4
Participation Rate'                                          62.5       59.7            62.3        51.5
Unemployment Rate                                             6.7        10.3            8.2        21.0
Public employees per 100 residents                            5.0         6.8            5.9         6.0
Public employees per 100 employed                            12.4       18.6            15.4        22.1
Public employees per unit of regional product2              124.0      194.4           155.0       275.1
Police officers per 1000 crimes denounced3                   72.9      122.5           134.1       108.3
Tax inspectors per unit of regional tax yield2               11.6       14.2               --       59.9
Postal workers per 100,000 units of                         179.3      566.2               --     1782.7
correspondence4
Railways workers per 100,000 tons of goods                   71.2       186.9          121.9       327.9
shipped5
Age Structure: 15 and younger in Population                   12.4       13.2           12.1         16.1
Age Structure: 65 and older in Population                     18.2       18.4           20.8         13.8
Class Sizet' (primary school)                                 16.2       16.9           15.9         18.0
Class Size6 (secondary school)                               20.7        20.5           20.5         21.0

Source: ISTAT (1996a,b), Ministero del Tresoro (1996) Note: All data refer to 1995, unless otherwise
indicated. I) Employed and unemployed as a fraction of population between 15 and 65. 2)Regional product
and regional tax yield in Lit 100 billion. Taxes (collected in 1996) include: VAT, Personal and Corporate
Income tax, the so-called "local tax on incomes" (ILOR, abolished in 1997), and Customs duties. 3)Police
officers in 1996 per 1000 crimes denounced by the police in 1995. 4) Number of Post Office employees per
100,000 letters and parcels sent in 1997. Railways workers in 1997 per 100,000 tons of goods shipped in
 1996.   Class size defined as students per session.




                                                       34
Table 3.4 Recent use of Public services. Yes=1, No=O

                                                          Utilization of Public Services
                                                           North      Centre South
Use of public transportation services                       0.56       0.53      0.39          *)
Use of public health services                               0.22       0.21      0.20
Medical tests in public laboratories                        0.62       0.67       0.49         *)
Medical examinations (public)                               0.52       0.48       0.41         *)
Use of medicines                                            0.81       0.84       0.79         *)

Nursery school attending                                    0.05       0.06       0.08         *)
Public primary, secondary school attending                  0.20       0.27       0.31         *)
Public university attending                                 0.09       0.11       0.12         *)
Source: BIW (1993) Note: (*) Indicates statistically significant differences of group means at 1% level.



Table 3.5 Quality of Public services. Subjective evaluation: 1=Worst, 1O=Best

                                                             Quality Assessment
                                                           North   Centre    South
Public transportation functioning                           6.09        5.45         4.52      *)
Health services functioning                                 6.03        5.21         4.00      *)
University functioning                                      6.31        5.79         4.76      4)
Municipality offices functioning                            6.27        5.57         4.60       4)

Municipality street cleaning                                6.20        5.70         4.52       4)

Public parks, gardens availability                          6.11        5.53          3.68      4)
Public water quality                                        5.01        4.54          3.91      4)
Safety, crime control                                       5.91        5.70          4.02      4)
Nursery school functioning                                  7.16        6.76          5.38      4)

Primary, secondary school functioning                       6.97        6.68          5.65      *)
Source: BIW (1993) Note: (4) Indicates statistically significant differences of group means at 1% level.




                                                     35
Table 4.1 Wage Regressions for the private and public sector
Dependent Variable: log hourly earnings from full time employment

                                                     Log Hourly Wages
                                            Public sector      Private Sector
                                                   (1)          (2)        (3)
Constant                                        4.480        4.163      4.180
                                              (105.2)     (159.23) (156.18)
High School degree                               0.063             0.095          0.09 1
                                                (3.50)             (6.73)        (6.51)
College degree                                   0.246             0.252          0.242
                                                (10.3)             (8.23)        (7.93)
Years Work Experience                             0.037            0.042          0.041
                                                 (8.37)          (13.11)        (12.97)
Years Work Experience                           -0.001            -0.001         -0.00 1
                                               (-5.96)           (-9.41)         (-9.24)
Female                                          -0.105            -0.115         -0.106
                                               (-7.66)           (-9.56)         (-8.52)
Married                                           0.064            0.100           0.101
                                                 (4.04)            (7.60)         (7.70)
Centre                                            0.011           -0.070         -0.072
                                                 (0.66)          (-4.99)         (-5.21)
South                                           -0.014            -0.189          -0.192
                                               (-0.99)          (-13.79)       (-14.00)
White collar                                      0.032            0.165            0.149
                                                 (1.63)          (11.00)           (9.49)
Teacher                                           0.355
                                               (13.94)
Midmanagement                                     0.116             0.288         0.259
                                                 (4.00)           (11.53)       (10.14)
Top management                                    0.292             0.6 16        0.588
                                                 (7.21)           (13.32)       (12.69)
Firm size: 20-99 Employees                                          0.114         0.110
                                                                   (7.94)        (7.54)
Firm size:100-499 Employees                                         0.190         0.177
                                                                  (11.36)       (10.26)
Firm size: > 500 Employees                                          0.275         0.247
                                                                  (17.64)       (15.03)
Industry dummies                                    No                 No           Yes
Adj. R2                                            40.4              47.0          47.8
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. Left Out category for work qualification are blue collar
workers. Left out category for industry dummies is manufacturing. The additional controls included in the
regressions are the following dummies: Invalid worker, Sick worker, Big city, all statistically insignificant.




                                                     36
Table 4.2 Pooled Wage Regression: private and public sector
Dependent Variable: log hourly earnings from full time employment

                                               Log Hourly Wages
                                   All Regions       North                       South
                                               (1)                (2)                (3)
Constant                                    4.168             4.238                3.85
                                          (182.1)          (147.22)             (78.5)
High School degree                          0.213             0.189              0.271
                                           (21.2)           (14.35)             (12.9)
College degree                              0.507             0.443              0.631
                                           (30.9)           (19.54)            (20.62)
Years Work Experience                       0.048             0.046              0.055
                                            (8.0)           (13.12)             (9.63)
Years Work Experience2                     -0.001            -0.001              0.001
                                          (-11.9)            (-8.24)           (-6.67)
Female                                    -0.099             -0.088              0.091
                                          (-10.3)            (-7.06)           (-4.44)
Married                                    0.108              0.074              0.183
                                            (9.9)             (5.26)            (7.99)
Midmanagement                              0.094              0.119              0.057
                                            (5.3)             (5.18)            (1.46)
Top management                                0.21            0.290              0.137
                                             (7.2)            (7.56)            (2.16)
Centre                                     -0.073
                                            (-6.2)
South                                        -13.1
                                           (-12.2)
Public Sector                                0.190            0.125              0.260
                                            (18.1)            (8.69)           (12.56)
Adj. R2                                       44.3              41.6              50.9
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. Additional controls included in the regressions are the
following dummies: Invalid worker. Sick worker, Big city, all statistically insignificant.




                                                     37
Table 4.3 Family ties' in the public sector: Frequency of public employment with
family ties to the public sector (in % of all employees)

                            Children-Parents Ties                               Spousal Ties
                  Head of Household         Children of                           Spouse of
                  and his/her Parents   Head of Household                     Head of Household
Family Ties        Yes         No         Yes         No                        Yes         No
North               31.8           21.3             17.0        10.9            58.4          25.4
Centre            36.2             27.4          20.8           10.3            57.4          27.1
South             49.0             29.9          31.1           14.3            78.5          35.6
Source: BIW (1995) Note: Fami1y ties to the public sector are defined as having one or more immediate
family member (parent or spouse) who holds or held a job in the public sector. All group mean differences
are statistically significant.

Table 4.3b Unemployment of young Italians (age 25-40) and Family ties1 (Logit)
Dependent Variable: Unemployed2 I =yes O=no.

                                        Unemployment
                                         Incidence2
Constant                                       1.294
                                                (1.9)
Family ties'                                   0.309
                                                (2.1)
Highschool degree                             -0.492
                                               (-2.8)
College degree                                -0.598
                                               (-2.0)
Years Work Experience                         -0.4 18
                                               (-4.4)
Years of Work Experience2                      0.0 14
                                                (3.9)
Centre                                         0.805
                                                (4.2)
South                                          1.670
                                              (10.5)
Parent-Schooling                              -0.014
                                               (-0.7)
Female                                         0.140
                                                (1.0)
Married                                       -0.5 19
                                               (-1.2)
Log Lik                                       -683.6
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. "Family ties to the public sector are defmed as having
one or more immediate family member (parent or spouse) who holds or held a job in the public sector.




                                                    38
 Children with a public job have been excluded from the sample. 2 incidence of unemployment conditional
 on not having been hired by public sector.




Table 4.4 Employees (%) with a business-oriented degree by family ties2
                                   Total Has family member in                 No family member in
                                                   public sector                  public sector
                                      (1)                 (2)                        (3)
 All employees                       65.3                62.0                       67.5 *)
 Public employees                    53.1                52.7                          53.4
 Private employees                   75.9                71.8                          78.4 *)
 Private employees: North                               76.8                         79.1
 Private employees: Centre                              70.6                         79.0
 Private employees: South                               65.2                         74.8 *)
 Source BIW (1995). Note: h      Business   degree is defined as field of specialization in economics,
 mathematics, statistics, engineering, and general science in college, and engineering in high school. 2
 Family ties to the public sector are defined as having one or more immediate family member (parent or
 spouse) who holds or held a job in the public sector. *) Differences for one sided tests are statistically
 significant at the 5% level.




                                                    39
Table 4.5 Job Search Activity in private and public sector (Logit)
 Dependent Variable: Job search 1=yes Ono

                                                           Job_Search
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
Constant                               -0.955         -1.250          -1.417           -1.286
                                      (-4.27)        (-5.00)          (-2.38)         (-5.12)
Years of Schooling                       0.005          0.005           0.037            0.006
                                        (0.34)         (0.31)           (0.99)          (0.37)
Years Work Experience                  -0.062         -0.063           -0.087          -0.062
                                    (-10.68)        (-10.77)          (-8.80)        (-10.72)
Female                                 -0.093         -0.079           -0.201          -0.077
                                      (-0.87)        (-0.74)          (-1.27)          (-0.72)
Public                                 -1.406         -1.421           -1.054          -1.244
                                      (-8.72)        (-8.80)          (-4.23)          (-6.67)
Public x South                                                                          -0.531
                                                                                       (-1.65)
Business Degree                                                       -0.022
                                                                      (-0.11)
Business Degree x Public                                              -0.109
                                                                      (-0.30)
Centre                                 -0.002           -0.108          0.110          -0.115
                                      (-0.01)          (-0.77)         (0.57)         (-0.82)
South                                    0.193          -0.393         -0.637          -0.312
                                        (1.60)         (—1.52)        (—1.62)         (—1.18)
Regional U-Rate                                          4.442          5.166          4.45 1
                                                         (2.62)         (2.03)         (2.63)
LogLik                               -1408.1           -1404.5         -667.1        -1403.1
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. Model 4 restricted to workers with at least a high
school degree.




                                                  40
Table 4.6 Model of Entrepreneurial Activity (Logit)
Dependent Variable: Entrepreneur: 1=yes 0=no

                                                              Entrepreneur
                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
  Constant                                        -0.747             1.644            1.364
                                                  (-1.96)           (2.04)           (1.64)
  Years of Schooling                                 0.035          0.037            0.023
                                                   (2.92)           (3.09)           (1.89)
  Years Work Experience                            -0.057          -0.056           -0.051
                                                  (-2.72)          (-2.64)          (-2.34)
  Years Work Experience2                             0.001           0.001           0.001
                                                    (4.10)          (4.01)           (3.38)
  Regional Unemployment-rate                         0.959         -3.598           -3.313
                                                    (1.23)         (-2.32)          (-2.07)
  Regional output! GDP                                            -63.656          -60.625
                                                                   (-3.37)          (-3.11)
  Regional Pub-Emp Rate                            -0.884          -2.210           -2.188
                                                  (-0.93)          (-2.15)          (-2.07)
  Father - Manager                                                                    0.469
                                                                                     (2.17)
  Father - Self employed'                                                             0.858
                                                                                     (9.89)
  LogLik                                         -1816.3          -1810.6          -1727.9
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. 'Father either professional. self employed, owner of
business, or entrepreneur.




                                                   41
Table 5.1 One-dimensional baseline rules and excess public employment in the
South

                                                   Baseline Rules
                                 Labor Force Employment Regional                  Regional
                                                                     Product    Consumption'
                                      (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)
Baseline Rule
                                    0.0113             0.121           1.636       2.331
Predicted excess public
employment in South (%)        J
                                     32.2            43.5               54.9        37.6
Source: Treasury (1996) and ISTAT (1996a) Note:U measured in billion of Lira.




                                                  42
Table 5.2 \Vagner regression of public employment for Northern provinces

                                                                 Public employment rate'
                                                                  "Alps"      Total North
                                                                Region 1-6              Region 1-8
                                                                    (1)                      (2)
 Constant                                                         -2.279                   -1.929
                                                                  (-2.02)                  (-1.68)
 Log of total income2                                             0.2273                   0.1865
                                                                   (2.03)                   (1.62)
 Service sector3 empl among private sector                        0.3605                   0.2 102
                                                                   (1.84)                   (0.92)
 Dependency Rate4                                                 0.0195                   0.3323
                                                                   (0.04)                   (1.36)
 Old people living wio family members                             0.2259                   0.3055
                                                                   (0.85)                   (1.14)
 Urbanization Rate                                                0.0780                   0.0564
                                                                   (1.36)                    (1.8)
 Adj.R2                                                              0.33                     0.18
 Number of Observations                                                30               43
Source: BIW (1993) and (1995) plus regional data from ISTAT. Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. For
definition of regions see text. 'Public employment as a fraction of all provincial employment 1995 income
has been deflated to 1993 using the CPI deflator; Disposable total income 3) Defined as bank insurance,
real estate and personal services and communication and transportation.4 Fraction of population younger
than 15 and older than 75. defined as 70 years an older. 6) Defined as the fraction of a provincial residents
living in a city with more than 25.000 inhabitants.



Table 5.3 Predicted percentage of excessive public employment in Southern
provinces based on Northern Wagner regression
                                                                 Northern Provinces
                                                            "Alps"          Total North
                                                          Region_1-6                  Region_1-8
                                                               (1)                         (2)
 Southern income adjusted by 15%                              43.2                        42.9
 Southern income adjusted1 by 25%                             37.8                        38.5
Source: BIW (1993) and (1995) plus regional data from ISTAT. Note: Excess public employment is
calculated as the difference between the average actual Southern public employment and predicted
employment rate divided by the actual rate. Predictions are weighted and based on Southern evaluations of
                                                                                                           1)
Northern Wagner-regression. As weights we use provincial sums of analytical weights from BIW.
Southern income has been increased by 15% (25%) to adjust for regional differences in cost of living.




                                                     43
Table 5.4 Wage regressions for the North and South: Public-private pay structure
Dependent Variable: log hourly earnings from full time employment

                                                               Log hourly wages
                                                      North                                     South
                                                (1)              (2)                      (3)                (4)
Constant                                    4.373             4.382                    4.109             4.133
                                          (128.4)           (126.6)                   (75.3)            (75.4)
Highschool Degree                            0.184            0.174                    0.269             0.245
                                            (13.9)           (12.9)                   (12.8)            (11.5)
College Degree                               0.438            0.427                    0.629             0.602
                                            (19.3)           (18.3)                   (20.5)            (19.2)
Years Work Experience                        0.045            0.045                    0.054             0.052
                                            (13.1)           (12.9)                     (9.6)              (9.2)
Years Work Experience                      -0.001             -0.001                 -0.001               -0.00
                                             (-8.3)            (-8.1)                  (-6.6)            (-6.3)
Female                                      -0.094            -0.08 1                -0.092            -0.074
                                             (-7.5)           (-6.3)                   (-4.4)            (-3.6)
Married                                      0.075            0.072                    0.183             0.185
                                              (5.3)            (5.0)                    (7.9)              (8.0)
Midmanagement                                0.111            0.099                    0.055             0.025
                                              (4.8)            (4.0)                    (1.4)              (0.6)
Top management                               0.283            0.265                    0.136             0.135
                                              (7.4)            (6.6)                    (2.1)              (2.0)
Non-Service Sector                          -0.139            -0.141                 -0.263             -0.270
                                             (-9.3)            (-9.4)                (-11.7)           (-12.1)
Service Sector                              -0.072                                   -0.249
                                             (-3.4)                                    (-7.9)
Service Sector w/o banks                                      -0.180                                    -0.405
and insurance                                                  (-7.2)                                  (-10.8)
R2                                        41.9                   41.3              50.9                   52.4
Source: BIW (1995) Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. Left out industry category is public employment.
Service sector Consists of: Banking and Insurance, Real Estate, Personal Services, Non-Service Sector:
Agriculture, Manufacturing, Telecommunication, Construction, Transportation. Additional controls
included in the regressions: Invalid worker, Sick worker, Big city, all statistically insignificant.




                                                      44
Figure 1



                     Distribution of hours worked
                         per sector and region

  70
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
    0
           0-10     10-18       18-30     30-40       40-48       >48

                  E North public I South public LII Private all




                                  45
Figure 2 Feasible Range of Cost of Excessive Public Employment


                  Excessive Cost of Public Employment in the South
                        (as a fraction of Southern wage bill)




        %Costof
       excessive
         public
      Employment


                                                                       0.18

                                                             —,-_.F 0.11
                                                                              Price
                                                0.48 0.51
                                                            0.54              effect
                                     Quantity Effect




                                        46
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To suhscrihe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the hack cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                                Date

7335            Rajesh K. Aggarwal                 Empire-Builders and Shirkers: Investment, Firm          9/99
                Andrew A. Samwick                  Performance, and Managerial Incentives

7336            Richard Portes                     The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows           9/99
                Héléne Rey

7337            Kathryn M. Dominguez               The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention 9/99

7338            Jeffrey A. Frankel                 No Single Currency Regime is Right for all Countries    9/99
                                                   or at All Times

7339            Axel Borsch-Supan                  Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain 9/99
                                                   Disability Option

7340            Hylke Vandenbussche                Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy          9/99
                Jozef Konings
                Linda Springael

7341            Robert F. Engle                    CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile           9/99
                Simone Manganelli                  Regression

7342            David C. King                      Congressional Vote Options                              9/99
                Richard J. Zeckhauser

7343             Christina Paxson                  Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment                       9/99
                 Jane Waldfogel

7344            Michael Hout                       Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race                9/99
                Harvey S. Rosen

7345             Jean 0. Lanjouw                   The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with             9/99
                 Mark Schankerman                  Multiple Indicators

7346             Geert Bekaert                     Stock and Bond Pricing in an A.ffine Economy                9/99
                 Steven R. Grenadier

7347             Thomas N. Hubbard                 Flow Wide Is the Scope of FIold—Up-Based Theories?          9/99
                                                   Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking
7348             Jonathan Gruber                   The Wealth of the Unemployed: Adequacy and                  9/99
                                                   Implications for Unemployment Insurance

7349             Edward P. Lazear                  Educational Production                                      9/99




                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also availahie at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7350            Tamim Bayoumi                      The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in            9/99
                                                   Japanese Growth in the 1990s

7351            Taizo Motonishi                    Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the        9/99
                Hiroshi Yoshikawa                  1990's: Financial or Real?

7352            Daron Acernoglu                    Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance             9/99
                Robert Shimer

7353             Jeff Grogger                      Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits                       9/99
                 Charles Michalopoulos

7354             Roberto Rigobon                   On the Measurement of the International Propagation        9/99
                                                   of Shocks

7355             Ricardo J. Caballero              The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-             9/99
                 Mohamad L. Hammour                Liquidationist View

7356             Alec Ian Gershberg                Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special     9/99
                 Michael Grossman                  Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                 Fred Goldman                      exempt Hospital Bonds

7357             Robert E. Lipsey                  Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm           9/99
                                                   Employment

7358             Vernon Henderson                  Marshall's Economies                                       9/99

7359             lain Cockburn                     The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:            9/99
                 Rebecca Henderson                 Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                 Scott Stern

7360             Douglas Holtz-Eakin               Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business           9/99
                 John W. Phillips
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7361             Bong-Chan Klio                    Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                       9/99
                 René M. Stulz

7362             Jagadeesh Gokhale                 Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans:          9/99
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff             How Bad Can It Get?

7363             Bruce D. Meyer                    Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the             9/99
                 Dan T. Rosenbaumn                 Labor Supply of Single Mothers



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NUER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                                Pai
7364            Dani Rodrik                         Short-Term Capital Flows                               9/99
                Andrés Velasco

7365            Michael D. Bordo                   The Future of EMU: What Does the History of             9/99
                Lars Jonung                        Monetary Unions Tell Us?

7366            Emmanuel Saez                      Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                      9/99

7367            Emmanuel Saez                      The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel     9/99
                                                   Study of 'Bracket Creep'

7368            Alan L. Gustman                    What People Don't Know About Their Peasions             9/99
                Thomas L. Steinmeier               and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                   From The Health and Retirement Study

7369            Wolfgang Keller                    Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct       9/99
                Arik Levinson                      Investment Inflows to U.S. States

7370            Michael Baker                      Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian         9/99
                Gary Solon                         Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                   Tax Records

7371            Michael Baker                       Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                Nicole M. Fortin                    1987-1988

7372            B. Douglas Bernheim                 The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the      10/99
                Lorenzo Forni                       Health and Retirement Survey
                Jagadeesh Gokhale
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373            Paul A. David                       Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
                Bronwyn H. Hall                     R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                Andrew A. Toole

7374            Peter Cappelli                      Do "High Performance" Work Practices Improve          10/99
                David Neumark                       Established-Level Outcomes?

7375            Charles I. Jones                    Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?              10/99
                                                    Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

7376            Harrison Hong                       Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage            10/99
                Jeremy C. Stein                     and Market Crashes




                     You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number           Author(s)                           Title

7377             George Chacko                       Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with             10/99
                 Luis M. Viceira                     Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets

7378             Bruce A. Blonigen                   Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of         10/99
                 Stephen E. Haynes                   Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

7379             Victor R. Fuchs                     The Future of Health Economics                            10/99

7380             Michael D. Hurd                      Anticipated and Actual Bequests                          10/99
                 James P. Smith

7381             Olivia S. Mitchell                   New Trends in Pension Benefit and                        10/99
                                                      Retirement Provisions

7382             Michael B. Devereux                  Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Welfare               10/99
                 Charles Engel                        Effects of tile Euro
                 Cedric Tille

7383             Stephen L. Mehay                     The Effectiveness of Workplace Drug Prevention           10/99
                 Rosalie Liccardo Pacula              Policies: Does 'Zero Tolerance' Work?

7384             Michael Klein                        Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and      10/99
                 Giovanni Olivei                      Economic Growth

7385             Jean Abraham                         Enter at Your Own Risk: 1-IMO Participation and          10/99
                 Ashish Arora                         Enrollment in the Medicare Risk Market
                 Martin Gaynor
                 Douglas Wholey

7386             Gerardo della Paolcra                Internal Versus External Convertibility and Developing- 10/99
                 Alan M. Taylor                       Country Financial Crises: Lessons from the Argentine
                                                      Bank Bailout of the 1930's

7387             Alberto Alesina                      Redistribution Through Public Employment: The Case 10/99
                 Stephen Danninger                    of Italy
                 Massiino V. Rostagno

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02 138-53 98. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(ordersnber.org).

                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                                www.nber.org
                             Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
