                                NBER WORKING PAPER SEIUES




                            ON THE DESIGN OF HIERARCHIES:
                         COORDINATION VERSUS SPECIALIZATION

                                               Oliver Hart
                                               John Moore


                                          Working Paper 7388
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w73 88


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




We thank Philippe Aghion, Antoine Faure-Grimaud, Ulrike Malmendier, Fausto Panunzi, Rohan Pitchford,
Andrei Shleifer, Jean Tirole, Chenggang Xu, and seminar audiences at the Western Economic Association and
European Association for Research in Industrial Economics (EARlE) meetings for helpful comments. We
acknowledge financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation through the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Leverhulme Trust, the LSE Financial Markets Group, and the Suntory Toyota
International Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines at the LSE. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

) 1999 by Oliver Hart and John Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
On the Design of Hierarchies:
Coordination Versus Specialization
Oliver Hart and John Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 7388
October 1999
JEL No. D2, L2

                                           ABSTRACT

       We develop a model of hierarchies based on the allocation of authority. A firm's owners have
ultimate authority over a firm's decisions, but they have limited time or capacity to exercise this
authority. Hence owners must delegate authority to subordinates. However, these subordinates also
have limited time or capacity and so further delegation must occur. We analyze the optimal chain of
command given that different agents have different tasks: some agents are engaged in coordination
and others in specialization. Our theory throws light on the nature of hierarchy, the optimal degree
of decentralization, and the boundaries of the firm.


Oliver Hart                                                  John Moore
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
Lattauer Center 220                                          London School of Economics
Harvard University                                           Houghton Street
Cambridge, MA 02163                                          London WC2A 2AE
and NBER                                                     United Kingdom
ohart@harvard.edu                                           j .h.moore@lse.ac.uk
1.   Introduction

     The purpose of this paper is to develop a model of hierarchies based

on the allocation of authority. We take the view that a firm's owners have

ultimate authority over a firm's decisions, but that they have limited time

or capacity to exercise this authority. Hence the owners must delegate some

authority to subordinates, i.e., they must grant the subordinates the right

to make decisions that they themselves are unable or unwilling to make.

However, these subordinates also have limited time or capacity to exercise

authority and so further delegation must occur to other subordinates. Thus we

view a firm as a chain of command over decisions. We use our model to

analyze the optimal chain of command given that different agents have

different tasks; in particular, some agents are engaged in coordination and

others in specialization. Our theory throws light on the nature of hierarchy

and the optimal degree of decentralization inside a firm, as well as on the

boundaries of the firm.

     There is a vast literature on many of the issues we consider, and this

is not the place to provide a review. Economists have studied hierarchical

structure from the point of view of supervision and task assignment (see,

e.g., Williamson (1967) and Rosen (1982)); from the point of view of

incentive theory (see, e.g., Calvo and Wellisz (1979)); and from the point of

view of information processing and team theory (see, e.g., Keren and Levhari

(1979), Radner (1992), Bolton and Dewatripont (1994), and Segal (1998)). By

and large, however, the existing literature does not analyze hierarchy in

terms of authority; that is, in contrast to our model, it is not the case

that if i is above j in the hierarchy, then i necessarily has authority over

j. Rather, in much of the literature, if i is above j in the hierarchy, then

j provides information to i.   Also the literature does not distinguish

between what happens inside a firm and what happens between firms.     In other



                                      2
words, the optimal hierarchies derived could apply just as well to the

organization of production in the U.S.A. as to the organization of production

in Microsoft.   In contrast, our approach does distinguish between the firm

and the economy. In our model, one firm has one person or group with

ultimate authority over all decisions (one owner or group of owners), whereas

the economy has many people with ultimate authority over different subsets of

decisions (many owners or groups of owners).1

     Although our approach differs from much of the literature, it has

parallels with the paper by Aghion and Tirole (1997). In our model, a boss

(e.g., an owner) has formal authority in the Aghion—Tirole sense, while a

subordinate has real authority if his boss cannot exercise authority but he

can. We discuss the relationship further in Section 5.

     The basic elements of our model are as follows. We consider an economy

consisting of a set of assets and a set of identical individuals. Each asset

represents a (residual) decision; that is, a decision must be taken with

respect to that asset. We assume that these decisions are noncontractible,

both ex ante and ex post. In addition to these basic decisions, there are

also "higher—level decisions, which correspond to the coordination of assets

or to synergies among assets.2 To be precise, we assume that, for each

subset of assets A, there is a task t, which consists of trying to come up

with an idea about what to do with the assets in A. A task does not




11n future work, it would obviously be desirable to combine the informational

approach in the literature and the authority approach in this paper.

2Decisions rather than assets are the key feature of the model. We introduce

assets because they are a convenient way to think about decisions,

particularly higher—level decisions (synergies).



                                       3
necessarily reach fruition, that is, become an idea ex post. If an

individual's task becomes an idea, we say that the individual is active.        In

this case he will carry out his idea if he can.    If the individual does not

have an idea, he is inactive; in this case not only can the individual not

implement his own idea, but also he cannot implement anyone else's.

      Because any particular individual may not have an idea, it is important

for efficiency that each asset has a hierarchy of bosses, that is, a chain of

command. The way a hierarchy works is as follows. If the first person in

the hierarchy (the ultimate boss) has an idea, she implements it.      If she

does not have an idea, control passes to her subordinate, who implements his

idea if he has one.    If the subordinate does not have an idea, the

subordinate's subordinate has a chance to implement his idea, and so on.

      A key assumption that we make is that ideas are mutually exclusive in

the following sense.    If one individual implements an idea involving an

asset, then someone else cannot implement an idea involving that asset

(whether or not the idea involves other assets too). This assumption has a

significant implication. The benefit of putting someone high up in a

hierarchy is that, if the person has a good idea, he is likely to be able to

implement it. The cost is that the person may block others from implementing

better ideas.

      A (stylized) example may help. Imagine that there are two assets, a

hotel and an airplane. Then there are three tasks: coming up with an idea

about the hotel; coming up with an idea about the plane; and coming up with

an idea about how to coordinate the hotel and the plane (synergy). The model

supposes that these ideas conflict. For example, the synergy" idea to offer

hotel discounts to airplane passengers is inconsistent with the "hotel' idea

to refurbish the hotel in the next three months.

      Assume that there are three individuals, one carrying out each task.



                                       4
One hierarchical structure would make the coordinator-—that is, the person

working on the hotel-plane synergy——senior on both assets. In this case, if

the coordinator is active, i.e. , has an idea, she can implement her idea,

whether or not the specialists have ideas, since she has authority.    In

contrast, each specialist can implement his idea only if (a) he has one; (b)

the coordinator does not.

      Another hierarchical structure would reverse the roles: the coordinator

would be junior to the specialists on both assets. In this case, each

specialist can implement an idea whenever he has one, while the coordinator

can implement her idea only if (a) she has one; (b) neither specialist does.

(If either specialist implements his idea, this preempts the use of one of

the assets, which means that the coordinator cannot implement her idea.)

      A priori it is not clear which of these two hierarchical structures is

better, although the second one seems unconventional.   It is in fact an

 implication of one of our main results that the second hierarchical

 structure is suboptimal (given some additional assumptions).

      Returning to the general case, we assume that the organizational

 form——characterized by a chain of command over each asset and an assignment

 of tasks to each individual-—is chosen ex ante to maximize expected total

 surplus. From the design point of view, the key questions are, what tasks

 should each individual be assigned to carry out and what is the optimal chain

 of command for each asset? One of our principal results is that, given the

 assumption that the probability of an idea is decreasing in the set of assets

 being looked after, individuals with a broad remit, i.e., whose tasks cover a

 large subset of assets, should appear higher in the chain of command than

 those with a narrow remit. In other words, big thinkers or coordinators

 should be senior to small thinkers or specialists. We also establish that

 'criss—croSs" hierarchies are never optimal; that is, if individual i appears



                                        5
above individual j on one asset, j will not appear above i on another asset.

Finally under an additional assumption, we show that the optimal hierarchy

is a pyramid, in the sense that each individual has at most one boss.

      We use these results to analyze the trade-off between centralization

and decentralization. We define an organization to be centralized if most

individuals in it are coordinators, and an organization to be decentralized

if most individuals in it except for the top people are specialists. We show

that if the gains to coordination are large enough, it is optimal for the

organization to be centralized; if the gains to coordination are significant

but not too large, it is optimal for the organization to be decentralized;

and finally if the gains to coordination are small, then it is optimal for

the organization to split up into several independent firms.

      The paper is organized as follows. We set out the model in Section 2.

In Section 3 we establish our main result, that individuals with a broad

remit should be senior to those with a narrow remit. In Section 4 we provide

a detailed analysis of the symmetric two—asset case. Section 5 is devoted to

some foundational issues. Finally, Section 6 contains extensions and further

discussion.




                                      6
2. The Model

       We consider an economy consisting of m assets, a1,... ,a, and n (risk

neutral) individuals 1,... ,n. The economy begins at date 0, and at this

point organizational form is chosen. Each asset represents a decision that

has to be made in the future at date 1.     These decisions are noncontractible

both ex ante and ex post. However, authority over decisions can be allocated

at date 0, as can the tasks that people are engaged in.

       For simplicity we assume that all individuals are identical. At

date 0 each individual is assigned a task.      (More than one person can be

assigned the same task.) A task consists of trying to come up with an idea

about what to do with a subset of the m assets, i.e., what decisions to make

with respect to these assets at date 1. For each set A c A =
                                                                  {a1,..   .   ,a},
there is a corresponding task t(A). Not all tasks reach fruition, that is,

become ideas. We write the probability that task t(A) becomes an idea as

p(A), where 0 <   p(A) < 1.
       An individual who has an idea about the subset of assets A, and is able

to implement it, generates value v(A)       0 (measured in money). We put few

restrictions on the function v, other than to suppose that v({ak}) > 0 for

all k. In particular, v may depend on the identity of the assets in A as

well as on their number. Also v may not be superadditive or even

nondecreasing in A.

       This last point deserves discussion. We have in mind a situation where

thinking about how to use two assets is a very different activity from

thinking about how to use one of them. The first activity involves

coordination while the second does not. If coordination possibilities are

limited, then the value of having an idea about how to coordinate two assets

may be very low. Thus v({a1, a2}) could be smaller than v({a1H +

or   even than Mm [vNa1fl v({a2})] if synergies between the assets are


                                        7
sufficiently small.3

       We will make the following (quite strong) assumptions about the

generation of value:



(Al) To realize v(A), an individual carrying out task t(A) needs access to

       all the assets in A.    If he has an idea but has access only to a

       non—empty, strict subset of A, he obtains a positive, but

       insignificant, value.



(A2)   (No externalities.) All the value from an idea accrues to the

       individual whose idea it is (think of a pet project).    In particular,

       ideas cannot be transferred: i cannot carry out j's idea.



(A3) Having an idea is an independent event across individuals.



(A4) There is no ex post renegotiation (e.g., because of shortage of time).

       That is, authority cannot be bought and sold at date 1.



       We suspect that not all of these assumptions (except possibly for

(A4)) are essential, but they greatly simplify the analysis. We discuss CA4)

further in Section 5.   Note that, as will be seen below, it is the absence of

costless ex post renegotiation that provides a role for hierarchical




3Take the hotel—plane example of the introduction. Consider the comparison

between the profit from offering hotel discounts to airplane passengers and

the profit from refurbishing the hotel and charging higher hotel prices. The

first may be bigger than the second if the plane flies to an airport near the

hotel; but smaller if it does not.

                                         8
structure in our model.   In fact, we view hierarchical structure as a

substitute for ex post renegotiation.

      (Al) - (A4) have a simple but useful implication:




(*)   An individual who has an idea and can implement it (even if only

      partially, i.e., even if he obtains only an insignificant value) will

      always do so; he will never defer to someone junior, however

      productive the junior person is. Also a senior individual who is

      inactive will never wish to veto the idea of a subordinate.



      The first part of (*) follows from the fact that, if a senior person

with an idea defers to a junior person, he loses his private value (for which

he cannot be compensated-—given (A4)). The second part follows from the fact

that, given (A2), a senior person without an idea neither gains nor loses

from his subordinate's idea.

      We now turn to the allocation of authority at date 0. We associate

with each asset a hierarchy of bosses, that is, a chain of command.

Formally, a chain of command is a list, i.e., a sequence of a subset of the

numbers l,...,n (the list may contain all the numbers l,...,n, none of the

numbers, or a strict subset of the numbers; no number is repeated). The

first number in the list refers to the ultimate boss, the second number to

his subordinate, the third number to the subordinate's subordinate, and so

on. Given a chain of command, the most senior person on the list with an

idea implements it.   If no one in the chain has an idea, the asset yields

zero value.

      We define an organizational form at date 0 to be a delineation of a

chain of command for each asset and an assignment of tasks to each

individual. We assume that both the chain of command and the tasks can be



                                        9
specified in an enforceable contract.4

     We make a final assumption:



(A5) There is costless (Coasian) bargaining at date 0, and individuals are

     not wealth-constrained.



      (A5) is in stark contrast to (A4). We have in mind that there is

plenty of time for the parties to negotiate at date 0, but very limited time

(no time) to negotiate at date 1.    (A5) implies that organizational form will

be chosen at date 0 to maximize expected total surplus, with the surplus

being divided up using lump sum transfers.

      Before we write down the formula for expected surplus, we can simplify

matters a little. Suppose an individual's task consists of looking after

assets in the subset A.    Then it makes no sense to put the individual in the

list (chain of command) involving an asset ak     A, since the individual will

never have an idea about ak.

      Similarly, suppose an individual is assigned the task t(A). Then it

makes no sense p, to put him in the list (chain of command) involving each

asset ak E A, since he generates no significant value unless he has control

over each of the assets in A.

      Putting these two observations together, we can conclude the following.

Once the lists for all the assets have been determined, we can figure out

which task each person is doing by seeing which list he appears in: if the

union of the lists he appears in corresponds to the set of assets A, then he

will be doing task t(A).




41n Section 6 we briefly discuss what happens if tasks are noncontractible.




                                       10
      An example might be useful at this point. Suppose there are two assets

and four people (in =   2, n = 4).        Figure 1 illustrates three possible

organizational forms.



      1           1


      2           2                  1             1



      3           3                  2             2              1            3

      4           4                  3             4              2            4




      a1          a2                 a1            a2             a1           a2

            (i)                             (ii)                       (iii)




                                           Figure 1



In the first form, 1 is the boss of a1 and a2, and has 2, 3, and 4 as

subordinates on both assets. The tasks correspond to this assignment of

authority: all four individuals are engaged in looking after both assets. In

the second form, 1 is the boss of both assets, 2 is l's subordinate on a1 and

a2, 3 is 2's subordinate on a1, and 4 is 2's subordinate on a2. Again, the

tasks correspond: 1 and 2 look after a1 and a2, 3 looks after a1 and 4 looks

after a2.     In the third form, 1 is the boss of asset a1, 2 is his

subordinate on a1, 3 is the boss of a2, and 4 is his subordinate on a2.             1


and 2 look after a1 and 3 and 4 look after
                                                      a2.
      The forms have a natural economic interpretation. The first two

represent a single firm since both assets have the same ultimate boss,

individual 1 (who can be interpreted as the owner of the assets). The second

form can be thought of as corresponding to a more decentralized firm than the



                                              11
first because authority is more likely to be exercised by someone with a

narrow remit——a specialist——and less likely to be exercised by a coordinator

(in the second form, 3 or 4 gets to exercise authority if 1 and 2 don't have

an idea). Finally, the third form represents two firms since assets a1 and

a2 have different ultimate bosses: 1 is the boss of a1, 3 is the boss of a2.

        We now write down the general formula for expected total surplus in the

m asset, n individual case. Let Lk be the list associated with asset ak. For

individual i, define



                          A. =    {assets   ak
                                                    i   appears   on list Lk}.



A is the set of assets over which i can exercise authority. From the above

we know that individual i will be engaged in task t(A.). Also for individual

i define




              Si =    {individuals               for some asset ak, i and j

                      both appear on list Lk and j appears above i}.



S. is the set of individuals who are senior to i on some asset. Now we know
 1

that individual i receives value v(A.) if and only if i has an idea and

nobody senior to i on any of the assets i looks after has an idea. Given

(A3), we can therefore write the formula for total expected surplus as




                     n
(2.1)          V =        p(A.)        IT    (1 —                 v(A.).
                     i1              JES.               P(A.))J


        According to (A5), organizational form will be chosen to maximize

(2.1)


                                                   12
3. An Example and the Main Theorem

         In this section we establish some general results about optimal

organizations. Part (a) of Theorem 1 provides a surprisingly powerful

characterization of an optimal hierarchy. It says that an optimal

organizational form has the property that an individual's place in the

hierarchy is determined (entirely) by his probability of having an idea:

individuals with the lowest probability of having an idea are placed at the

top of the hierarchy, individuals with the next lowest probability of an idea

are placed next in the hierarchy, and so on. Part (b) (which pretty much

follows from part (a)) says that criss—cross arrangements are never optimal.

That is, if j is above i on one asset, i will never be above j on another

asset.

         Before we state Theorem 1, and two corollaries, it is useful to get

some intuition from a special case. Suppose there are two assets, a1 and a2,

and two individuals, 1 and 2 (m = n =    2).   Given our assumption that

individuals are identical, but assets may not be, there are nine distinct

organizational forms.     (In what follows, everything is unique up to the

permutation of the individuals' names.) To see this, note that there are two

organizational forms where both individuals look after both assets (2 can be

senior to 1 on both, or senior on one and junior on the other); four forms

where 2 looks after two assets and 1 looks after one (2 can be senior or

junior on the asset 1 looks after; and 1 can look after a1 or a2); and three

forms where 1 and 2 both look after one asset (they can look after different

assets or the same asset, which may be a1 or a2).

         Some of these forms are illustrated in Figure 2.   (We leave out the

symmetric version of (iii), (iv) and (v), where assets a1 and a2 are

reversed.)



                                        13
     2           2             1               2        2            2

      1          1             2               1        1




     a1          a2            a1              a2       a1           a2
          Ci)                       (ii)                     (iii)




      1          2             1


     2                         2                        1            2




     a1          a2            a1              a2       a1           a2
          (iv)                      Cv)                      (vi)



                                    Figure 2




     Forms (i), (iii), (v) and (vi) make good economic sense. We would

expect form (i) to be desirable if coordination is very important; form (iii)

to be desirable if some coordination is important but not too much; form Cv)

to be desirable if coordination is not valuable and a1 is very productive;

and form (vi) to be desirable if coordination is not valuable and both assets

are comparably productive.   (Each of these forms can be shown to be optimal

for a suitable choice of the parameters.)

     However, forms (ii) and (iv) seem strange. Does it make sense to have

someone coordinate and yet be junior on some asset, given that this implies

that he will rarely be able to implement his coordination idea?

     Fortunately, (ii) is never optimal, and neither is (iv) (under an



                                          14
additional assumption). To see this, note that the expected surpluses

(values) from forms (i) -       (v)   (represented by V1 ,..., V5, respectively) are

given by



                                  2               2
                V1 = [1 — (1 — p2) 1v2 = (2p2 — p2 )v2,

                V2 = 2p2C1—p2)v2,

                V3 = p2 v2 + (1 - p2)p1 v1,

                V4 = p1 v1 + (1 — p1)p2 v2,
                                  2                2
                V5 = [1 — (1 - p1) I v1 = (2p1 — p1 )v1,



where v1 =
              v(a1}),   v2 =   v({a1,a2}),   p1 =   p({a1}),     p2 =   p({a1,   a2}).
                                                                                           (To

understand these formulae, note that in Ci) coordination occurs if either 1

or 2 (or both) is active; in (ii) coordination occurs if exactly 1 or 2 is

active (but not both); in (iii) coordination occurs if 2 is active whether or

not 1 is active; and in (iv) coordination occurs if 2 is active but 1 is

not.)

         it is immediate that V2 <          and so (ii) is not optimal. To see
                                       V1

whether (iv) can be optimal, note that, if it is, we must have V4 a V1 and V4

a V5. The first implies p1v1 a p2 v2 (1 +                 —          while the second implies
                                                     p1       p2),
        a p1v1. These cannot both be true, as long as we are prepared to assume

p2 <    p1.
         This example illustrates the theorem (and corollaries) stated below:

(a) If individual 2's task is such that he has a lower probability of an idea

than individual 1, then it is not optimal to put 1 above 2 on any asset ((iv)

is not optimal).     (b) Criss—cross arrangements are not optimal, i.e., it

cannot be the case that 2 is above 1 on one asset and 1 is above 2 on another

((ii) is not optimal).

         Without the monotonicity assumption on probabilities, p2 <                        cannot
                                                                                   p1,we


                                              15
rule out organizational forms like (iv).          In the above example, let v1 = 10,

      = 8, p1 =   1/4,        1.   Then direct calculation shows that (iv) is
                         p2
optimal.5

         Let us return to the m asset, n individual case. Recall from Section 2

that A. is the set of assets over which i can exercise authority and Lk is

the list (chain of command) associated with asset ak. We now state the main

theorem.




Theorem 1.     Consider an optimal organizational form.

(a)      Suppose p(A.) > p(Ai. Then, for all assets ak E A. n A., j appears

         above i on list Lk.

(b)      Criss—cross arrangements are not optimal, i.e. ,      if   j appears above i on

         list Lk for asset ak then there does not exist k' such that i appears

         above j on list Lk, for asset ak,.



Proof: See appendix.



         Notice that, when p(A.)        p(AJ, part (b) of the theorem follows

immediately from part (a). The heart of part (b), therefore, lies in showing

that criss—cross arrangements are also not optimal when p(A.) =            p(A.).
         Of course, the leading case where p(A.) =     p(A.)   is when A. =   A.:   part




5Although (iv) may be optimal when p2 > p1, we can rule out (iii) in this

case.     It follows from direct calculation that p2 > p1           either V3 < V1 or V3

< V5. This finding provides another illustration of part (a) of Theorem 1:

If a specialist has a lower probability of an idea than a coordinator (p2 >

        then it is not optimal to put a coordinator above a specialist on any

asset ((iii) is not optimal).


                                             16
(b) of the theorem then says that, given two people with the same remit, one

should be senior to the other on all the assets they work on. Below we state

a corollary that deals with the more interesting case where A. c A. A.        A.,
                                                                1      J 1      J
i.e., j's remit is broader than i's.

      First, we make an observation about Theorem 1. Part (a) at first looks

a little suspicious.     It would appear that the decision about who to put on

top of a hierarchy is determined solely by the probability of the success of

an idea and not at all by the value of an idea. For example, suppose p(A.)

and v(A.) are very low. Then putting j at the top of the hierarchy is very

inefficient, and yet the theorem suggests that this is optimal. The reason

there is no contradiction is that the theorem says nothing about which tasks

should be carried out. Given that j has a low probability of success and is

unproductive even when he has an idea, j is clearly doing the wrong task.

That is, in an optimal organizational form no—one will be doing task t(A.).

      This observation about unproductive individuals with low probabilities

having the wrong tasks gives the clue to how part (a) of the Theorem is

proved. Take an asset ak, and suppose that agent i is senior to agent j on

list Lk, but p(A.) > (A). In broad terms, we show that expected surplus

can be increased by making one of two changes to the organizational form.

Either i is relatively unproductive (v(A.) is relatively low), in which case

expected surplus can be increased by switching i to task t(A.) and placing

him just under j in seniority on all assets in A.-—akin to changing from

hierarchy (iv) to hierarchy (i) in Figure 2 (with i     1, A.       {a1}, j   2, A.

  {a1,a2}, and ak      a1). Or j is relatively unproductive (v(A.) is relative

low), in which case expected surplus can be increased by switching j to task

t(A.) and placing her just under i in seniority on all assets in A.-—akin to

changing from hierarchy (iv) to hierarchy (v). The merit of these two kinds

of maneuver is that one can keep track of how overall expected surplus



                                        17
changes. By contrast, if we consider a third kind of change to the

organizational form, the ostensibly more straightforward maneuver of simply

switching the seniorities of i and j, then the people who lie between i and j

(on list Lk) are affected in subtle ways and so the overall change to

expected surplus is complicated.      (In terms of our earlier two—person

analysis, this third maneuver amounts to switching the seniorities of 1 and 2

on asset a1; i.e., changing from hierarchy (iv) to hierarchy (iii). This

method happens to work when there are just two people, but not if there are

others in between them.)

       Corollary 1 follows directly from Theorem 1, given a further

assumption.



Monotonicity (M).             p(A) > p(B) if A c B, A        B.




Corollary .1..   Assume (M). Consider an optimal organizational form. Suppose

A. c A., A.
 1          1
                 A., where i, j E {1,. .   . ,n}.   Then, for each asset a such that
                                                                         k
       j          j
ak E A., j will appear above i on list Lk.



       Corollary 1 says that, under the assumption that the probability of an

idea is decreasing in an individual's span of control, it is optimal for

someone with a broad remit to be senior to someone with a narrow remit.

       Assumption CM) warrants further discussion. We would argue that this

assumption is plausible. Consider the two functions p(A) and v(A) as the set

A increases.     It would be surprising if p and v moved in the same direction.

If p and v both increase, this would say that coordinators are supermen,

while if p and v both decrease, it would say that specialists are supermen.

It is more likely that p and v move in opposite directions, i.e., p falls and

v rises, or p rises and v falls. The first of these seems more reasonable



                                             18
than the second: that is, it seems to accord with common sense that a

coordinator can (on average) achieve a sizable efficiency gain if he has an

idea, but that he is not that likely to have an idea.                (Note, however, that

(M) requires only that p is decreasing in A; it does not require that v is

increasing in A.

      Corollary 1 covers only the case where the remits of individuals can be

ranked. To this extent, the corollary leaves open the possibility that

someone can have two bosses (a non-pyramidal hierarchical structure). That

is, person i may be senior to person j on one asset; while person i' is

senior to person j on another asset, whereas i is not. This can happen if

the remits of persons i, j and i' cannot be ranked.

      For example, consider the situation illustrated in Figure 3. There are

three individuals and six assets, and synergies exist only between assets a1,

a2, a3, assets a4, a5, a6, and assets a3, a4.




                1               1                        2     2          2

                                            3            3




            a1                  a2          a3           a4    a5          a6



                                                 Figure 3



Assume v({a11a2,a3}) =                              = 14, v({a3,a4}) =   8, p({a1,a2,a3}) =
                                    v({a4,a5,a6})
                    =   1/4,                     1. Then it is straightforward to show that
p({a4,a5,a6})                  p({a3,a4})
it is optimal to put individual 1 in charge of a1,a21a3, individual 2 in

charge of a4,a5,a6, and to make individual 3 a subordinate on a3,a4.

Individual 3 then has different bosses on a3 and a4.



                                                    19
      In order to rule out this kind of situation, we need a further

assumption.



      Let us define a set of assets A to be synergistic if v(A) > 0.



Nestednedness (N). Synergies are nested if given two synergistic sets A, B,

either A c B, or B c A, or A B = 0.



      In other words, (N) says that if there is a synergy between a set of

assets, then any synergy involving one of the set and a new asset requires

the presence of the other assets in the set too.       If synergies are nested,

the situation in Figure 3 cannot arise, since if {a3, a4} is a synergistic

set (which is why 3 is working on these assets), then {a1, a2, a3} is not a

synergistic set (and so 1 will not work on these assets).

      (N) is quite strong. Note, however, that it is trivially satisfied in

the two asset case.



Corollary 2.      Assume (M) and (N). Consider an optimal

organizational form.     If j appears above i on list Lk for some asset ak, then

j appears above i on every list on which i appears.



      The proof of Corollary 2 is direct. Suppose i looks after the set

of assets A. and j looks after the set of assets A.. A. and A. must be
              1                                        J        1         J

synergistic since otherwise one of the individuals creates zero value and

expected surplus could be increased by assigning this individual to a single

asset (any one) and making him the most junior person on this asset.                It

follows from (N) that A. c A., A. c A. or A. r A. =
                          1
                                                           0.       The last is
                               J   J   1     1     J

impossible since j appears above i on some asset.          If A. c A.., A.        A., the


                                        20
conclusion of Corollary 2 follows from Corollary 1.        If A. =   A.,   the

conclusion follows from Theorem 1, part (a).        Finally, A. c A., A.         A.,    is

inconsistent with Corollary 1 since we know that i does not appear above j on

list Lk.

      At this point it is worth returning to the two asset—two individual

example. Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 imply—-and we have also observed this

from direct calculation——that the organizational forms (ii) and (iv) in

Figure 2 cannot be optimal (assuming p2 <             In fact, if we are prepared
                                             p1).
to make the additional assumption of symmetry (v({a1}) =
                                                              v({a2}),      p({a1}) =

            (iii) and (v) can also be ruled out. To see this, note that the
p({a2})),
expected surplus from organizational form (vi) is given by



                             V6 = 2p1v1,



which is obviously greater than V5.     (This is just an implication of

diminishing returns. )   In addition, it is easy to show that either V6 >                    or
                                                                                       V3

V1 > V3 (so (iii) is not optimal).

      So in the two asset-two individual example, the optimal arrangement is

symmetric: either there should be two coordinators (as in (1)) or no

coordinators (as in (vi)).

      In the next section, we will show that symmetry always holds in the two

asset case when the number of individuals (n) is even. This has an

interesting implication for Figure 1.      In Figure 1 we illustrated three

possible organizational forms for the two asset-four individual case.              It

turns out that, under symmetry, these are the only candidates for optimality

(as the next section will show). Moreover, the trade—off between them is as

one would expect (at least if p1 >
                                     p2, p1 not too close to p2). Form (1) is
optimal if the gains to coordination are large enough; (ii) is optimal if the



                                        21
gains to coordination are moderate; and (iii) is optimal if the gains to

coordination are small.




                                      22
4. The Symmetric Two Asset Case

      In this section we analyze in detail the case of n individuals and two

symmetric assets (m =       2).    We refer to an individual who looks after both

assets as a cordinator and an individual who looks after one asset as a

specialist. The values they generate if they have an idea and exercise

authority over the appropriate assets are given by v2, v1, respectively

(i.e., v2        v({a1,a2}), v1        v({a1}) =   v({a2})).       The probabilities of having

an idea are given by p2, p1, respectively (i.e., p2 =                 p({a1,   a2)), p1 =
           =
p({a1})        p({a2fl).
      We assume p1 >              Hence, from the Theorem, coordinators will be
                           p2.
senior to specialists and, given any two coordinators, one will be senior to

the other on each asset. Thus we can represent an optimal organization as

follows:




                                   1                           1


                                   2                           2




                                   r                           r

                                  r+l                   r+s+l

                                  r+s                          n



                                  a1                           a2


                                            Figure 4




                                               23
In Figure 4 there are r coordinators and (n —                                           r)   specialists. Note that the

optimal organization may not be symmetric, i.e. ,                                            the number of specialists,
s, on asset a1 need not be the same as the number of specialists, n -                                                r   — s,

on asset a2.

           In fact it turns out that the optimal organization is symmetric, i.e.,

s = n —     r       -       s, except in the case where n is odd and there are no
coordinators at all.



Result 1. Assume m = 2; the assets are symmetric, i.e., v({a1}) =
                                                                                                                  v((a2})
=                                                    =         and p1 >               Consider an optimal
    v1, pC{a1}) = pC{a2})                                p1;                  p2.
organizational form in which individuals 1,... ,r look after both assets (A. =

{a 12
    ,a }    for             i =      1,.   ..,r), individuals r +                   1,... ,r   + s look after asset a (A.
                                                                                                                         1

=
    {a1}    for i =              r    +1,... ,r + s)                 and individuals r + s +         1,... ,n   look after

asset a
           2
                (A. =
                        1
                                  (a2 } for i = r +                  s +   1,... ,n).    Then, unless n is odd and r =

0, s =     a    —       r    —   s = (n—r)/2.


Proof: See appendix.



           The key step in proving Result 1 is to show that if there is some

coordination Cr > 0) and, say, one more specialist working on asset a1 than

on asset a2 Cs = a -                         r   -       s +   1),    then it would be better either for the most

junior coordinator to switch to specializing on a2, or for the extra'

specialist on asset a1 to switch to coordination. Either way, the number of

specialists on a1 and a2 should be equalized: an asymmetric compromise is

never optimal. And if there are no coordinators Cr =                                               0),   the number of

specialists on each asset should be as equal as possible-—i.e., the same when

n is even.

           From now on, to simplify matters, we will assume that n is even, in



                                                                             24
which case the optimal organization is symmetric even if there are no

coordinators. As above, write the number of specialists on each asset as s.

Since n is even, the number of coordinators must also be even: r = n — 2s.

        We now consider the optimal choice of s. Before we get into the

details, let us note a simple way of thinking about this. Imagine that

everyone is a specialist, i.e., 2s                  n. Then the value of the organization
                        n/2             .
is
•
     2(1 — (1 —
                  p1)
                                    .
                              )v1, which is a strictly concave function of n. In other

words, not surprisingly, there are diminishing returns to having more

specialists. As we will see, this has the following implication: in a class

of cases (more precisely, when the surplus maximization problem is convex,

and the solution to the problem is interior), then, after s has reached a

certain value, it is better not to have further specialists, but rather to

make any additional people in the organization (i.e., those at the top)

coordinators. That is, for large enough n, the optimal value of s is

independent of n.

        However, this is not the only possibility. There is another class of

cases (when the surplus maximization problem is nonconvex) where the optimum

is a corner solution: s            0 or s =    n.

        Now to the details. Denote by V the expected surplus (value) of an

organizational form in which there are s specialists on each asset and n — 2s

coordinators. Suppose s             n/2 — 1.        Let 8 be the probability that at least

one of the first (n — 2s — 2) coordinators is active (i.e., has an idea).

Then we can write



(4.1)                         V=8v+(1-O)V,
                               s  2      s




where V is the value of the organizational form (call it 'hat') consisting

of everyone         the first (n — 2s — 2) coordinators, i.e., the organizational



                                                    25
form consisting of 2 coordinators and s specialists below them on each asset.

The justification for (4.1) is that if one of the first (n — 2s -                                 2)
coordinators is active, which happens with probability 0, v is realized;

while, if not, V is realized.
                S
        In turn we can write



                  =                 -            + (1 -
(4.2)
                       (2p              p22)v2               p2)2(2W),


where W is the value of the organizational form consisting of s specialists

working on asset a1 (or a2). The justification for (4.2) is that in the

organizational form 'hat, the probability that at least one of

the coordinators is active is (1 — (1 —                                     in which case v2 is realized;
                                                                 p2)2),
otherwise 2W is realized.
            S
        Now increase s by 1. Since there are now 2 more specialists

altogether, the number of coordinators falls to n - 2s -                               2.     Using the same

logic as above, we can write



(4.3)                      V÷1 = 0v2 + (1 — 0)


where V41 is the value of an organizational form consisting of (s + 1)

specialists on each asset and no coordinators. In turn,



(4.4)            V1 =          2[p1v1
                                           + (1 —
                                                          p1)W].

                                                                2           ..
        Define     =   1
                           -
                                   p1, q2 = (1
                                                      -
                                                          p2)
                                                                    .
                                                                        Combining   (4.1) -   (4.4),   carrying

out some manipulation, and using the fact that W = (1 —                                qS)v       we obtain



(45)           V V V V
                 s+1           S         s+1      5



                                                            26
                                             q2 -    q)qS     > (1 -
                                                                             q2)[   -
                                                                                        1).


(4.5) provides us with important (marginal) information; it tells us when

total value can be raised by increasing the number of specialists on each

asset from s to s +               1    (and correspondingly reducing the number of

coordinators by 2).

         In what follows, it is helpful to consider separately the cases q1
                                                                                                        q2
and q1 <             (The first is likely to occur when p1                          p2 and the second when
             q2.
p1 > >



Case 1: q1           q2

From (4.5), the crucial inequality is:



(4.6)               (q -          q)qS           (1 -
                                                        q2)
                                                                         -
                                                                             iJ.

Now if q1          q2 the left—hand side (LHS) is nonpositive and increasing in s.

The right—hand side (RHS) may be positive or negative, but it is constant.

It follows that if (4.6) holds at a particular value of s, it also holds at s

+   1,   i.e.,




(4.7)                             V V =V V
                                      si-i       s      s+2        s+1



          (4.7) tells us that the problem of maximizing V in Case 1 is

nonconvex. An implication is that an interior value of s is never (uniquely)

optimal (if 0 <           s   <   n/2        maximizes V ,
                                                        S
                                                              then V"
                                                                    s V and
                                                                        s—i
                                                                            so, from (4.6), Vn/2
    V, which is a contradiction). Hence, in Case 1, we have a corner
     S

solution:        s = 0 or s = n12.

          To see which corner is better, we compare


                                                              27
                                                  n                          n/2
                    V0 = [1 — (1        —                         (1   -
                                            p2)       ]v2 =                q2       )v2

and

                                   -                    n/2                = (1 —        n/2
                    V12 = 2[1           (1        p1)
                                                              I
                                                                  v1                q1         )2v1.



It follows that, if v2                 2v1, s = 0 is optimal (since q1                                 q2); while, if v2

<
    2v1,
            s =   n/2 is optimal for large enough n (since q2"2, q1"2 - 0                                              as n -




           The results for Case 1 are summarized in Result 2.



Result .          Assume m =     2; the assets are symmetric; n is even; p1 > p2;                                        and q1

                         1   -                         (1 -                     Then if v2         2v1, it is optimal
    q2, where q1 =               p1 and q2                        p2)2.
to have n coordinators on the two assets (a completely centralized firm). On

the other hand, if v2 <
                                    2v1, then, for large enough n, it is optimal to have
n/2 specialists on each asset (two independent firms).



           The intuition behind Result 2 is straightforward.                                      If v2         2v1,

coordination adds value. Since q1 q (i.e., p2 is not much smaller than

p1), the expected return from coordination is also quite large.                                                 It is

therefore not surprising that all individuals will be assigned to the task of

coordination. On the other hand, if V2 < 2v1, two specialists create more

value than one coordinator, conditional on all of them having ideas..

Moreover, when n is large, the probability that at least one of n

coordinators is active, or that at least one of n/2 specialists is active, is

close to 1. So value, conditional on having an idea, is the only thing that

matters.          It follows that specialization is better when v2 <
                                                                                                         2v1.
           We turn next to the case q1 <
                                                          q2.




                                                                  28
Case 2: q1 < q



        In Case 2 the LHS of (4.6) is positive and decreasing in s, while the

RHS is constant.            It follows that, if (4.6) fails to hold for s =                        0, it fails

to hold for all s.               Hence (q2 -
                                                       q1)
                                                                (1 -
                                                                       q2)   (-i..
                                                                                     - 1)   is a sufficient


condition for V1 V everywhere. In other words, if




                                                                1 -
(4.8)                                         v2 2v I
                                                         l1—q2
then V is maximized at s = 0.
           S

        At the other extreme, if V2                          2v1, the RHS of (4.6) is nonpositive and

so the LHS > RHS for all s.                        In this situation V                V for all s, i.e., s =
                                                                              s+l      s

n12   is       optimal.

           The interesting parameter range in Case 2 is where



(4.9)
                                         v)
                                 2 <—- < 2 I
                                                        l-q
                                         v1             l—q2
In this range, V                  > V for small s, and V                     < V for large s. To be more
                           s+1       5                                 s+1      5

precise, when (4.9) holds, the problem of maximizing V is convex and there is

an interior solution (for large enough n) characterized by the "first order

condition": V                    Vs > Vs+i     .       Write   the optimal value as s. From (4.5), s
                     s—i
is given by the smallest integer greater than or equal to the solution x of



                          x =
                                 (l—q)
                                     2 ,v2         i

 (4.10)              q1                            t           — 1
                                 (q2q1) 12v1

                                                                29
 The results for Case 2 are summarized in Result 3.



Result 3.      Assume m =      2, the assets are symmetric, n is even, and q1 < q2,
where q1 = 1 —                      -
                     p1, q2 = (1
                                                Then:
                                        p2)2.

                      11-q 1
(1) If v        2v    I            I,   it   is optimal to have n coordinators on the two
         2
                     ll -q2j
assets (a completely centralized firm).




(2) If v2       2v1, it is optimal to have n/2 specialists on each asset (two

independent firms).



(3)   If 2 <
                V2
                      <2   l-q1
                           I     I, it   .                             —
                                                 is optimal to have (n—2s) coordinators
                v1         l —q2)

on the assets, with s specialists below them on each asset, where s is the

smallest integer greater than or equal to the solution of (4.10).



        The thrust of Result 3 is similar to that of Result 2.             The higher v2

is relative to 2v1, the greater are the gains from coordination and the more

coordinators one would expect to have. Result 3 tells us that, if (v2/2v1)

is high enough, everyone will be a coordinator (complete centralization).                  If

(v2/2v1) is low enough, no one will be a coordinator (two independent firms).

In between there will be a mix of senior coordinators and junior specialists

(a decentralized firm); moreover, the number of specialists is increasing in

(v2/2v1).
        One aspect of the interior solution (part (3) of Result 3) deserves



                                                  30
particular mention. Provided n is large enough (specifically, provided n >

2s),   the optimal number of specialists on each asset is independent of n!

This is an instance of a more general idea: the shape of an optimal

sub—hierarchy——that is, everyone below a group of senior coordinators——is

independent of how many senior coordinators there are in that group. The

reason is that the sub—hierarchy makes a contribution to the organization if

and only if no one in the group of senior coordinators is active. Let us

call this event E. By assumption (A3), E is statistically independent of

which agents in the sub—hierarchy are active. Hence, for a given number of

agents in the sub—hierarchy, the optimal design of the sub—hierarchy is

independent of E: conditioning on an independent event does not change the

nature of the design problem. In particular, for the parameter values in

part (3) of Result 3, consider the sub—hierarchy of (say) m people,

comprising the s specialists on each asset together with the m — 2s most

junior coordinators (take m >   2s).   Then the optimality of this sub—hierarchy

is unaffected by the number, n - m, of senior cooordinators. As the total

number, n, of agents grows, provided the optimal number, s, of specialists on

each asset has been reached, all additional agents should be assigned to be

coordinators. Of course, for large n the event E (the event that none of the

n — m senior coordinators is active) becomes extremely unlikely; but that

does not affect the optimality of having just s specialists on each asset.

        Given this logic, it is not surprising that in all cases in Results 2

and 3, the optimal number of coordinators, n -    2s, grows as n grows.   In

effect, an increase in n leads to larger, more centralized firms. To put it

another way, a fall in the opportunity cost of workers would make it optimal

 to have bigger, more centralized firms. We shall return to this point in

Section 6

        Finally, there are some other comparative statics properties that



                                         31
follow from Results 2 and 3.   First, if    falls (i.e., p2 rises),

centralization increases (i.e., the number of specialists, s, does not rise).

This is intuitive since the probability of a coordinator having an idea has

increased. Second, if q1 falls (i.e., p1 rises), inspection of (4.10)

reveals that s can rise or fall, i.e., centralization may decrease or

increase. The intuition for this is that, although the returns to

specialization have increased, which suggests that the number of specialists

should rise, diminishing returns to specialization will set in earlier, i.e.,

it may not be necessary to have as many specialists.




                                       32
5. Foundational Issues

        In this section we discuss further some of the assumptions that we have

made.

        The model is one of symmetric information and there are no ex ante

investments. What matters are ex post decisions. The decisions are

noncontractible both ex ante and ex post, but the right to make them can be

allocated ex ante (think of allocating the right to press a button).

An obvious question to ask is, why doesn't the Coase theorem apply here,

i.e., why don't then individuals simply sit down at date 1 and negotiate

over who can press which button? (The tasks would presumably still be agreed

on contractually at date 0.) A related question is, even if the Coase

theorem doesn't apply, aren't there perhaps mechanisms other than the

assignment of authority through hierarchy that could do a better job

of maximizing total surplus?

        The first point to notice is that in some cases a hierarchical

structure can achieve a remarkably efficient outcome——even the first-best.

Take the two asset, n individual case analyzed in Section 4 (where n is

even). Suppose v2 > 2 v1. According to Results 2 and 3, the optimal

hierarchy has (n — 2s) coordinators on the two assets, with s specialists

junior to them on each individual asset (where s may be zero). It is easy to

see that this arrangement yields an ex post efficient outcome since (a) if

one or more coordinators has an idea, then one of these ideas will be

implemented (since coordinators are senior); (b) a coordinator creates at

least as much value as two specialists combined (and so if a coordination

 idea exists, it is efficient to implement it).

         In fact, this hierarchical structure is also ex ante efficient; that

 is, surplus cannot be increased by reassigning tasks. The reason is that,

when v2 >          the above argument shows that, given any assignment of tasks,
            2v1,

                                         33
ex post value can be maximized through a hierarchical structure (in which

coordinators are senior to specialists). Thus it is impossible to find an

assignment of tasks, and an ex post rule for implementing ideas, that creates

more value than the optimal hierarchy. Hence, when v2 > 2v1, the

optimal hierarchy identified in Results 2 and 3 achieves the first—best.6

      In general, of course, a hierarchy will not achieve the first—best. We

now try to provide two (very tentative) justifications for being interested

in hierarchies in this case too.

      First, suppose that having an idea corresponds to being active or

"awake," and not having an idea corresponds to being passive or "asleep."

Moreover, being "asleep' means being totally incommunicado (e.g., the person

is away from the office). Then renegotiation or revelation-type mechanisms

that require the participation of all the parties are infeasible, since those

who do not have ideas cannot be included.

      It is still possible to have renegotiation or mechanisms involving only

those who are active at date 1.    In fact, this issue is key. Determining the

ex post outcome when more than one person is active is what the analysis is




6The case v2 <     is a bit more complicated. Results 2 and 3 tell us that
               2v1
(when n is large) the optimal hierarchy has n/2 specialists on each asset.

Since there are no coordinators, this arrangement is trivially ex post

efficient. However, we suspect that the outcome may not be ex ante

efficient. That is, it may be possible to increase surplus by having some

coordinators and some specialists, in combination with a nonhierarchical

structure: this nonhierarchical structure would have the feature that a

coordinator gives up authority to a specialist if and only if there is at

least one specialist on each asset with an idea.    (See footnote 7 for a

related point.)

                                       34
all about: given that decisions do no harm, if only one person is active, his

decision should be implemented.

     We take the view that time pressure at date 1 may make it very costly

to have an elaborate exchange of messages or renegotiation even among those

who are active. Instead the parties may want to rely on an ex ante mechanism

that is "simple." A hierarchical structure is a leading example of such a

mechanism. Under a hierarchy, individuals are ranked and the individual with

the highest rank among those who are active has the right to decide: complex
                                                         7
messages and side—payments at date 1 are thereby avoided.




7We are not suggesting that a hierarchy is necessarily the only mechanism

that is "simple." A hierarchy has the feature that an individual's ranking

does not depend on who the other active individuals are. However, one could

depart from this. For instance, take the example in Figure 3, but suppose

that v({a3, a4}) = 15.   Then the following mechanism achieves first—best (and

is more efficient than the hierarchy illustrated in Figure 3): If individuals

1 and 2 both have ideas, then individual 1 has authority over a3 and

individual 2 has authority over a4; in all other cases individual 3 has

authority over a3 and a4. This mechanism ensures that, in the event that

individual 3 has an idea and only one of individuals 1 and 2 has an idea, a

value of 15 is generated instead of 14. Enforcing a mechanism like this may

be difficult, however, to the extent that the number of people with ideas may

not be verifiable.

      In future work it would be interesting to analyze the role of more

general mechanisms. Note that nondeterministic mechanisms are also a

possibility. For example, one could have a first—come/first—served rule,

where the person who first has an idea gets to implement it (see Lando

(1998)). We doubt that nondeterministic mechanisms have a useful role to

                                      35
      The assumption that no communication or exchange of messages at all

is possible ex post is extreme. There is a second interpretation of our

model that is also of interest. Imagine that all ideas can in principle be

passed up to the top person in the organization, i.e., even if the boss does

not have an idea, he can still consider the ideas of others. The top person

is overloaded, however, and so cannot vet every idea carefully. Moreover, he

is (approximately) indifferent about which of his employees' ideas are

implemented since he does not benefit directly from them. Then the boss may

employ a simple 'satisficing rule (which is set up ex ante): he implements

his own idea if he has one; otherwise he ratifies or rubber—stamps whatever

his subordinate proposes. The subordinate behaves in the same way: he

proposes to the boss his own idea if he has one; otherwise he proposes

(ratifies / rubber-stamps)     subordinate's idea. And so on. This second

interpretation also corresponds to our model, although the foundations for it

are less clear.

      This second interpretation serves to distinguish the model from

Aghion—Tirole (1997). Aghion and Tirole (1997) differentiate between formal

and real authority. An owner has formal or legal authority but may not have

the information to exercise his authority. Instead he defers to an informed

subordinate whose preferences are not too different from his; the subordinate

has real authority.   In our model, a senior individual has formal authority,

while a junior individual has real authority if he has an idea and his boss

does not. Aghion and Tirole's interpretation is that the senior individual

rubber-stamps the junior individual's proposal in this case since he doesn't




play in the present model.




                                      36
have a better proposal of his own.8

         Aghion and Tirole focus on the case of two individuals. The question

is, what happens if there are more than two, e.g., there is one senior

individual and two junior individuals? One natural extension of Aghion—Tirole

is to suppose that the senior individual, if he does not have an idea of hi

own, considers the proposals of both the juniors and chooses the one he likes

better. According to this interpretation, no chain of command needs to be

set up in advance. All that matters is that one individual is designated the

boss: this individual then decides which proposal to favor on an ex post

basis.

         In contrast we take the Aghion-Tirole model in a different direction.

We assume that the boss cannot decide between all the ideas of his employees

either because he is not there (he's asleep) or because he is overloaded.

Instead he uses a shortcut: he decides in advance who will have authority if

he can't exercise it, who will have authority if that person can't exercise

it, and so on. In other words, he decides on a chain of command.

         Needless to say, the above discussion is quite preliminary. Providing

a more formal foundation for the model would be extremely desirable in future

research.

         We close this section with some remarks about the other assumptions we

have made.     (Al) - (A3) are all strong, but greatly simplify the analysis.

It would be interesting to examine cases where (a) the value of an idea does

not accrue entirely to the person having it, i.e., values are not purely

private (part of value may be contractible); (b) an individual can achieve

value even if he does not have access to all the assets corresponding to his




8For an alternative interpretation of the Aghion—Tirole model, based on the

idea of an implicit contract, see Baker et al. (1999).

                                        37
task. Note that an implication of allowing for non—private values is that a

boss may sometimes defer to a subordinate if the subordinate has a better

idea than the boss; or may veto the idea of a subordinate if the idea creates

negative value for the boss.

      It is also desirable to relax the assumption that the probability p(A.)

of having an idea is exogenous.   In a more general model, p(A.) would depend

on individual i's effort decision, which in turn might depend on where i is

in the hierarchy. This would bring incentives into the picture and

would greatly enrich the analysis.




                                       38
6. Further Discussion

     We have established several results. First, we have shown that, given

the assumption that the probability of an idea is decreasing in the set of

assets being looked after, individuals with a broad remit, i.e., whose tasks

cover a large subset of assets, should appear higher in the chain of command

than those with a narrow remit. In other words, big thinkers or coordinators

should be senior to small thinkers or specialists. Second, we have shown

that 'criss—cross' hierarchies are never optimal; that is, if individual i

appears above individual j on one asset, j will not appear above i on another

asset. Third, if synergies are nested, the optimal hierarchy is a pyramid,

in the sense that each individual has at most one boss.

      There are several ways in which our work could be extended. In Section

4 we analyzed the two-asset case and considered what happens to the optimal

hierarchy as the number of agents increases. We found that if coordination

occurs at all it increases (Results 2 and 3). However, this is not the only

margin of interest. One could also ask what happens as the number of assets

increases along with the number of agents (perhaps assets can be purchased at

a fixed price; perhaps the ratio of assets to individuals remains constant).

Depending on the nature of synergies, expansion might then take the form of

further specialists being hired rather than increased coordination.

      In a similar fashion, one could fix the number of assets at more than

two and consider what happens as the number of agents increases. For

instance, suppose that there are four assets, a1, a2, a3, a4, and the

synergistic sets are {a1, a2), {a3, a4) and {a1, a2, a3, a4), in addition to
the singleton sets. We know from our two main results that the optimal

hierarchy consists of a combination of bosses (working on all four assets),

middle—level managers (working on a1, a2, and a3, a4, respectively) and

low-level employees (working on a1, a2, a3, a4, respectively). But the mix


                                     39
of these groups can be almost anything, depending on the parameters. For

example, it might be optimal to have very few or no middle—level managers; or

it might be optimal to have very few or no bosses. We suspect, however, that

Result 3 generalizes: that is, if the surplus maximization problem is convex

and the solution to the problem is interior (which means that low—level

employees, middle-level managers, and bosses are all hired), then after the

total number of agents has reached a critical level, all further people in

the organization will be bosses.

      The case just described helps to cast light on the subtleties of the

term decentralization. Consider an organization with several bosses and

several low—level employees, but no middle—level managers. This organization

might be said to be centralized, given that a decision is likely to be made

by a boss (a high—level coordinator). However, the organization might be

said to be decentralized given that, if decisions are not made by a boss,

they are made by specialists.

      On the other hand, consider an organization with no bosses, but many

middle—level managers and some low-level employees. This organization might

be said to be decentralized, given that a decision is never made by a

high—level coordinator (a boss). However, the organization might be said to

be centralized, given that decisions are usually made by middle—level

managers and rarely by specialists.9




9We should acknowledge that our concept of decentralization is far from

standard in the literature. It is not uncommon for economists to define

decentralization in terms of span of control. For example, an organization

where four workers report to one boss is said to be centralized, whereas an

organization where two pairs of workers report to two middle—level managers,

who in return report to a boss is said to be decentralized (see, e.g.,

                                       40
     We turn now to some more general remarks about the model. First, it

is useful to relate it to the literature on the theory of the firm. The

property rights theory (see Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990),

and Hart (1995)) can be thought of as a special case of the current model in

which an owner of an asset is always able to exercise control. In effect,

p(A) =    1   for all A (there is no uncertainty). There is still a nontrivial

allocation decision even under these conditions. For example, suppose m = n

= 2 (two assets and two individuals). Then the choice is between putting one

person in charge of a1 and a2 and getting v({a1, a2}); or putting one person

in charge of a1 and the other in charge of a2 and getting v({a1}) +

         Apart from uncertainty, another important difference between the
current model and the standard property rights model is that the current

model ignores effort (or investment) incentives. As a consequence, the

current model is probably biased toward finding that large firms are optimal.

For example, consider Result 3 of Section 4, which says that, given an

interior solution, the optimal hierarchy becomes more centralized as the

number of workers increases. This result is much less likely to hold once we

take into account the fact that lower—level employees' effort incentives will

be dulled by the presence of many senior coordinators.

         At the same time the property rights model, which is based on

entrepreneurial incentives, has a hard time explaining the existence of large

firms (except in the presence of very strong complementarities between

assets). Thus to have a theory that is biased in the direction of large




Wernerfelt (1992)). There does not seem to be a simple connection between

this notion of decentralization and ours. The reason is probably that the

one in the literature is based on information flowing up the system, whereas

ours is based on authority being imposed from above.

                                          41
firms may not be such a bad thing.

      The current model exhibits another, more subtle bias toward large

firms. Given our assumption that tasks are contractible, there is in a

formal sense no limit to the size of a firm. Take a situation in which there

are two assets and two individuals, one looking after each asset. We have

interpreted this to represent two independent firms. However, one could also

interpret the situation to represent one firm with a single owner, who has

committed himself to look after only one asset. Of course, if tasks are

noncontractible, this equivalence breaks down: in general, the only way for

someone to commit himself to look after one asset is for him to give up the

legal right to intervene in a second asset.   In future work it would be

desirable to drop the assumption that tasks are contractible. We conjecture

that this is unlikely to change our results about the nature of an optimal

hierarchy very substantially.

      We end by mentioning two potential applications of the model. The

first is to understand how economies differ during periods of national

emergency ("war) as opposed to periods of normality ("peace'). There is a

sizeable informal literature arguing that centralization becomes more

desirable when urgent decisions are required. However, it has

been hard to formalize this idea.1° Our model seems well placed to deal with

this issue since it delivers the prediction that centralization is optimal

when coordination benefits are sufficiently great.

      Second, ever since Chandler's work (Chandler (1962)), economists have

been interested in the choice between the U form and the M form.11 To




10For an interesting attempt in this direction, see Bolton and Farrell (1990).

11For a recent formalization, see Maskin, Xu and Qian (1999). For a



                                      42
understand this choice in our model, consider a stylized automobile company.

Suppose that there are four assets, a1, a2, a3, a4, where a1 represents an

asset for producing luxury cars, a2 represents an asset for producing family

cars, a3 represents an asset for marketing luxury cars and a4 represents an

asset for marketing family cars. One way to structure the automobile company

is to combine a1 and a2 in one division and a3 and a4 in another division.

This corresponds to the U form (organization by function). A second way to

structure the company is to combine a1 and a3 in one division and a2 and a4

in another. This corresponds to the M form (organization according to

self—contained units). It would be interesting to use the model to analyze

the trade—off between these two arrangements. Note that to do this it would

seem necessary to drop the assumption that synergies are nested (since

presumably there are synergies both between a1 and a2 and between a1 and a3).




discussion of how the U form and M form compare in their ability to solve

coordination problems, see Argyres (1995).




                                     43
                      APPENDIX (Proofs of Theorem and Result 1)



Proof of Theorem



      Consider an optimal organizational form, and two individuals i and j

with tasks t(A.) and t(A.) respectively. To ease notation, let                  =   p(A.)
and p. =   p(A.).    Suppose 0 <      p.     p. < 1.   Define



           X = expected surplus conditional on neither i nor j being active;

           X. = expected surplus conditional on i being active but j not;

           X. = expected surplus conditional on j being active but i not;

           X.. = expected surplus conditional on both i and j being active.



That is, the (unconditional) expected surplus equals



V =   (1 —   p.)(1    —
                          piX     ÷ p.(l —    piX.     ÷   (1 —
                                                                  P)PJXJ
                                                                           +           (A.l)


Since we are at an optimum, we know that no organizational form can generate

an expected surplus strictly in excess of V.               That is, V is maximal.

      Now consider a change to this organizational form. Give j the same

task as i (task t(A)) and move her immediately below i in seniority on the

lists pertaining to assets                 including those assets not in A. (j no longer

appears on the lists pertaining to those assets in A. that aren't in AJ.

The new expected surplus cannot exceed the maximum:



               (1 —       p.)2X   +   [1 - (1 -                   V.                  (A.2)
                                                  p)21X.


      The symmetric argument holds, reversing the roles of i and j. So




                                                  44
              (1 -   pi2X   +    [1    -   (1 -             V.                          (A.3)
                                                   p)2]X.

Inequalities (A.2) and (A.3) will be of use in proving both parts (a) and

(b) of the Theorem.



Part (a):     <




      Suppose part (a) of the Theorem is false; i.e., there exists some ak E

A.rA such that i appears above j on list Lk and yet



                                       <                                                 (A.4)




      Conditional on i being active, j cannot implement any idea of her own

because i is senior to j on one of her assets, a E A..              In effect, i has the
                                                k   j

seniority   (at least, on asset ak) to block j: when i is active, j cannot

generate any value. Worse, when j too is active, not only is she blocked (by

i) from generating value herself, she in turn may block someone else who is

active but junior to her from implementing their idea. In short, conditional

on i being active, j's presence in the organization cannot raise expected

surplus:



                                X. .         X..                                         (A.5)
                                 13           1




Taken together, (A.4) and (A.5) are incompatible with the maximality of V.

      To see why, first perform some manipulations on (A.l)-(A.3). Take a

convex combination of 1/(2 —
                                  p)       times (A.2) plus (1 -   p.)/(2   —
                                                                                p.)   times

(A.3). Then substitute for V from (A.l), to yield



                                                   45
            p.(l —   p.)(p.   -
                                  p.)
             J        1   1
                                        (x3 - X)    +   p.p.(X. - X.
                                                         13   1
                                                                       .)    0.      (A.6)
                    2—r'1                                          13




If (A.4) and (A.5) hold, then (A.6) implies



                                    X.        X.                                     (A.7)
                                        J



      Notice that (A.5) and (A.7) together say that j is making no

contribution to the organization, irrespective of whether i is active or

inactive.        Indeed, combining (A.l), (A.5) and (A.7), we obtain



                         V         (1 -     p.)X
                                             1
                                                 + p.X.;
                                                     11                               (A.8)




and the RHS of (A.8) is the expected surplus of the organization with j taken

out. Since V is maximal, (A.S) cannot hold as a strict inequality.

      But j can make a positive contribution. Suppose her seniority is

lowered so that, for each asset ak. E                   she is placed at the bottom of list

Lk,. Now she is so junior that she can no longer block anyone. Moreover,

despite her junior status, she sometimes contributes v(A.) (when she is

active and no one senior to her is active). The modified organization thus

yields an expected surplus strictly in excess of the RHS of (A.8), which

contradicts the maximality of V. Part (a) of the Theorem is proved.




                                                   46
Part (b): p.      p...




       As noted in the text, part (b) of the Theorem follows directly from

part (a) when p p. Therefore the only case we need consider is when p. =

pi.
       For p. =   p.,    suppose part (b) of the Theorem is false. That is,

suppose there exists some asset ak E A.rA. such that i appears above j on

list      and there exists another asset ak, E A.rA. such that j appears above

i on list Lk,..    Then i and j block each other.

       In particular, consider the event that i is active.              j cannot implement

any idea of her own (because i is senior on asset ak). Moreover, when j too

is active she blocks i from implementing his idea (because j is senior on

asset ak,). Hence, conditional on i being active, j's presence in the

organization strictly reduces expected surplus:



                                       X. .    <     X..                               (A.9)
                                         13           1




       The symmetric argument holds, reversing the roles of i and j.              So




                                        X. .   <     X..                               (A.iO)
                                         13           3




       Given p. =    p.   =   p, say, we can substitute (A.9) and (A.lO) into (A.1)
to obtain



                    V < (1 - p)2X        ÷     [1 - (1 -   p)2lmax{X.,X.}.             (A.1l)




       But (A.i1) contradicts one of (A.2) or (A.3). Part (b) of the Theorem

is proved.                                                                        Q.E.D.



                                                47
Proof of Result 1



      Suppose Result 1 is not true. Then there are two cases to consider.

Either (a) there exists an optimal organizational form for which r                               1 and

(without loss of generality) s                   n -   r   -   s + 1.   Or (b) there exists an

optimal organizational form for which r = 0 and (again, without loss of

generality) s         n — s + 1, where n is even.



Case (a): r       1




      Let 6 denote the probability that at least one of the most senior r —                                 1


coordinators has an idea (if r                    1 then define 9 to equal 0):



                             =       1   - (1 -         )rl
      Let Y1 denote the expected surplus generated by the bottom s -                              1


specialists on asset a1, conditional on none of the r +                        1   people senior to

them (r coordinators and 1 specialist) having an idea (if s —                          1   = 0 then

define         to equal zero):



                                 =       [1 - (1 -     p)S_llv                                         (A.12)




         Let     denote the expected surplus generated by all the n —                        r   — s

specialists on asset a2, conditional on none of the r coordinators senior to

them having an idea (if n —              r   -   s =   0 then define        to equal zero):



                                 =       [1 - (1 -      p1)1v1.                                        (A.13)




                                                        48
       Note that given s a n -           r        —   s + 1, it follows from (A.12) and (A.13)

that




                                              < v1.                                                   (A.14)




       The organizational form yields expected surplus



             V =              +    (1
                    9v2

                    ÷     (1 —     e)(l       —
                                                      p2)[p1v1
                                                                    +       (1 —
                                                                                   p1)Y1
                                                                                           +
                                                                                               Y2].   (A.15)




       Consider an alternative organizational form. Change the task of the

most junior coordinator so that he is a specialist on asset a2, and make him

the most senior of such specialists. Leave everyone else's tasks and

seniorities unchanged. This alternative organizational form yields expected

surplus



             V' =             +    2(1    —
                    By2

                          +       (1 —   e)(l          —
                                                           p1)[Y1
                                                                        +
                                                                            Y2].                      (A.16)




       Consider a second alternative. Starting from the original

organizational form, change the task of the most senior specialist on asset

a1 so that she is a coordinator, and make her the most junior coordinator.

Leave everyone else's tasks and seniorities unchanged. This second

alternative organizational form yields expected surplus




                                                            49
            V" =
                    Ov        +     (1 -      e)[1 - (1       -
                                                                  p2)21v2

                                         +     (1 -    O)(1   -
                                                                  p2)2[Y1    ÷ Y21.        (A.17)




      Given that the original organizational form is optimal, V'                        V and V"

V. From (A.15), (A.16) and (A.17), these inequalities can be simplified and

then combined to eliminate v2, yielding




                     p2v1 +                  (1 —                                           CA.18)
                                                     p2)Y1         Y2.



      But (A.18) contradicts (A.14).



Case (b): r = 0 and n even



      When r = 0, the organizational form yields expected surplus



             V =    [1    -       (1 -         )S}       + [1 - (1       -
                                                                             p1)5]v1.

      Now move one of the specialists from asset a1 to asset a2. The new

expected surplus equals



             V1 =    [1       -   (1 -       p)S_l]v          +    [1 - (1 -




Given that n is even and s               n - S + 1, V' is greater than V, which

contradicts the optimality of the original organizational form.                          Q.E.D.




                                                        50
                                   REFERENCES



Aghion, P., and J. Tirole, Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,

      Journal of Political Economy, 105 (1997), 1—29.

Argyres, N. ,   Technology Strategy, Governance Structure and Interdivisional
      Coordination, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 28

       (1995), 337—58.

Baker, G., R. Gibbons, and K. J. Murphy, "Informal Authority in

      Organizations," The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 15

       (1999), 56—73.

Bolton,P., and M. Dewatripont, 'The Firm as a Communication Network,"

      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (1994), 809—39.

Bolton, P., and J. Farrell, Decentralization, Duplication, and Delay,"

      Journal of Political Economy, 98 (1990), 803-26.

Calvo, G. A., and S. Wellisz, 'Hierarchy, Ability, and Income Distribution,

      Journal of Political Economy, 87 (1979), 991—1010.

Chandler, A. D., Jr., Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the

      American Industrial Enterprise (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962).

Grossman, S., and 0. Hart, "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of

      Vertical and Lateral Integration," Journal of Political Economy,

      94 (1986), 691—719.

Hart, 0., and J. Moore, "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm," Journal

      of Political Economy, 98 (1990), 1119—58.

Hart, 0., Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure (Oxford: Oxford

      University Press, 1995).

Keren, M., and D. Levhari, "The Optimum Span of Control in a Pure Hierarchy,"

      Management Science, 25 (1979), 1162—72.




                                       51
Lando, H., Communication Costs, Individual and Collective Ownership,' mimeo,

      Copenhagen Business School, January 1998.

Maskin, E., Y. Qian, and C. Xu, "Incentives, Information and Organizational

      Form," mimeo, Harvard University, Department of Economics, February

      1999.

Radner, IL, "Hierarchy: The Economics of Managing," Journal of Economic

      Literature, 30 (1992), 1382—1415.

Rosen, S., "Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings," Bell

      Journal of Economics, 13 (1982), 311-23.

Segal, I., "Communication Complexity and Coordination by Authority," mimeo,

      Department of Economics, University of California at Berkeley, 1998.

Wernerfelt, B., "The Structure and Scope of Firms and Economies of Scale in

      Contracting," mimeo, MIT Sloan School of Management, November 1992.

Williamson, 0. E., "Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size," Journal of

      Political Economy, 75 (1967), 123—38.




                                      52
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                         Title

7336            Richard Portes                     The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows          9/99
                Hélène Rey

7337            Kathryn M. Dominguez               The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention 9/99

7338            Jeffrey A. Frankel                 No Single Currency Regime is Right for all Countries   9/99
                                                   or at All Times

7339             Axel Borsch-Supan                 Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain 9/99
                                                   Disability Option

7340             Hylke Vandenbussche               Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy      9/99
                 Jozef Konings
                 Linda Springael

7341             Robert F. Engle                   CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile          9/99
                 Simone Manganelli                 Regression

7342             David C. King                     Congressional Vote Options                             9/99
                 Richard J. Zeckhauser

7343             Christina Paxson                  Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment                  9/99
                 Jane Waldiogel

7344             Michael Hout                      Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race            9/99
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7345             Jean 0. Lanjouw                   The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with         9/99
                 Mark Scharikerman                 Multiple Indicators

7346             Geert Bekaert                     Stock and Bond Pricing in an Affine Economy             9/99
                 Steven R. Grenadier

7347             Thomas N. Hubbard                 How Wide Is the Scope of Hold—Up-Based Theories?        9/99
                                                   Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking
7348             Jonathan Gruber                   The Wealth of the Unemployed: Adequacy and              9/99
                                                   Implications for Unemployment Insurance

7349             Edward P. Lazear                  Educational Production                                  9/99


7350             Tamim Bayourni                    The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in           9/99
                                                   Japanese Growth in the 1990s



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                         Title                                                Date

7351            Taizo Motonishi                    Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the        9/99
                Hiroshi Yoshikawa                  1990's: Financial or Real?

7352            Daron Acemoglu                     Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance             9/99
                Robert Shiiner

7353            Jeff Grogger                       Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits                       9/99
                Charles Michalopoulos

7354            Roberto Rigobon                    On the Measurement of the International Propagation        9/99
                                                   of Shocks

7355             Ricardo J. Caballero              The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-               9/99
                 Mohamad L. Hammour                Liquidationist View

7356             Alec Ian Gershberg                Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special     9/99
                 Michael Grossman                  Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                 Fred Goldman                      exempt Hospital Bonds

7357             Robert E. Lipsey                  Foreign Production by U.S. Finns and Parent Firm           9/99
                                                   Employment

7358             Vernon Henderson                  Marshall's Economies                                       9/99

7359             lain Cockburn                     The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:            9/99
                 Rebecca Henderson                 Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                 Scott Stern

7360             Douglas Holtz-Eakin               Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business           9/99
                 John W. Phillips
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7361             Bong-Chan Kho                     Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                       9/99
                 René M. Stulz

7362             Jagadeesh Gokhale                 Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans:          9/99
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff             How Bad Can It Get?

7363             Bruce D. Meyer                    Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the             9/99
                 Dan T. Rosenbaum                  Labor Supply of Single Mothers

7364             Dani Rodrik                        Short-Term Capital Flows                                  9/99
                 Andrés Velasco



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                           Title                                               Pi
7365            Michael D. Bordo                    The Future of EMU: What Does the History of           9/99
                Lars Jonung                         Monetary Unions Tell Us?

7366            Emmanuel Saez                       Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                    9/99

7367            Emmanuel Saez                       The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel 9/99
                                                    Study of 'Bracket Creep'

7368            Alan L. Gustman                     What People Don't Know About Their Pensions           9/99
                Thomas L. Steinmeier                and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                    From The Health and Retirement Study

7369            Wolfgang Keller                     Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct     9/99
                Arik Levinson                       Investment Inflows to U.S. States

7370            Michael Baker                       Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian       9/99
                Gary Solon                          Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                    Tax Records

7371            Michael Baker                       Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                Nicole M. Fortin                    1987-1988

7372            B. Douglas Bernheim                 The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the    10/99
                Lorenzo Forni                       Health and Retirement Survey
                Jagadeesh Gokhale
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373            Paul A. David                       Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
                Broiiwyn H. Hall                    R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                Andrew A. Toole

7374            Peter Cappelli                     Do High Performance" Work Practices Improve           10/99
                David Neumark                      Established-Level Outcomes?

7375            Charles I. Jones                   Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?              10/99
                                                   Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

7376            Harrison Hong                      Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage            10/99
                Jeremy C. Stein                    and Market Crashes

7377            George Chacko                      Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with         10/99
                Luis M. Viceira                    Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets




                     You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number           Author(s)                           Title

7378             Bruce A. Blonigen                   Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of         10/99
                 Stephen E. Haynes                   Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

7379             Victor R. Fuchs                     The Future of Health Economics                            10/99

7380             Michael D. Hurd                     Anticipated and Actual Bequests                           10/99
                 James P. Smith

7381             Olivia S. Mitchell                  New Trends in Pension Benefit and                         10/99
                                                     Retirement Provisions

7382             Michael B. Devereux                 Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Welfare                10/99
                 Charles Engel                       Effects of the Euro
                 Cedric Tille

7383             Stephen L. Mehay                    The Effectiveness of Workplace Drug Prevention            10/99
                 Rosalie Liccardo Pacula             Policies: Does 'Zero Tolerance' Work?

7384             Michael Klein                       Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and       10/99
                 Giovanni Olivei                     Economic Growth

7385             Jean Abraham                        Enter at Your Own Risk: HMO Participation and             10/99
                 Ashish Arora                        Enrollment in the Medicare Risk Market
                 Martin Gaynor
                 Douglas Wholey

7386             Gerardo della Paolera               Internal Versus External Convertibility and Developing- 10/99
                 Alan M. Taylor                      Country Financial Crises: Lessons from the Argentine
                                                     Bank Bailout of the 1930's

7387             Alberto Alesina                     Redistribution Through Public Employment: The Case 10/99
                 Stephen Danninger                   of Italy
                 Massimo V. Rostagno

7388             Oliver Hart                         On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination Versus         10/99
                 John Moore                          Specialization

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02 138-5398. Pre-payinent is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders(4nber.org).


                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                               www.nber.org
                             Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
