                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNCERTAINTY AND THE DISAPPEARANCE
                              OF INTERNATIONAL CREDIT


                                            Joshua Aizenman
                                             Nancy Marion


                                          Working Paper 7389
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7389


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




This paper was presented at the conference on Financial Crises in Emerging Markets sponsored by the Center
for Pacific Basin Monetary and Economic Studies of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September
23-24, 1999. We wish to thank Mark Spiegel, our discussant, and other participants at the conferencefor their
comments. We wish to thank Changyong Rhee and officials at the Ministry of Finance and Economy of Korea
for help in obtaining data. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

)   1999 by Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Uncertainty and the Disappearance
of International Credit
Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion
NBER Working Paper No. 7389
October 1999
JEL No. F2, F3


                                            ABSTRACT


       We show that increased uncertainty about the size of an emerging market's external debt has
a nonlinear and potentially large adverse effect on the supply of international credit offered to them.
We also show that if international creditors are first-order risk averse, attaching greater weight to
utility derived from bad outcomes than from good ones, a moderate increase in uncertainty about debt
overhang—or about other relevant factors affecting repayment prospects-- can cause the supply of
credit to dry up completely. We therefore offer one possible explanation for why emerging markets
may find themselves suddenly cut off from international capital markets.



Joshua Aizenman                                                    Nancy P. Marion
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                                  Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755                                                  Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                                           nancy. p. marion@dartmouth.edu
joshua.aizenmandartmouth. edu
1. Introduction

       In this paper, we examine how increased uncertainty about an emerging market's debt

overhang might affect the willingness of foreign investors to supply new international credit. We

show that increased uncertainty about the debt overhang has a nonlinear and potentially large

adverse effect on the supply of international credit. As a result, it can contribute to the liquidity

shortage often experienced by emerging markets during a crisis. We also show that if international

creditors have preferences characterized by first-order risk aversion, a moderate increase in

uncertainty about debt overhang—or about other relevant factors affecting repayment prospects-

- can cause the supply of credit to dry up completely. We therefore offer one possible

explanation for why emerging markets may find themselves suddenly cut off from international

capital markets.

       We begin by describing events that contributed to increased uncertainty about the debt

overhang in two of the Asian economies hit hard by the financial crisis in 1997—Thailand and

South Korea. We then compare reported external debt levels before the crisis with higher figures

uncovered once the crisis began. We suggest that external debt levels for these two countries

turned out to be much higher than what was reasonably foreseen. Surprised by the size of the

upward adjustments, investors likely attached greater uncertainty to the size of the debt as well.

        Previous investigations of debt overhang have generally focused on the level of

outstanding debt and its impact on the economy. We use a modified model of sovereign risk to

analyze the impact of greater uncertainty about the debt level. We show that more uncertainty

reduces the supply of international credit when there is a chance of default. More uncertainty

also magnifies the effect of news about the level of outstanding debt. We also observe that if we

abandon the capital asset pricing model as a way of explaining portfolio choice and instead rely



                                                   1
on a specification where agents attach more weight to utility from "bad' outcomes than from

"good" outcomes, investors will require a substantial risk premium to diversify internationally.

Further, a moderate increase in the perceived risk of lending can induce investors to shift out of

emerging-market assets completely.

       The paper is organizes as follows. Section 2 illustrates the build-up of external debt levels

in Thailand and South Korea and makes a case for increased uncertainty about the debt. Section 3

uses a model to analyze the effects of increased uncertainty about debt overhang on the supply

of international credit offered emerging markets. Section 4 examines how greater uncertainty may

lead risk-averse investors to shift out of emerging-market assets entirely, even if those assets

offer a risk premium. Section 5 concludes.



2. External debt levels in Thailand and South Korea

       Figure 1 shows the growth of Thailand's external debt over the 1990s. In 1990, the Bank

of Thailand reported an external debt of US$ 25.06 billion. By the end of 1995, this figure had

grown 172% to $68.13 billion. At the end of 1996, this figure was $79.85 billion, 17% higher

than the previous year. Once the financial crisis for Thailand began on July 2, 1997, the Bank of

Thailand reported revised debt figures. Total external debt for 1995 turned out to be $82.57

billion, a 21% upward adjustment over the previously-reported 1995 value, while the figure for

1996 was revised up by 26%, to $90.54 billion. Even before the crisis hit, however, there were

rumors and press reports about higher debt figures. On May 17, 1997, for example, The

Economist reported that Thailand's external debt was probably closer to $90 billion, with

perhaps $70 billion owed by the private sector.




                                                  2
        Figure 2 shows the growth in South Korea's external debt over the same period. The

Korean government's original measure of external liabilities followed the World Bank definition

and did not include the off-shore borrowing of domestic financial institutions or the liabilities of

foreign branches and subsidiaries of domestic financial institutions. The original measure is

labeled in Figure 2 as the "old" definition. These are data reported by Korea's Ministry of

Finance and Economy before the crisis engulfed the country (before October 25, 1997). Since

external liabilities from the excluded entities turned out to be considerable, the Korean

government and the IMF agreed to include these liabilities in a new definition of external debt.'

Debt figures using the new definition now go back to 1995 and are also shown in Figure 2.

        The striking observation about Figure 2 is that Korea's external debt, like Thailand's,

turned out to be much higher than what was originally reported. An examination of the 1996

figures illustrates the point. The Financial Times reported on May 7, 1997, just five months

before Korea succumbed to the crisis, that the South Korean government had put its 1996 gross

external debt (old definition) at $104.5 billion. The government later revised the figure upward to

$113.6 billion (still using the old definition). The figure jumped to $164.34 billion under the new

definition, about a 60% increase over what was initially reported by the Financial Times in May.

        The discrepancy between the originally-reported and revised September, 1997, estimate

was equally dramatic. In December, 1997, investors learned that Korea's total external debt for

September was about $170 billion when measured by the new definition. More alarming was the

revelation that about 60% of it was short-term in nature. The IMF later stated that "In



'The liabilities of foreign branches and subsidiaries of domestic enterprises are not included in
either definition.




                                                  3
December, ... investors and lenders panicked when they learned that the country's short-term

external debt was approximately $104 billion---rather than the $66 billion originally reported . .

(Adams, et al., 1998, p. 155).2 Describing the financial crisis that hit Korea, the OECD reported

that "the lack of timely, reliable information on the state of (Korea's)    foreign debt added to

uncertainty" during this period. (OECD, 1998, p. 31). When Standard and Poor's lowered

Korea's sovereign credit rating on December 11, one reason cited for its actions was the lack of

transparency about external debt.

         The upward adjustments in external debt figures increased investor pessimism and

contributed to the collapse of the international credit market for Thailand, Korea and other

emerging markets. The large reversal of international capital flows in the fourth quarter of 1997

has been widely documented (e.g. Adams, 1998). The transformation in institutional structures

has also been noted:


                 "Before the crisis, the typical foreign exchange market was an
         interbank market with banks willing to take on intraday foreign exchange
         exposures in order to provide market liquidity and to help match order
         flows throughout the day. Even when required by regulation to limit
         overnight foreign exchange exposure, these intraday exposures could be
         quite large. This type of interbank market totally collapsed during the
         crisis as banks refused to take intraday open positions (because of the fear
         that counterparties would not deliver.)
                 In domestic money markets          as concerns about the solvency of
         domestic banks increased, many foreign banks would make loans in the
         domestic currency in the local interbank market only to other foreign
         banks. Moreover, some of the stronger domestic banks would only deal
         with the local foreign banks.




2
    Park and Rhee (1998) argue that the Korean government made the market more speculative by

not confirming or officially announcing these figures.




                                                  4
                The structure of equity markets also was transformed when broker
        dealers that acted as market makers could no longer serve that function
        because of their inability to obtain bank credit."
                                                     (Mathieson, forthcoming.)




        We obtain some suggestive evidence on investor beliefs about external debt levels in

Thailand by constructing confidence bands around a forecast of debt. To obtain the forecast, we

assume that investors believed external debt followed an auto-regressive process. We therefore

regress the log of external debt on a constant and its one-period lagged value, using debt levels
reported before the financial crisis occurred.
        Using quarterly data for the period 90:4 through 95:3, the regression results for Thailand

are:


                                    D=     0.2969 + 0.9767 Dt-I
                                                                                             (1)
                                           (0.2271) (0.0215)


where D is the logarithm of(US$ million) total external debt and standard errors of the estimated
coefficients are reported in parentheses. The adjusted R2 is 0.99, the standard error of the
regression is 0.0262 and Durbin's h-statistic of 0.12 suggests that serial correlation is not a

problem.3
       Figure 3 illustrates the data on Thailand's external debt reported prior to the crisis as well

as the revised figures from 96:3 onwards.4 In addition, the figure shows the predicted values of


 For small samples, one cannot reject the hypothesis that log external debt in Thailand follows a
random walk. Both the auto-regressive process and the random walk formulation have similar
implications for our topic of interest.


       have not been able to obtain revised quarterly data for 95:1-96:2, although we have revised
annual estimates.


                                                  5
Thai external debt for the estimation period based on the auto-regressive process and the 95%

confidence band surrounding that prediction. For the period 95:4 and after, we assume that

investors continue to use (1) to predict quarterly debt. However, the confidence bands around the

future predictions widen over time to reflect the growing uncertainty about the true value of

Thailand's debt. Note that by the second half of 1996, the revised external debt figure is

considerably above the upper confidence band.

       We repeat the exercise using the initially reported data over 90:4 — 96:4 to estimate (1).

As we see in Figure 3A, the revised debt figure is once again above the upper confidence band

from at least 1996:3 onwards. Thus Thailand's external debt turned out to be much higher than

any reasonable forecast.

       For Korea, we do not have quarterly debt data using the old definition, and a forecasting

equation that relies on annual data over the 1990-1995 period of financial liberalization gives an

unreliable forecast with very wide confidence bands. So we consider instead the inference

problem of investors who try to evaluate the magnitude of the surprise generated by the revision

of the reported debt data. We suggest that the greater the debt surprise relative to the standard

deviation of the debt process, the greater is the reevaluation of the uncertainty about the size of

the total debt. Using the conventional yardstick, if the revision in the reported data is greater

than two standard deviations of the debt process, we conclude that the size of the revision is

more than what could reasonably have been expected if one maintained the old assumption about

the volatility of the underlying debt process. These circumstances would lead investors to

increase their assessment of the uncertainty regarding the debt.

        For example, consider the case where investors learn in late 1997 that the 1996 external

debt is higher than previously reported. In order to evaluate the surprise, the investors compare



                                                  6
the percentage size of the revision of the 1996 debt figure to the standard deviation of the debt

process. To obtain the latter, investors use a first-order auto-regressive process (AR-i) to

describe the path of the log of the debt in the years 1989-1995 and calculate the standard

deviation of the residuals. (The investor takes 1989 as the starting point of the time series of the

debt process because a regime switch towards more financial liberalization occurred in the early

1 990s.) Investors repeat the procedure for the years 1989-1996 to evaluate the magnitude of the

surprise about the revised debt figure for 1997:3.

        Figure 4 illustrates the results of this exercise for Korea's total debt and short-term debt.

The magnitude of the surprise about the upward revisions in debt figures is substantial. The

upward revision in the 1996 total external debt figure exceeds four standard deviations and the

revision in the 1997:3 figure is in excess of three standard deviations. The upward revisions in the

1996 and 1997:3 estimates for short-term debt are each about three standard deviations. All of

the upward revisions were thus much greater than what could have been reasonably predicted.5

        We now develop a model that can show how increased uncertainty about the size of an

emerging market's external debt can affect the willingness of foreign investors to supply credit.




 When the same exercise is repeated for Thailand, the upward revisions in the quarterly
estimates for 96:3-97:1 are each on the order of 5.5 to 6.5 standard deviations. While we focus
on uncertainty about external debt, there was also enormous uncertainty during this period about
other factors affecting repayment prospects of the Asian economies, such as the size of their
international reserve holdings needed for possible bail-outs, the extent of currency depreciation
that raised real debt burdens, and the fall in property values that worsened balance sheets. When
we construct a forecast of net liabilities, measured as the difference between external debt and
international reserves, the true value of net liabilities exceeded reasonable predictions by an even
greater degree than what is reported here.


                                                  7
3. The Model
       Consider a global economy with high-income countries and emerging-market economies

and a two-period planning horizon. Second period output in the emerging markets is:


                                            Y;Y*(1)                                          (2)


Its value is uncertain because emerging markets are subject to a second-period productivity

shock £ whose probability density function f(E) lies over the range —E0 £ e0 , with

£ 0.
       Emerging markets may borrow internationally. However, their ability to borrow is

constrained by two factors --- the limited enforceability of international contracts and the

uncertainty about the size of their debt overhang. The uncertainty about debt overhang can be

characterized in a simple way. Suppose the outstanding debt due to be repaid next period can

be either high or low with equal probability:6



                                   D(1 + A) with probability 0.5

                             D2=                                                             (3)

                                    D(1 —   ) with    probability 0.5


       High-income countries must decide on how much new lending they are willing to

provide emerging markets. Let B represent the aggregate amount of new short-term loans

offered emerging markets in period one at a contractual interest rate of r. In period two,


6The specification in (3) is the simplest way to model uncertainty about debt overhang. The key
results of the model hold for other distributions of ?, such as the uniform or truncated normal.




                                                 8
emerging markets must repay these loans plus the debt overhang. Emerging markets may end

up defaulting, however, if their period two output turns out to be too low or their repayments

too high.

       Let S2 denote the total debt repayment to foreign creditors in period two. In the event

of a default, suppose creditors can penalize the borrowing countries by reducing their net

output by an amount Y. The parameter            reflects the bargaining power of foreign lenders,

where up to a fraction     of output can be "confiscated" by lenders through retaliatory trade

measures or other actions.7 Consequently, the effective ceiling on net resource transfers to

creditors is the lesser of either the contractual repayments or the confiscated output:




                                    S2=min[(l+r)B+D2;                                        (4)


       The size of the productivity shock that makes emerging markets indifferent between

repaying their loans or defaulting and facing the output penalty is       where:



                                                         . ..
            = max[ (1+r)B+D(1+)
        *                                         .

                          *     — 1;—I            if the initial debt is high


                                                                                             (5)

                                                             ..
            = max[ (1+r)B+D(1—A.)
        *                                         .      .
                           *      — 1;—]          if the initial debt is low




7The term      is influenced by a host of factors that relate to the integration of markets. See
Bulow and Rogoff (1989) for details.




                                                   9
Because the size of the debt overhang is uncertain, the value of £ is contingent on the realized

debt overhang.

       The intertemporal pattern of net lending and consumption is determined by price-taking

agents who maximize their discounted expected utility. Agents in the high-income countries are

risk neutral, so their preferences over a two-period planning horizon are characterized by:


                                               VC1+                                        (6)
                                                       1+p

where p is the rate of time preference and coincides with the risk-free interest rate.

           Agents in the emerging-market economies have preferences represented by:



                                 *         *    u( 2)
                               V     u(C1 ) +            u'>; u'L 0                        (7)
                                                1+p

We assume that      > p because the real interest rate in emerging markets is substantially

above the rate in the high-income group.

        The international credit market is characterized by competition among creditor banks.

A default by emerging markets requires creditor banks to spend real resources u in order to

verify the productivity shock and the size of the debt overhang and to enforce the transfer of

resources from emerging markets according to (4)8

        The risk neutrality of lenders implies that they offer an elastic supply of new credit at


8To simplify, we lump together monitoring and enforcement costs and we ignore the possibility
of randomized monitoring. Boyd and Smith (1994) show that random monitoring makes the
financial contract more complex without altering first-order welfare effects. See Townsend (1979)




                                                  10
an expected yield equal to their rate of time preference. In the event of default, confiscated

output first goes to cover repayment of the old debt, which is considered senior. To simplify

exposition, we focus on the case where confiscated output can fully cover the required

repayment of old debt. Thus r, the interest rate on new credit to emerging markets, is

determined by an arbitrage condition that equates the expected yield on new loans to emerging

markets to the risk-free return:



       (8)




                 O.5[{(1   + r)B + (l +                +         + e)   - II}f(E)de - D(1 + )] +
O=(1+p)B—
                 O.5[{(1 + r)B + D(1       )}5 f(E)dE + j{XY*(1 + e)               — D(1 —
                                       —                                —




The second term on the right-hand side of(8) evaluates the expected repayment on new loans

when there is an equal chance that the debt overhang will turn out to be high or low. For a

given realization of debt overhang, the expected repayment is the sum of three components: (i)

the return on new loans and repayment of the debt overhang in the absence of default; (ii) the

confiscated output in the case of default, less enforcement costs; (iii) minus the repayment of

the debt overhang whether or not there is a default.

        Using (5), we can rewrite (8) as:


 (r - p)B =0.55 {%Y*(E - s) + }f(E)dE] + 0.5 5         {y*( - e) + }f(e)dE]           (9)



for a model where a debt contract with state verification costs is optimal. See Bernanke and



                                                  11
Note that monitoring and enforcement costs are passed on to borrowers by way of higher

borrowing rates.

        We now examine how uncertainty about debt overhang affects the supply of new loans

that foreign creditors are willing to offer.9 Equation (8) defines the supply of international

credit facing emerging markets (along with the definitions of    ;E).   We denote the right-hand

side of(8) by H. Applying the implicit function theorem to (8), the slope of the supply curve

is




                                                                                           (10)



where



                                                           E()


                -H = 0.5B[$f(E)dE_ -f(E)]+[Jf(E)de---—f(e)]
                                                            -
                                                                                           (11)
                                         E()         E()


                H. = 1+p_0.5(1+r)[5f(e)de+f(e)de_-{f(E)+f(E)}1




Gertler (1989) for a related analysis.
 We ignore the possibility of a bailout in case of default. See Aizenman and Marion (1999b) for
a model where emerging-market governments are willing to bail out international creditors. In that
case, uncertainty about the size of international reserves held by emerging markets for a possible
bailout can also affect the supply of new loans.




                                                   12
We assume that the emerging-market economies operate along the upward-sloping portion of

the supply of international credit.'° Such would be the case if —He' > 0 and HB;' > 0.1!




       Proposition 1: Greater uncertainty about debt overhang in emerging markets reduces

       the supply of international credit. Moreover, the supply of credit shifts in a non-

       linear manner.



       Applying (8), we find that for a given amount of new credit, B, increased uncertainty

about the debt overhang shifts the supply of credit curve upwards by the amount:




'°For a sufficiently low level of emerging-market debt,    = —E0. In these circumstances, the

critical condition for dB7dr> 0 reduces to /Jf(_ )/y* <1, a condition that is satisfied for a
low enough but positive enforcement cost, jt. If pf(—E0 )/Y > 1, the supply of credit is
backward bending at interest rates marginally above the risk-free rate. In these circumstances it
would be in the interest of emerging markets to prohibit borrowing. Consequently, we assume
pf(e )/y* <1, so that the supply-of-credit curve is upward sloping at relatively low interest
rates. In general, the supply curve may contain a backward-bending section at high interest rates
and external debt levels. In these circumstances, it would be in the interest of the borrowers to
adopt policies that prevent them from reaching the backward-bending section of the supply curve
since such a point entails lower welfare than the point where external borrowing is maximized.
See Aizenman (1989) for further discussion.


"The supply of international credit (defined implicitly by (8)) and the demand for international
credit jointly determine the equilibrium interest rate and level of credit. We focus our attention on
the supply side.



                                                 13
                                                           - {f(E) - f()}1
                          dr                    £           X
                                                                                          (12)
                      dA IB
                                          f(e)de    - f(e)] + iJ f(s)de - -f(E
                                  B {[5                                          )J}


An important implication of ( 2) is that greater uncertainty about the debt overhang (a larger

A) has a non-linear effect on the supply of international credit. Greater uncertainty does not

affect the supply of credit when the probability of default is zero.12 If the default probability

is positive, however, greater uncertainty about the debt overhang reduces the supply of credit.



          Proposition 2: . The greater the uncertainty about debt overhang, the more a given

          increase in uncertainty reduces the supply of credit. The greater the expected debt

          overhang, the more a given increase in uncertainty about debt overhang reduces the

          supply of credit.



                    We can rewrite (12) as:


                      dr 2)2                £                                             (13)
                     d2LH *        Y*B*
                          B
                                          [5 f(e)de —--f(e)] + [5 f(E)de
                                                   —                     —




12
     In this case     =        = —se, and             0.
                                             dI

                                                           14
where          are defined by the 'mid points' in the segment [ei,   I,   with


         J f(e)d
f(E) =     *     *;     f () =     E÷—E
                                                 We maintain the assumption that the monitoring


and enforcement cost (ji) is relatively small, so that f() —   f     ()p / XY* > 0.

         Equation (13) reveals that when there is a chance of default, increased uncertainty

about the debt overhang reduces the supply of credit in proportion to the product of the

expected debt overhang (D) and the initial degree of uncertainty (X). Consequently, the

greater the expected debt overhang or the initial degree of uncertainty, the greater is the impact

additional uncertainty has on the supply of credit.13

         One can also verify that bad news about the expected level of outstanding debt

(d15> 0 ) reduces the supply of new credit (dr / dD .> 0). Figures 1-4 suggest that the

financial crisis increased both the expected level of outstanding debt and the uncertainty about

its actual size. Our model shows that uncertainty magnifies the reduction in credit induced by

the level effect, and does so in a non-linear way.




4.       The disappearance of markets

         At the onset of the Asian financial crisis, the international credit market for these

emerging markets collapsed. Countries that presumed they could access the international credit

market learned the hard way that when credit is desperately needed, the market may go dry.


13
     We can obtain the same results by modeling investment in period one that provides a random
return in period two, since a low return is analogous to low productivity.


                                                     15
This phenomenon can be explained in several ways. 14 In terms of our model, if the crisis

increases uncertainty about the debt overhang—or about other relevant factors affecting

repayment-- the shift in the supply of funds may be abrupt enough to dry up the market.

Such will be the case, for example, if the expected debt overhang or the uncertainty about its

level is larger than the one anticipated by the a priori distribution, so that the revised supply

of funds is backward bending at B = 0.

          There is an alternative and more general explanation, however. It is well known that

agents exhibit home bias in their asset holdings. 15 The unwillingness to supply new credit to

emerging markets during a crisis may be viewed as a strengthening of the home-bias phenomenon.

If one uses the capital asset-pricing model (CAPM) as the benchmark for explaining portfolio

choice, the complete shift to home assets during a crisis is a puzzle since the CAPM predicts

continued diversification. However, if portfolio choice is derived from a generalized expected

utility framework with first-order risk aversion, the risk premium needed to maintain


14
     Radelet and Sachs (1998) and Chang and Velasco (1998a, 1998b) attribute the phenomenon to
an investor panic, but without addressing the origin of the panic. Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(1998) suggest it may be due to the real or perceived inadequacy of international collateral
stemming from microeconomic contractual problems. Calvo (1999) hypothesizes that poorly
informed investors may misread a shift out of emerging-market assets by liquidity-constrained
informed traders as signaling low returns and this confusion may lead to a market collapse.

' For example, French and Poterba (1991) and Tesar and Werner (1992) note that 94% of US
investor wealth is held in domestic equity, much more than the optimal share predicted by the
conventional capital asset-pricing model (CAPM). See Lewis (1995) and Obstfeld and Rogoff
(1996) for comprehensive overviews of the home-bias puzzle and existing interpretations within
the context of the CAPM.




                                                  16
international diversification is much larger. A small increase in uncertainty can eliminate the

desire to diversify internationally, making investors unwilling to supply new international credits

or roll over existing credits, Consequently, the disappearance of the market during a crisis may be

the rule, rather than the exception. If this is the case, the potential benefits of liquidity and the

proper maturity structure on debt are much larger than those predicted using the conventional

CAPM framework.

        We can formalize the argument by using a generalized expected utility (GEU) framework

to describe preferences. We focus on a simple version of GEU that is a one-parameter extension

of the standard (Savage ,1954) neoclassical expected utility model. In this version, agents attach

greater weight to utility derived from "bad" outcomes than from "good" outcomes.16 A

consequence of this weighting pattern is that the agents exhibits downside risk aversion and

require a substantial risk premium to diversify internationally)7

        Preferences are summarized by [u(x), y], where u is a conventional utility function

describing the utility of consuming x, [u'>O, u"< 01, and 1 y 0 is a parameter that measures

the weighting of a high-ranked outcome relative to a low-ranked one. This weighting is obtained

by replacing the probability weight p1 attached to utility u(x) in the standard expected utility

framework with a modified weight, defined by a proper transformation of p)'.




  The asymmetric evaluation of gains and losses may also be the result of the incentives facing
portfolio managers who understand that their loss from underperforming the market is more
costly than their gain from outperforming it.
'7Similar results may be produced by other versions of generalized expected utility. See Segal and
Spivak (1990) and Epstein (1992).



                                                   17
          Suppose that with probability a the agent receives income            and with probability (1 -a)

income         where       >
                               x2. The generalized expected utility V(y) is defined by' 8:




                                 V(y)=[1-(1-a)7]u(x1)+(l-a)'u(x2)                               (14)


                                   1—a
Alternatively, V(y) = a[1 —              w1u(x ) + (1— a)[1 + w]u(x   ),   where   w = (1 — a)y—l — 1
                                    a
          For y = 1, V is identical to the conventional expected utility. In this case, good and bad

states of nature are treated symmetrically when u(x) is weighted by the probability of its

occurrence. For values of y less than one, the agent attaches an extra weight of (1 —a)w to the

"bad" outcome, and attaches a lesser weight of (1 — a)w to the "good" outcome.

          We focus now on a simple example of allocating initial wealth among 3 assets - a risk-free

asset and risky domestic and foreign assets. The safe asset offers a real yield of ,. The risky

domestic and foreign assets offer random yields of r; r , respectively. The realized yield for

each risky asset may be high or low, depending on the state of nature. We denote the

corresponding states of nature by h and I for the home asset and by h* and 1* for the foreign one.

The realized returns are given by


     +e+a instateof nature h                           r0+e*tcr* instateof nature h*
r=                                              ;r*=
          +   e—   a in state of nature     1            + e * —a * in state of nature     1*




18 The   formulation in (14) is based on Yaari (1987).


                                                       18
where e, e * denote the expected excess yields attached to the risky domestic and foreign assets,

respectively, relative to the yield of the safe asset, and , denote the standard deviations of the

                                     (h,h*)      ,
yields. The probability of state
                                      (1,1*) = p      , with p + q = 0.5.
                                          *
                                      (l,h) q
                                      (h,l*)   q

The correlation between the returns of the two risky assets is p =4p —1.

       The agent allocates fractions x and x of his initial wealth to the risky domestic and foreign

asset, respectively. In financial autarky, x 0. International diversification is beneficial if, in the


autarky equilibrium,           —
                              x—x
                                    > 0, where denotes the optimal share of the risky domestic

asset in   financial autarky. It can be shown that with financial openness, the demand for the

foreign asset is positive iff




                 >    (2p) — (p)Y + (1— p)7 —1 +
                                1—(O.5)
                                                             — (05)] + (0.5) —(1— p)7
                                                                  1—(0.5)                   (15)
                                                e ;T* =e*
                                               =—      —
                                                a


           In (15), 't and 't' are the normalized premiums on the risky domestic and foreign assets,

respectively, where the normalization is obtained by dividing the premium by standard deviation

of the yield.




   In order to obtain (15), we use the specification for generalized utility in (14) and our
assumptions about the properties of asset returns to infer that expected utility is:



                                                     19
        With the standard expected utility framework,                      1 and (15) is reduced to               p. Hence,

the risky foreign asset is demanded if its normalized premium exceeds the product of the

correlation between returns and the normalized premium of the risky domestic asset. This

condition is met trivially if the correlation is zero (or negative). For a positive correlation, an agent

maximizing a conventional expected utility tends to diversify as long as the correlation among

yields is not too close to one.

        This result does not hold for an agent that demands a first-order risk premium, however.

As long as the correlation between returns is positive, first-order risk aversion increases the

normalized foreign premium needed for diversification. This result follows from the observation

that the right-hand side of (15) depends negatively on y.

        Figure 5 plots the dependency of the foreign premium (the RHS of(15)) on y for the

case where the normalized premium on the risky domestic asset is one-half [i.e., 'r =-- = 0.5] and
                                                                                                                  a
the correlation between returns on the two risky assets can be either zero or 0.5. Points above


                (1 — [2q   + p]Y)u(h,h*)+ ([2q + p11 —[q + p]1 )u(h, /*) +                                        *
                                                                                                  if xa > x *
                (Eq   + p]1 — [p]1 )u(l, h*) + [p]1 u(1, 1*)
         v=                                                                                                            (A)

                (1 — [2q +      p]1 )u(h,h*) + ([2q +   pI   —
                                                                 [q + pIY)u(l,h*) +
                                                                                                  f xa    x**
                ([q + p]1 — [p]1 )u(h,l*) + [pJYu(l,l*)
         u(h,h*) = u[1 + r0 + x(e + a) + x * (e * +o.*)];             u(1,1*) = u[1   + + x(e —a) + x * (e * _*)];
where
         u(h,1*) = u[1 +        + x(e + a) + x * (e * _a*)];       u(1,h*) = u[l +         + x(e — a)+ x * (e *
                           r0                                                         r0

We then use (A) and the first-order condition for the optimal portfolio in autarky to obtain (15),
writing the condition in terms of normalized returns. Aizenman (1999) and Aizenman and Marion
(1999a) use a generalized utility framework that relies on a second-order approximation to derive
results. Here we find the exact analytical condition leading to a positive demand for foreign assets
in autarky.


                                                                 20
the curve [area D] define the range where the demand for the foreign asset is positive. Notice that

if the correlation among returns is zero, the CAPM (with 7=1) predicts that the agent will always

demand a foreign asset offering a positive return.

          The case for diversification is much weaker if the agent exhibits first-order risk aversion,

with 1<1 20 Similar results hold if the correlation is positive, although with positive correlation


the foreign normalized excess return must be positive to induce diversification even in the CAPM

model.

          The implication of this analysis is that a moderate increase in the risk of the foreign asset

will terminate diversification if agents are first-order risk averse. Using Figure 5, suppose that

pO.5, 7=0.75, and that initially the normalized excess return of the foreign assets is t         0.4.


In these circumstances, we will observe diversification, as the point corresponding to the initial

equilibrium is in the D range above the zero-diversification curve. An exogenous drop of t from

0.4 to 0.3 will end diversification, causing the market for the foreign assets to dry up. The drop

in      may be the outcome of many combinations of changing e* and y* For example, suppose

that initially e = 0.05, a = 0.10, e* = 0.06 and   f = 0.15 (so that 'r = 0.5 and 'r 0.4). A rise in

q* to 0.20 will reduce rK to 0.3, terminating diversification. Alternatively, a drop in e* to 0.045


20
     In the generalized expected utility specified by (14), the termw=(0.5' —1) measures the
first-order risk aversion exhibited by agents. Loss aversion, defined as the ratio of the marginal
utility of a loss to the marginal utility of a gain, is [1 + w]/[1 — w]. Empirical estimates of loss
aversion are typically in the neighborhood of two, suggesting that y 0.74 if preferences
conform to the generalized utility framework. See Tversky and Kahneman (1991) and




                                                   21
will induce the same change in 't" and eliminate diversification. If instead agents behave according


to the CAPM (where y = 1), the same decline in the normalized foreign excess return will not end


diversification, only reduce it.




5.      Conclusion

        We have shown how a collapse of the international credit market can occur when the

perceived risk of lending to emerging markets increases, even moderately. Any number of

factors can alter risk perceptions. We focus on one factor that was important for Thailand,

Korea, and other emerging markets in late 1997. This factor was a growing awareness on the part

of investors that the uncertainty about emerging-market external debt was greater than previously

thought. Once the market updated its risk assessment, the reduction of international credit to

these countries-- or even the collapse of the market altogether—can be explained by models of

sovereign risk or models that reveal the "home bias" investment patterns of agents with first-

order risk aversion.

        For expositional simplicity, we have illustrated the reduction and collapse of international

credit in two separate models. The first model is one of sovereign risk, extended to account for

uncertainty about debt overhang. There we maintain the conventional assumptions about risk

preferences, such as the risk-neutrality of foreign lenders. The second model describes the

portfolio diversification patterns of agents who are first-order risk averse. We use it to derive the

exact analytical condition that terminates international diversification, causing a market collapse.


Kabneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1990). See Harless and Camerer (1994) for an empirical
assessment of the generalized expected utility approach.


                                                 22
We have left for future work the ambitious task of integrating these two models in order to study

sovereign risk when all agents are first-order risk averse.

       While we have focused on the role of debt overhang in altering risk perceptions about

some of the Asian economies, we believe that other factors also could have played a role. For

example, if the market changed its perception about the growth prospects of the Far East from

the upbeat view of the 'East Asian Miracle' to the more somber assessment of Young (1992) and

Krugman (1994), this revision in perceived risk could have contributed to the collapse of the

international credit market.




                                                  23
                FIGURE           1:   THAILAND'S BUILD-UP OF FOREIGN DEBT
100
                                                                                     Revised figures
                        Pre-cnsis figures
80
20
  0
         1990       1991         1992       1993   1994      1995     1996    1995        1996         1997
      Source: Bank of Thailand                              year
                                                   • short term 0 long term
                                                    24
                  FIGURE 2: KOREA'S BUILD-UP OF FOREIGN DEBT
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
 0
       1990        1991        1992       1993    1994      1995     1996    1995   1996   Sep-97
 Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy, Korea
                                                            year
                                                  • short term 0 long term
                                                     25
            FIGURE 3: A FORECAST OF THAILAND'S EXTERNAL DEBT
    11.5
    11.3          -                                                                           —
I   11.1


                                                 -
                       -
    10.9
           95Q1        95Q2        95Q3          95Q4            96Q1     96Q2   96Q3         96Q4    97Q1   97Q2
                                                                    quarter
             —    —   total debt          total debt (revised)   — — forecast    confidence
                                                                                              bands
                                                           26
                FIGURE 3A: FORECASTING THAILAND'S EXTERNAL DEBT
    11.5
    11.3
I   11.1         -                            -
                             '9
                        -
    10.9
            95Q1        95Q2       95Q3      95Q4      96Q1         96Q2     96Q3      96Q4   97Q1   97Q2
                                                              quarter
           —-   total debt        total debt (revised)— — forecast         confidence bands
                                                         27
      [th(revised debt ethnat) Viitial debt
                 etinate)]/t dev
        —


                                              T1


                                              C

                                              -
                                              H

                                              If)



                                              I:
                                              Cl)
                                              tTl
C

Ct?
C-                                            0
0
(ID                                           H
C-
0
                                              0
                                              If)
                                              tTI

                                              H




                                              H
0.5                               0.5



0.4                               0.4


0.3             D                 0.3



0.2                               0.2


          ND                      0.1
0.1




        0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9                     0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1


                   I                              II

               p   =0                           p = 0.5

                           Drawn for    = 0.5



      FIGURE 5: The Foreign Premium Required for Diversification




                                  29
                                         References
Adams, Charles, D. Mathieson, G. Schinasi, and B. Chadha, (1998), International Capital

       Markets: Developments, Prospects, and Key Policy Issues, International Monetary Fund,

       September.
Aizenman, Joshua (1989) "Country Risk, Incomplete Information and Taxes on International

       Borrowing," Economic Journal 99, 147-16 1.
                  (1999), "International Portfolio Diversification with Generalized Expected

       Utility Preferences," Canadian Journal of Economics 32, No. 4, 1010-1023.
Aizenman, Joshua and N. Marion (1999a) "Volatility and Investment: Interpreting Evidence from

       Developing Countries", Economica 66, 157-79.

_____________________________ (1999b) "Reserve Uncertainty and the Supply of International

       Credit," Dartmouth Working paper, June.
Bernanke, Ben and M. Gertler (1989), "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,"
       American Economic Review 79, 14-3 1.
Boyd, J.H. and B.D. Smith (1994), "How Good are Standard Debt Contracts? Stochastic versus
       Nonstochastic Monitoring in a Costly State Verification Environment," Journal of Business

        67, 539-561.
Bulow, Jeremy and K. Rogoff (1989), "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,"

       Journal of Political Economy; 97(1), 155-78.
Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (1998), "Emerging Market Crises: an Asset

        Markets Perspective," NBER Working Paper No. 6843, December.
Calvo, Guillermo (1999). "Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier," World

        Bank/Universidat Torcuato Di Tella Conference on Integration and Contagion, June 17-18,

        1999.

Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco (1998a), "Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: A Canonical

        Model," NBER Working Paper No. 6606, June.




                                               30
_____________________________(1998b), "The Asian Liquidity Crisis," NBER Working Paper
       No. 6796, November.

Economist (1997), "Feeling the Heat," May 17, p. 82.
Epstein, L. G. (1992) "Behavior Under Risk: Recent Developments in Theory and Applications,"
       Chapter 1 in Advances in economic theory: Sixth World Congress., Volume 1, Laffont-

       Jean-Jacques, ed. (Cambridge University Press), 1-63.
French, K. and J. Poterba (1991) "International Diversification and International Equity Markets,"
       American Economic Review, 222-226.
Harless, D. W. and C. Camerer (1994), "The Predictive Utility of Generalized Expected Utility

       Theories," Econometrica 62(6), November, 1251-89.

Kahneman, D., J. Knetsch, and R. Thaler (1990), "Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect

       and the Coase Theorem," Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-48.

Krugman, Paul (1994), "The Myth of Asia's Miracle, a Cautionary Fable," Foreign Affairs,

       November/December.

Lewis, Karen (1995) "Puzzles in International Financial Markets," Chapter 37 in G. Grossman

       and K. Rogoff, editors, Handbook of International Economics, Volume III.
Mathieson, Don (forthcoming), "Comment," in Peter Isard, Assaf Razin and Andrew Rose

       (editors), International Finance in Turmoil: Essays in Honor of Robert F. Flood,
       Washington and Boston: IMF and Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1996) Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT Press.

Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (1998), Economic Survey: Korea,
       Paris: OECD Publications.

Park, Daekeun and C. Rhee (1998). "Currency Crisis in Korea: How Has It Been Aggravated?"

       mimeo, Seoul National University, December.

Radelet, Steven and Jeff Sachs 91998). "The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,

       Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 1.



                                                31
Savage, L. J. (1954), Foundations of Statistics, New York: John Wiley.

Segal, U. and A. Spivak (1990) "First-Order versus Second-order Risk Aversion,"Journal of

       Economic Theory, Vol. 51, 111-25.

Tesar, L. L. and I. M. Warner (1995) "Home Bias and High Turnover," Journal of International

       Money and Finance; 14 (4), 467-92.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1991), "Loss Aversion and Riskless Choice: A Reference

       Dependence Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1039-61.
Townsend, R.M. (1979), "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State

       Verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265-293.
Yaari, M.E. (1987), "The Dual Theory of Choice under Risk," Econoinetrica 55, 95-115.
Young. A. (1992), "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in Hong

       Kong and Singapore," in Blanchard 0. and S. Fischer, eds.,. NBER Macroeconomics
       Annual992.. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 13-54.




                                              32
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7337            Kathryn M. Doininguez              The Market Microstructure of Central Bank Intervention 9/99

7338            Jeffrey A. Frankel                 No Single Currency Regime is Right for all Countries   9/99
                                                   or at All Times

7339            Axel Bdrsch-Supan                  Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain 9/99
                                                   Disability Option

7340            Hylke Vandenbussche                Import Diversion under European Antidumping Policy     9/99
                Jozef Konings
                Linda Springael

7341            Robert F. Engle                    CAViaR: Conditional Value at Risk By Quantile          9/99
                Simone Manganelli                  Regression

7342            David C. King                      Congressional Vote Options                             9/99
                Richard J. Zeckhauser

7343             Christina Paxson                  Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment                  9/99
                 Jane Waldfogel

7344             Michael Hout                      Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race           9/99
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7345             Jean 0. Lanjouw                   The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with            9/99
                 Mark Schankerman                  Multiple Indicators

7346             Geert Bekaert                     Stock and Bond Pricing in an Affine Economy                9/99
                 Steven R. Grenadier

7347             Thomas N. Hubbard                 How Wide Is the Scope of Hold—Up-Based Theories?           9/99
                                                   Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking
7348             Jonathan Gruber                   The Wealth of the Unemployed: Adequacy and                 9/99
                                                   Implications for Unemployment Insurance

7349             Edward P. Lazear                  Educational Production                                     9/99


7350             Tamim Bayoumi                     The Morning After: Explaining the Slowdown in              9/99
                                                   Japanese Growth in the l990s

7351             Taizo Motonishi                   Causes of the Long Stagnation of Japan during the          9/99
                 Hiroshi Yoshikawa                 1990's: Financial or Real?



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7352            Daron Aceinoglu                    Productivity Gains From Unemployment Insurance             9/99
                Robert Shimer

7353            Jeff Grogger                       Welfare Dynamics under Time Limits                       9/99
                Charles Michalopoulos

7354             Roberto Rigobon                   On the Measurement of the International Propagation        9/99
                                                   of Shocks

7355             Ricardo J. Caballero              The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-             9/99
                 Mohamad L. Hammour                Liquidationist View

7356             Alec Ian Gershberg                Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special   9/99
                 Michael Grossman                  Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                 Fred Goldman                      exempt Hospital Bonds

7357             Robert E. Lipsey                  Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm         9/99
                                                   Employment

7358             Vernon Henderson                  Marshall's Economies                                     9/99

7359             lain Cockburn                     The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:          9/99
                 Rebecca Henderson                 Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                 Scott Stern

7360             Douglas Holtz-Eakin               Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business         9/99
                 John W. Phillips
                 Harvey S. Rosen

7361             Bong-Chan Kho                     Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                       9/99
                 René M. Stulz

7362             Jagadeesh Gokhale                 Social Security's Treatment of Postwar Americans:          9/99
                 Laurence J. Kotlikoff             How Bad Can It Get?

7363             Bruce D. Meyer                    Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the             9/99
                 Dan T. Rosenbaum                  Labor Supply of Single Mothers

7364             Dani Rodrik                       Short-Term Capital Flows                                   9/99
                 Andrés Velasco

7365             Michael D. Bordo                  The Future of EMU: What Does the History of                9/99
                 Lars Jonung                       Monetary Unions Tell Us?



                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                          Title                                               Date

7366            Emmanuel Saez                      Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                     9/99

7367            Emmanuel Saez                      The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel 9/99
                                                   Study of Bracket Creep'

7368            Alan L. Gustman                    What People Don't Know About Their Pensions            9/99
                Thomas L. Steinmeier               and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                   From The Health and Retirement Study

7369            Wolfgang Keller                    Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct      9/99
                Arik Levinson                      Investment Inflows to U.S. States

7370            Michael Baker                      Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian        9/99
                Gary Solon                         Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                   Tax Records

7371            Michael Baker                      Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                Nicole M. Fortin                   1987-1988

7372            B. Douglas Bernheim                The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the      10/99
                Lorenzo Forni                      Health and Retirement Survey
                Jagadeesh Gokhale
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373            Paul A. David                      Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
                Bronwyn H. Hall                    R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                Andrew A. Toole

7374             Peter Cappelli                    Do 'High Performance" Work Practices Improve          10/99
                 David Neurnark                    Established-Level Outcomes?

7375             Charles I. Jones                  Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?               10/99
                                                   Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

7376             Harrison Hong                     Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage             10/99
                 Jeremy C. Stein                   and Market Crashes

7377             George Chacko                     Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with          10/99
                 Luis M. Viceira                   Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets

7378             Bruce A. Blonigen                 Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of      10/99
                 Stephen E. Haynes                 Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

7379             Victor R. Fuchs                   The Future of Health Economics                         10/99


                      You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number           Author(s)                           Title

7380             Michael D. Hurd                     Anticipated and Actual Bequests                          10/99
                 James P. Smith

7381             Olivia S. Mitchell                  New Trends in Pension Benefit and                        10/99
                                                     Retirement Provisions

7382             Michael B. Devereux                 Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Welfare               10/99
                 Charles Engel                       Effects of the Euro
                 Cedric Tille

7383             Stephen L. Mehay                    The Effectiveness of Workplace Drug Prevention           10/99
                 Rosalie Liccardo Pacula             Policies: Does 'Zero Tolerance' Work?

7384             Michael Klein                       Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and       10/99
                 Giovanni Olivei                     Economic Growth

7385             Jean Abraham                        Enter at Your Own Risk: HMO Participation and             10/99
                 Ashish Arora                        Enrollment in the Medicare Risk Market
                 Martin Gaynor
                 Douglas Wholey

7386             Gerardo della Paolera               Internal Versus External Convertibility and Developing- 10/99
                 Alan M. Taylor                      Country Financial Crises: Lessons from the Argentine
                                                     Bank Bailout of the 1930's

7387             Alberto Alesina                     Redistribution Through Public Employment: The Case 10/99
                 Stephen Danninger                   of Italy
                 Massimo V. Rostagno

7388             Oliver Hart                         On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination Versus         10/99
                 John Moore                          Specialization

7389             Joshua Aizenman                     Uncertainty and the Disappearance of International        10/99
                 Nancy Marion                        Credit


Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge. MA
02138-5398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders@nber.org).



                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                                www.nber.org
                             Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
