                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE TECHNOLOGY OF BIRTH:
                                         IS IT WORTH IT?


                                             David M. Cutler
                                              Ellen Meara


                                           Working Paper 7390
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7390


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on Frontiers in Health Policy Research. We are grateful
to the National Institute of Aging for research support and to Dr. Steven Ringer, Director of Newborn Medicine
at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital for helpful discussions. We also gratefully acknowledge the Registry
of Vital Records and Statistics in the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for provision of the
Massachusetts vital statistics data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by David M. Cutler and Ellen Meara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Technology of Birth: Is it Worth it?
David M. Cutler and Ellen Meara
NBER Working Paper No. 7390
October 1999
JEL No. I1


                                            ABSTRACT



       We evaluate the costs and benefits of increased medical spending for low birth weight
infants. Lifetime spending on low birth weight babies increased by roughly $40,000 per birth
between 1950 and 1990. The health improvements resulting from this have been substantial.
Infant mortality rates fell by 72 percent over this time period, largely due to improved care for
premature births. Considering both length and quality of life, we estimate the rate of return for
care of low birth weight infants at over 500 percent. Although prenatal care and influenza shots
are more cost effective than neonatal care, this is significantly more cost effective than other
recent innovations such as coronary artery bypass surgery, treatment of severe hypertension, or
routine pap smears for women aged 20-74. We conclude that the answer to the question posed in
this paper is a resounding “Yes.”


David M. Cutler                                                Ellen Meara
Department of Economics                                        Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard University                                             Harvard Medical School
Cambridge, MA 02138                                            180 Longwood Avenue
and NBER                                                       Boston, MA 02115
dcutler@fas.harvard.edu                                        meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       Is medical technology worth it? Perhaps no question is as central in evaluating

the medical care system as this one. We know on the one hand that medical technology

is quite costly. The average person in 1996 spent $3,759 on medical care per year; a half

century ago, the amount was $3,200 less (in real terms).1 Most of this enormous increase

B four percent per year B is a result of medical technology changes (Newhouse, 1992).

We also know that people live longer and in better health than they used to. Half a

century ago, life expectancy at birth was 68 years; today it is near 80 years. Further,

chronic disability rates are falling (Manton et al., 1997; Costa, 1998). Thus, it seems like

medical technology changes may well be worth it.

       But combining these facts is difficult. People are healthier for many reasons.

Medical technology is certainly one factor. But incomes have improved, and higher

income people have historically lived longer than poor people have. Smoking rates have

declined, which will also improve health. And public health improvements such as

alcohol restrictions or healthy eating messages have changed individual behavior. How

can we tell what the contribution of medical technology is to better health?

       In this paper, we evaluate the costs and benefits of medical technology changes

for one particular type of medical technology B care for low birth weight infants. We

focus on low birth weight infants for several reasons. First, low birth weight is extremely

expensive. A neonatal intensive care unit can cost up to $2,200 per day, and as much as




       1
           Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1972 & Health United States, 1998.



                                                      3
$131,000 per infant in 1996 dollars. 2 When something costs so much, it is natural to

evaluate what the spending buys.

         This is particularly true in light of the enormous uncertainty about the value of

this care. It is a common – although not wholly correct -- perception that many children

saved at very low birth weight live substantially reduced lives: they experience higher

rates of cerebral palsy, deafness, blindness, epilepsy, chronic lung disease, learning

disabilities, and attention deficit disorder than normal birth weight infants (Paneth, 1995,

Lewit et al. 1995). Aside from their own personal suffering, these infants impose a large

burden on their family and society.

         Second, technology for low birth weight infants has expanded tremendously. In

the first half of the 20th century, the technology to treat pre-term infants consisted

primarily of the incubator; the first nursery to have such technology opened in 1922.3

Ventilators for premature infants were developed in the 1960s. Today, a sophisticated

neonatal intensive care unit houses infants in an incubator where the sickest infants

breathe with the assistance of a ventilator (better than the 1960 version). Other

technologies available to sick infants include phototherapy and exchange blood

transfusions for jaundice, intravenous hyper-alimentation (the provision of nutrition to

critically ill infants), machines to monitor blood gases, heart rate and rhythm, breathing

rate, and blood pressure. Infants sometimes receive diagnostic techniques such as CT

scans and cardiac catheterization. Intravenous tubes deliver medication and fluids to


         2
            Based on average length of stay and inpatient charges for infants diagnosed as Ashort gestation,
low birth weight, and fetal growth retardation.@ These account for 24,555 or .6 percent of newborn
admissions, so it includes less than 10 percent of all low birth weight infants. See Statistics From the
HCUP-3 Nationwide Inpatient Sample for 1994: Principal Diagnoses for details. This publication can be
viewed at http://www.ahcpr.gov/data/hcup/94DCCHPR.htm#218. See Anspach 1997, p. 246 for estimates
of direct costs for very low birth weight infants.
          3
            The first incubator was developed as a warming chamber for premature infants in 1880 in France.


                                                     4
these infants. The staff involved in a neonatal nursery can include up to 50 neonatal

nurses, as many as ten physicians and one to two social workers.

       This innovation in neonatal care has come at a cost. In 1949, spending for low

birth weight infants likely averaged less than for normal birth weight infants, since

nothing major could be done for them and death was relatively cheap. Today, costs for

low birth weight infants substantially exceed those for normal birth weight infants – by

10 to 20 times. As a result of this technological change, the cost of infant care has

increased substantially more rapidly than the cost of health services on average. Our

earlier work (Cutler and Meara, 1998) shows that spending for infants increased by 4.2

percentage points per year more rapidly than spending for the average middle-aged adult

in the past 40 years. The vast bulk of this differential spending increase appears

attributable to the costs of premature infants.

       The third reason for studying neonatal care is that it is possible to know in some

detail the effect of medical technology on outcomes. Conditional on birth weight,

essentially all changes in neonatal survival are due to increasing technology. By focusing

on birth weight-specific survival, we can therefore construct an extremely accurate

estimate of the effect of medical technology changes on outcomes. This is in contrast to

many other conditions, for example in the elderly, where it is difficult to separate the

effects of medical care on outcomes from the effects of public health measures,

behavioral changes, or socioeconomic status.

       We review available literature on the care of low birth weight infants, and

examine both national vital statistics data and data on low birth weight infants in

Massachusetts to understand the costs and benefits of medical technology changes. We




                                              5
estimate that low birth weight infants cost about $39,000 more per birth in 1990 than in

1960. As a result of this spending, an additional 12 percent of low birth weight infants

survive, at what will likely be a reasonable -- if not disability free -- life.

        We evaluate this social tradeoff in several ways. First, we attach a value to

additional years of life and estimate the rate of return to spending on low birth weight

infants. Using a consensus estimate from the literature (a year of life in perfect health is

worth $100,000; see Cutler and Richardson, 1987, 1988, 1989), we find a striking rate of

return to increased medical spending on low birth weight infants- 510 percent.

        We also compare this return to estimates for other medical interventions. We find

that the benefits from this care compare favorably to other types of medical spending, for

example coronary artery bypass surgery in the elderly. Estimates of enhanced prenatal

care suggest a potentially greater efficacy of that intervention – in some cases cost

reductions – but such gains may not always be achievable. In total, our calculations

suggest a clear bottom line: while we spend a lot more on care for low birth weight

infants than we used to, we get a lot more in return.

        One should distinguish our estimates of the return to increased spending over time

from recent analyses that estimate the return to increased spending across regions (see for

example Skinner and Wennberg in this volume). It is possible that increased spending

over time is worth it, while additional spending at a point in time delivers little

measurable benefit. In our analysis, we are measuring the average gain to society of

spending on new technologies for critically ill neonates. In cross-sectional analyses,

authors estimate how the marginal benefit of intensive medical treatment changes as we

apply that treatment to additional individuals. For example, our findings suggest that the




                                                6
introduction of neonatal intensive care has yielded high returns, but this result is

consistent with a case where expanding intensive care for newborns is not worth it.

       We begin in the next section by discussing how one can estimate the rate of return

to medical technology. In the second section, we discuss changes in outcomes for low

birth weight infants over time and the medical changes that have likely led to this

increased survival. The third and fourth sections estimate the benefits and costs of this

technology. These are combined into a rate of return calculation in section 5. The last

section concludes.

II.    Evaluating the Worth of Medical Technology

       Before discussing the specifics of care for premature infants, we detail the more

general problem of estimating the costs and benefits of medical technology changes.

Changes in medical technology affect the cost of medical care and the benefits that care

provides. Table 1 details the costs and benefits of general changes in medical treatments.

       The first cost is the cost of the initial treatment itself -- in the case of premature

infants, the cost during the birth episode.4 In addition, there are downstream costs

provided over the person=s remaining life. In the case of care for low birth weight infants,

these costs may be large, if the children saved at birth are at increased risk of future

physical and developmental complications. In other circumstances, for example in

analyzing preventive medications, there might be downstream savings from incurring

costs up front.

       A third cost is the normal cost of sustaining a person over their lifetimeB food,

clothing, shelter, etc. These costs are relevant for interventions that extend life. Even

       4
           Assuming no care related to the premature birth was provided to the mother while pregnant.



                                                    7
though these costs are not medical, they need to be included in calculating the costs of a

medical intervention that prolongs life, since saving a low birth weight infant commits

society to these future costs. Similarly, the benefits a person provides to society should

also be included in the valuation of medical spending (Meltzer, 1997).

        Using a discount rate r, we express the present value of the cost of saving low

birth weight infants as:



                     PDV (Cost ) =      ∑ (1 + r )
                                        t =0
                                                     −t
                                                          Mt   +   ∑ (1 + r )
                                                                   t =0
                                                                                −t
                                                                                     Lt               (1)




where we have separated the medical (M) and non-medical (L) costs for reasons that will

be clear shortly.

        The benefit of medical care is the increase in quality-adjusted life it affords and

the fact that it keeps people alive longer, who will provide more to society. There may

also be some spillovers of medical technology to other fields, but these are difficult to

evaluate.5 We denote the contribution an individual will make to society in year t as wt,

with present value defined as above.

        To quantify the health benefits of medical technology, we use a framework of

health capital (Grossman, 1972; Cutler and Richardson, 1997, 1998, 1999). We assume

that years of life can be measured on a quality-adjusted scale. The lowest quality of life

        5
           Other sometimes-claimed benefits should not be considered. For example, some have claimed
that additional jobs in the medical care field are a benefit of spending on medical care. But this assumes
that some people would not be employed but for the medical care spending. Since money spent on medical
care would be spent elsewhere if not in medical services, the jobs created by additional medical spending
would have been created in other parts of the economy. Thus, the impact of medical spending on overall
employment is negligible.




                                                      8
is death, which we define as quality of zero. We define perfect health as quality of one.

Living with various conditions falls between death and perfect health. We denote the

expected quality of life for a person in year t as qt.

        The (discounted) value of quality-adjusted life years is:



                                   QALYs =        ∑ (1 + r )
                                                  t =0
                                                               −t
                                                                    qt                        (2)




        The cost-effectiveness ratio is typically defined as the increment to quality of life

from a given amount of medical spending:



              Cost-effectiveness =        )(QALY) / )(Medical Spending)                       (3)



Using only medical spending and not total spending is not appropriate theoretically. But

it is an approximation to a rate or return calculation for medical care in this case.

   To see this, we need to form the net benefits of medical treatment changes – the dollar

value of health benefits net of their cost. Such a calculation requires valuing the health

improvement from medical care in dollars. We denote the value of a year in perfect

health as V. It is important to note that V is the social value of life. This is not what a

person will earn – that amount is included separately. 6




        6
            In economic terms, we are not using a willingness to pay framework.



                                                         9
We express the net benefits as:



                                                                                                                
     Net Benefit =      ∑ (1 + r )
                        t =0
                                      −t
                                           Vqt      −  ∑ (1 + r ) − t M t +
                                                       t =0
                                                                                   ∑ (1 + r )
                                                                                   t =0
                                                                                                −t
                                                                                                     ( Lt − wt ) 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                     (4)




        The last term in [.] is the net contribution of an individual to society – the value of

what they contribute less what they consume. Using the life cycle model as a rough

approximation, we assume that for infants without severe problems, this term is zero –

infants will consume as much as they produce over the course of their life.7 For infants

with severe health problems, the second term in [.] will be positive on net. We therefore

include non-medical costs in our rate of return calculation.

        We can then estimate the rate of return to medical technology using the health

benefits and costs (current and future) of that technology:




                                           ∑ (1 + r )   −t
                                                             Vqt
                                            t =0
            Rate of Return =                                              −
                                ∑ (1 + r ) ( M              + Lt − wt )
                                                   −t
                                                                               1                                     (5)
                                                        t
                                t=0




        For individuals without severe health problems or disability, we assume that the

Lt-wt terms cancel out and the denominator is simply medical spending. For people with

disabilities, we assume that there are additional costs of living that we account for

separately.


        7
          Meltzer shows that individuals who are saved at age 25 have negative net resource use. He does
not show calculations for net resource use of individuals under 25.



                                                             10
         To implement this equation, we need to measure several items: the current and

future medical costs for treatment of the condition under consideration, M; the quality of

life resulting from medical treatments q; the value of a year of life to society, V; the net

costs of living for disabled individuals, L-w; and the discount rate, r. We discuss how we

form each of these for low birth weight infants in some depth below. We start by

analyzing trends in infant survival and the role of medical technology in those trends.

III.     Birth Weight and Survival

         Infant mortality has declined dramatically this century. Figure 1 shows trends in

infant mortality -- death in the first year of life -- in the 20th century. 8 In 1900, infant

mortality was 16 percent. The magnitude of this number is staggering; it implies, for

example, that half of woman finishing their childbearing years at the turn of the century

had a child die in infancy. By 1996, infant mortality was about 1 percent, a nearly 95

percent decline. In 1996, only 2 percent of women finishing childbearing age currently

have had a baby die during infancy. 9

         In fact, even these figures may underestimate the change in infant survival.

Neonatal intensive care changes the distribution of pregnancy outcomes between fetal

deaths and live births. Aggressive medical intervention implies that some babies who

might have been counted as fetal deaths now survive, are counted as live births, but die

         8
           Infant mortality rates express the number of deaths before age one per 1,000 live births.
Neonatal mortality refers to death within 28 days of birth and fetal death refers to the death of the fetus.
Fetal deaths are typically recorded only for gestations of at least 20 weeks.
         9
           The percent of women starting childbearing in year t who see an infant die by the end of child
bearing is estimated with the following equation:

         1 -Pr[All children born survive the 1st year] = 1-(death rate)t(fertility rate)t*(30 years of child bearing) .

This assumes that all women have the average number of children and that death rates are constant
throughout childbearing years.



                                                               11
before 1 year of age. Adding these infant deaths to total infant deaths will overstate the

infant mortality rate, and especially so in later years. To adjust for this, Figure 1 shows

an expanded infant mortality rate equal to the number of fetal deaths plus infant deaths

per 1,000 births plus fetal deaths. Expanded infant mortality is declining at roughly the

same rate as infant mortality. Thus, the magnitude of the underestimate of gains in infant

health is small.

        Figures 2 and 3 highlight how gains in infant health differ by decade. Infant

mortality declined by 7 or 8 deaths per thousand in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Gains

in infant health continue throughout the 1980s and 1990s, but at a slower pace. Figure 3

reveals the 1970s as the decade with the most rapid percentage decline in both infant and

fetal deaths.

        Changes in infant mortality can result from many factors, of which medical care

for low birth weight infants is only one. Medical care in the prenatal period may also

increase infant survival, for example by increasing maternal weight gain or ensuring an

adequate diet. Public health measures such as water and sanitation, economic variables

such as income and education, and behavioral variables such as smoking and drinking

will also affect infant health.

        In the case of neonatal mortality, or death within the first 28 days of life, there is a

natural way to control for these factors. Conditional on birth weight, the overwhelming

factor influencing survival for low birth weight babies is medical care in the immediate

post-birth period (Paneth et al. 1995, Williams and Chen 1982). In essence, infant health

is a condition for which there are very good risk adjusters B the birth weight and

gestational age of the infant. Table 2 illustrates how birth weight allows one to adjust for




                                              12
non-medical factors by showing simple linear probability models of neonatal mortality on

non-medical factors. Factors such as education, maternal race, smoking, and marital

status have a strong relationship with neonatal mortality as shown in the first two

columns. However, conditional on birth weight, these factors diminish greatly in

importance and become statistically insignificant in many cases. A comparison of R2

values in these two regressions supports the notion that any non-medical factor impacting

neonatal mortality is reflected in birth weight. The R2 on the regression without birth

weight is .03 compared with an R2 of .325 when controlling for birth weight.

       Thus, the effects of medical care on infant health can be isolated by conditioning

survival on birth weight. Figure 4 and Tables 3a and 3b display trends in birth weight-

specific neonatal mortality over time; background on the birth weight distribution over

time is shown in appendix 1. Table 3a and the top of figure 4 show national data on birth

weight-specific infant mortality rates from 1950, 1960, 1985, and 1990. Table 3b and the

lower panel of the figure show Massachusetts Vital Statistics data for various years

between 1972 and 1994. In both cases, the data omit fetal death rates, thus biasing

towards zero the estimated decline in infant mortality rates at the lowest birth weights.

       The figure and table show a remarkable change. The largest declines in infant

mortality are for low birth weight infants. Between 1950 and 1990, infant mortality rates

for very low birth weight infants (<1500 grams) fell almost 2 percentage points per year,

or 42 percent in total. Mortality for low birth weight infants (1500-2500 grams) declined

much more slowly, by about 1/3 percentage point each year, or 7.5 percent in total.

Mortality for normal birth weight infants fell the least, about 1 percentage point over the




                                             13
period. The Massachusetts data show very rapid declines in mortality among the lightest

infants during the period from 1972-94.

          The figures suggest that changes in survival rates are an important source of

improved infant mortality. We can make this formal using a simple decomposition. The

neonatal mortality rate is the weighted average of mortality rates for infants at each birth

weight:



                       P[Neonatal Death]t =             ∑          P[Weight ∈ group k ]* P[Death | k ]
                                                            K
                                                                                                               (7 )
                                                            k =1




Changes in neonatal mortality rates can thus be decomposed into changes in the birth

weight distribution, and changes in survival conditional on birth weight:10


        ∆P[Neonatal Death] =          ∑            ∆P[Weight ∈ group k ] * P[Death | k ] +
                                           K
                                           k =1

                                     P[Weight ∈ group k ] * ∆P[Death | k ]                                    (8)




The first term in equation (8) is the change in neonatal deaths due to changes in the birth

weight distribution. The second term is the change due to trends in birth weight-specific

neonatal death rates, which can be broken out by birth weight.

          Table 4 shows the relative importance of these two factors in the national and

Massachusetts data. As table 4 shows, 35 percent of the improvement in national

          10
               This is an approximation; there is also an interaction term, which we ignore.
        ∆P[Neonatal Death ]'60− '90 =   ∑          ∆P[Weight ∈ group k ]'60− '90 * P[Death | k ]'60 +
                                            K
                                            k =1
P[Weight ∈ group k ]'60 * ∆P[Death | k ]'60− '90 + ∆P[Weight ∈ group k ]'60− '90 * ∆P[Death | k ]'60− '90 .



                                                                     14
neonatal mortality since 1950 have resulted from reductions in mortality for very low

birth weight infants (<1500 g). This is despite the fact that these infants account for just

over 1 percent of births. Another 31 percent results from reductions in mortality for other

low birth weight infants (1500 g to 2500 g), who account for only 5.5 percent of births.

Thus, two-thirds of the national and Massachusetts reduction in neonatal mortality results

from improved survival for the 7 percent lowest birth weight infants. Most of the

remainder results from reductions in mortality for the 93 percent of infants born of

normal birth weight (>2500 g). Changes in the distribution of births by birth weight over

time would actually have increased infant mortality, although this is somewhat

misleading since some formerly fetal deaths are almost certainly now classified as infant

mortality at low birth weights.

         It is clear that medical technology has been very important for improving infant

health. Examining neonatal deaths highlights the role of technology, because almost all

neonatal deaths occur within the hospital, and most of these happen within 24 hours of

birth.

         A.     The Technology of Birth

         The improvement in birth weight-specific survival is consistent with the diffusion

of technologies for these babies. Table 5 outlines some of the major developments in

newborn medicine over time. Before 1960, there was little medical treatment for pre-

term infants. In the 1960s the first modern neonatal intensive care units began as

physicians started to adapt ventilators for use on pre-term infants. One of the leading

causes of infant death is respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), a consequence of being

born too early and having poorly developed lungs. Although recent innovations such as




                                             15
the use of surfactant have greatly reduced the consequences of RDS, various deficits

relating to the poor respiratory development are still a central part of neonatal intensive

care.

        The machine that is most visible and probably also most important in recent gains

in neonatal mortality is the ventilator. The major innovation of the 1970s was the

refinement of ventilators so that they would not damage a tiny infant’s fragile lungs.

State-of-the art ventilators now use high-speed ventilation to fill the infants’ lungs with

rapid short puffs of air that pose fewer risks to the undeveloped lung.

        Recently, new pharmaceuticals have triggered impressive gains in health for tiny

infants. Surfactant is used to treat respiratory distress syndrome, and is believed to have

contributed a major part to declines since 1990 in death and morbidity for the lightest

infants (Stevenson et al. 1998, Schoendorf and Kiely 1997). Prenatal steroids are used to

speed up development of the fetus when the fetus is in danger of being premature. There

are now pharmaceuticals that treat infants with a patent ductus arteriosus, a condition

when the structure that allows blood to bypass the lungs of the fetus does not close

naturally after birth. Previously, infants with a severe case of patent ductus arteriosus

faced heart surgery; now, many can be treated medically.

        Other less visible, but important innovations include the development of

improved monitoring both before and after birth and improved personnel. One example

of improved monitoring technology is the development of technology to perform blood

tests and related lab tests using incredibly small samples of blood. The tiniest babies

have only a few tablespoons of blood in total, so standard blood tests would be

impossible for these infants. In addition, there is more coordination between




                                             16
neonatologists and obstetricians, so women at risk for low birth weight births take

appropriate pharmaceuticals as soon as possible to speed the development of the infant.

B.     Health Consequences of Low Birth Weight

       Perhaps the most controversial issue in the technology of birth is the question of

quality of life for infants saved by neonatal technology. Horror stories abound of light

infants saved at birth but without a semblance of a normal life.

       In fact, the situation is far better than the horror stories suggest. A rough summary

of the literature11 is that at the margin of viability, developmental problems are

substantial: roughly one-third of infants will have serious disability, one-third of infants

will have moderate disability, and one-third will not be disabled. As mortality rates in

any birth weight fall, health of survivors typically improves. Babies born at birth weights

that formerly had substantial problems have many fewer problems now than in the past.

       Table 7 shows evidence on developmental problems by birth weight for births in

about 1960 and about 1990. As table 3 shows, in 1960, the margin of viability was near

1500 g, while in 1990 the margin of viability was under 1000 g.

       Estimates around 1950 reported that for infants born under 1500 grams, only one

third would be free of handicap and with IQs in the normal range (Lubchenco 1963).

Common handicaps for low birth weight infants included (and still include) cerebral

palsy, blindness, mental retardation, and other neurosensory, behavioral or learning

disabilities. Since there was little technological advance (and little mortality

improvement) for these infants between 1950 and 1960, we assume this applies to 1960

as well. Table 7 shows our estimate that two-thirds of all infants under 1500 grams had

developmental problems in that year. These early estimates do not separate out health




                                             17
outcomes for infants under 1000 grams because so few survived to leave the hospital.

Estimates for heavier infants come from Shapiro et al. 1983. In their analysis 23 percent

of infants weighing 1500-2500 grams had some form of impairment ranging from mild to

severe. Developmental problem rates for normal birth weight infants were low; we proxy

these at 1 percent, roughly the rate of disability in 1990.

       Among infants born under 750 grams between 1990 and 1992, Hack (1996)

documents a 31 percent chance of severe problems including mental retardation, cerebral

palsy, blindness, deafness, or some combination of these. This is consistent with the

notion that infants at the edge of viability have equal chances of severe problems,

moderate disability, and no problems. Therefore, we assume that the probability of

problems for infants under 1000 grams is 66 percent in 1990. Given that Hack’s results

focus on babies born under 750 grams, we are probably overstating the disability rates in

this group.

       Estimates for infants weighing 1500 to 2500 g are based on Hack et al. 1995, who

review other literature suggesting that infants born in 1984 weighing 1000 to 1499 grams

had a 14 percent chance of neuromotor impairment, a 0.3 percent chance of blindness, a

12 percent chance of squint, and a 1.4 percent chance of deafness. An upper bound

estimate on the probability of impairment is the sum of these probabilities, or 28 percent.

Compared with a 68 percent chance of impairments in 1960, there has been a clear

improvement not only in mortality rates, but morbidity for infants born weighing 1000-

1500 grams. Hack also reports that infants born 1500 to 1749 grams had an 11 percent

chance of neuromotor impairment, 1.2 percent chance of blindness, 9 percent chance of

squint, and 2 percent chance of deafness. An upper-bound estimate on their probability

       11
            We are particularly grateful to Dr. Steven Ringer for discussing this subject with us.

                                                     18
of impairment, the sum of these probabilities, is 23 percent. We use these numbers for

infants in the 1500 to 2500 gram weight range in the absence of estimates for the entire

range. These will over-estimate rates of problems because they focus on the lower part of

that birth weight range and because they are based on births in 1984 rather than 1990.

        The rates of problems or disability reported reflect all impairments and disabilities

regardless of severity. Based on the literature, the rate of severe disability is at most,

about half as large as the rates reported here. The remaining disabled infants suffer

relatively mild disability ranging from mild visual and hearing impairments to mild

learning disabilities.

        To test these conclusions in more detail, we examined data from the National

Health Interview Survey Child Health Supplements in 1981 and 1988.12 The Child

Health Supplements are part of the health interview surveys that are designed to measure

the extent of illness, its effects on disability and chronic impairments, and the kinds of

health services people receive. This Child Health Supplement focuses on non-

institutionalized children under 18 years of age. It includes questions on biological

parental information, the child’s general health status, school, development, learning,

behavior, and health services.

        Table 8 shows age-adjusted outcomes by birth weight in 1981 and 1988 for

several indicators of child health and well-being: whether health status is reported as

excellent, whether the child has moderate or severe activity limitation, the average

number of short-stay hospital days in the last 12 months, the number of hospital episodes



        12
           These data end in 1988, but recent evaluations of morbidity in infants through 1994 show a
trend toward lower morbidity for several clinical indicators (Stevenson et al. 1999).



                                                   19
and doctor visits in the last 12 months, the number of behavior problems on a 32 point

behavior problem index, and the percent of children who repeated a grade.

       Children born weighing less than 1500 grams are remarkably similar to normal

birth weight children in all aspects except activity limitation. In both years, about 70

percent of children, regardless of birth weight, report being in excellent health. In cases

where outcomes are comparable across years, low birth-weight infants have either

improved outcomes or experienced little change. Only doctor visits “worsened” over the

1981 to 1988 period, and this likely reflects the shift from inpatient to outpatient care for

these children.

       The similarity of health for lighter and heavier births refutes the idea that as we

push the edge of viability toward lower birth weights, we are saving children who will

lead severely limited lives.

       Figure 5 shows a similar pattern by showing the share of children aged 2 to 4

years who are reported to be in excellent health in 1981, 1988, and 1991. The 1981 and

1988 data are from the child health supplements described above and the 1991 data come

from the follow-up to the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health survey. There are

few differences across birth weight groups. Nearly three quarters of two to four year olds

are rated as being in excellent health regardless of their birth weight. And the share in

excellent health rises slightly over this period for all birth weight groups.

       Improving health for babies at the same birth weight is consistent with the

diffusion of new technologies, such as the refinement of ventilation techniques or the

advent of surfactant to treat respiratory distress syndrome. In part, these technologies

reduce mortality by speeding infant development. The same increase in development




                                              20
reduces future disability. In our analysis of the costs and benefits of care for low birth

weight infants, therefore, we assume that roughly two-thirds of infants at the edge of

viability have developmental problems, but this falls rapidly at birth weights where

survival is nearly 100 percent.

IV.     The Costs of Medical Innovation for Newborns

        The innovations in neonatal care have been large, but not without cost. Very little

was spent on the typical birth in 1960 since many women gave birth at home and

seriously ill infants died shortly after birth. In contrast, today the average length of

hospital stay for infants born with the diagnosis “pre-term or small for gestational age” is

about 23 days. Infants under 1500 g have an average length of stay near 40 days

(Rogowski 1998).

        There have been many studies estimating the birth costs for infants at different

birth weights. Table 6 presents a summary. The literature is not uniform on the weight

of the infants being considered. In older studies, viability at higher weights was a more

important issue, and costs considered heavier infants. More recent studies focus on the

lightest infants, where viability is currently the most difficult.

        The costs for the lightest infants (those weighing less than 1000 grams at birth)

range from $35,000 to about $68,000. Infants between 1000 and 1500 grams incur

hospital costs near $56,000 based on the only estimate that breaks out costs for this

group. The remaining infants under 2500 grams are much cheaper, with costs in the

$11,000 dollar range. Table 6 shows a summary of the costs by birth weight we will use

for our cost-benefit analysis.




                                              21
       We also need to estimate the subsequent costs for caring for low birth weight

infants with developmental difficulties. We assume that given disability, an individual

will incur three major costs: medical, benefit payments, and costs of special education.

Estimates of medical costs are based on the 1990 average Medicaid payment for disabled

Medicaid recipients and they total $6,594. The average payment for a disabled child is

$4,167. Finally, Lewit et al. (1995) estimate that the additional cost of special education

is $4,728. Not all of these costs will persist forever; for example, special education costs

occur only during school ages. We include special education costs for ages 5 through 20.

In 1990, therefore, the subsequent costs for school-aged children with severe disabilities

is about $15,000 per year. About half of the children with health problems are not

severely disabled. They may suffer more minor disorders such as hearing impairment

that requires the use of a hearing aid. We do not expect these children to require

resources of $15,000 per year. We assume that for these individuals, the cost of disability

is 1/10 as large as for severely disabled children. Therefore, we use $8,271 as the

average annual spending for children with problems in 1990.

       These costs have increased over time. To account for this, we assume that costs

in 1960 were half of their real value in 1990. Our estimate of costs for impaired children

in 1960 is therefore about $4,136.

V. Valuing the Benefits of Neonatal Care

       The benefits of improved care for low birth weight births involves both mortality

and morbidity changes. We take life expectancy estimates from period life tables from

the Social Security Administration (Bell et al. 1992). To generate life tables by birth

weight, we use birth weight-specific infant mortality rate and assume that conditioning on



                                             22
survival to age one, subsequent mortality rates equal those of the average child within the

population.13 Details of the procedure used to compute life expectancy are included in

Appendix 2.

         Life expectancy grew dramatically for the lightest infants from 1960 to 1990. In

1960, an infant born under 1000 grams was expected to live 6.5 years. In 1990, that

number was 38.2. Babies born at 1000-1500 grams were expected to live until age 36 in

1960, but now are expected to live until age 73. The gains were smaller, but non-trivial

for heavier infants over this period, increasing from 71 to 79 years for infants weighing

1500 to 2500 grams and from 77 to 80 years for infants above 2500 grams. By 1990, all

infants over 1500 grams could expect to live 79-80 years.

         Quality of life is more difficult to estimate. Ideally, one might estimate quality of

life for each of the complications low birth weight infants face, using a methodology such

as that suggested by Cutler and Richardson (1997, 1998, 1999). We intend to pursue this

in subsequent work. As a starting point, we use already published results on quality of

life, in Cutler and Richardson. In their work, they show that in 1990, QALYs for even

the most severe conditions studied such as cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and paralysis,

are in the range of .65 to .75. We therefore use a QALY of .65 for severely disabled

children, .75 for moderately disabled children and .95 for low birth weight children who

are considered normal. We assume that half the children who are disabled have a serious


         13
           The number of deaths for low birth weight infants after age 1 is too small to estimate subsequent
mortality by birth weight. Such mortality rates would also be contaminated by differences in
socioeconomic status of low and normal birth weight babies. One sensitivity test for this estimate is to
assume death at age 50 for all low birth weight births. Making this change does not substantially affect our
results.




                                                    23
disability and half have a moderate disability. Finally, we assume that infants born of

normal birth weight have a quality of life of .99, reflecting the absence of serious

disability in this group.

        Table 9 shows the implied quality-adjusted life expectancy by birth weight in

1960 and 1990. Quality-adjusted life expectancy has increased as much or more than

expected years of life.

        To form cost-effectiveness ratios, this is all the information we need. To estimate

a rate of return to medical care, however, we need to value these health changes in

dollars. The economics literature has attempted to measure the value of life in several

ways (see Viscusi, 1993, or Tolley et al. 1994, for reviews). One type of measurement is

contingent valuation B asking people in surveys how much they value life at. A second

method is the compensating differentials framework B inferring the value of life from

how much people have to be paid to work in risky jobs or how much people are willing to

pay for safety measures. While any concept as difficult as the value of life is problematic

to measure, the preponderance of the evidence is in a fairly tight range. Most studies find

a value of life of about $75,000 to $150,000 per year, or about $3 to $7 million for a

middle-aged person. We use the $100,000 figure in our analysis; for those who prefer a

different number, our estimates of the benefits of medical technology can be multiplied

by the ratio of the preferred number to 100,000, and a new estimate of the rate of return

to technology can be calculated. For reasons discussed above, we do not vary this

estimate across people or ages.

        The final requirement is a discount rate, r. This too is a venerable economic issue.

Arguments for a number of discount rates have been presented, ranging from 0 (life




                                             24
should not be discounted) to 20 percent or more (to justify risky behavior). As a rough

consensus of the economic literature, we use a discount rate of 3 percent in our central

estimate. We present sensitivity results to alternative discount rates of 0 and 10 percent.

Although discount rates affect the magnitude of returns to increased spending on low

birth weight infants, these will not alter our conclusions.



VI. Cost-benefit Analysis

       The last rows of table 9 show the cost-benefit calculation, in 1990 dollars. The

net benefit for all birth weights is high. Among the lightest infants, costs increased by

nearly $150,000 per infant between 1960 and 1990. About 40 percent of this amount is

the cost of the birth; the remainder is the future costs for the increased share of surviving

infants with developmental problems. But the benefit of care for this group is high. We

estimate a benefit to this group of 30 additional years of life, or 1.3 million dollars of

quality-adjusted life. The rate of return for babies born under 1000 grams, shown in the

last row of the table, is 791 percent.

       For infants born between 1000 and 1500 grams, we estimate that lifetime costs

grew by $47,000. We estimate that the birth costs of these infants was nearly $70,000

higher in 1990 than in 1960, but the share of infants with developmental problems fell by

40 percent. The benefits to these infants of improved survival and quality of life is nearly

$1 million per infant. The return to spending on these infants is a stunning 1880 percent.

       For infants of 1500 to 2499 grams, the change in net benefits of care are smaller.

Birth costs increased by only $11,000 per child, and developmental problems are

relatively low. Thus, total costs for these infants rose by $27,000. These infants lived an



                                              25
additional 7 years of quality-adjusted life, however, for a gain of over $75,000. The rate

of return is 190 percent.

       The next column shows an extremely high rate of return for increased technology

for normal birth weight infants – over 930 percent. But this estimate is somewhat

misleading. Both cost increases and benefit changes are low for this group. The net

benefit of improved care is not particularly large.

       The final column of the table shows the estimated return for all low birth weight

infants together. Our estimated return is 510 percent. Using a higher discount rate

reduces the rate of return to 46 percent (because the value of life in the future is

discounted). However, among very low birth weight infants, returns still exceed 400

percent. The clear conclusion is that while care for low birth weight infants has cost a

lot, it has brought even more in the way of benefits.

       One might alternatively judge this technology by how it compares to other

medical interventions. Table 10 shows cost-effectiveness ratios for various medical

interventions. Our estimates in table9 imply a cost per QALY of $3,700 (assuming a 3

percent discount rate).

       Based on estimates presented in an Office of Technology Assessment Report

(1988), prenatal care still appears to be much more cost effective than neonatal care. The

OTA estimates that prenatal care actually saves money. However, these estimates of the

impact of prenatal care should be interpreted with caution. Recent estimates of the effect

of Medicaid expansions on infant survival estimate very small effects of Medicaid

eligibility on low birth weight (Currie and Gruber, 1996). The estimates are sufficiently

small that prenatal care would not pay for itself. The difference between the theoretical




                                              26
and actual impacts of insurance eligibility on costs may result from inadequate take-up of

prenatal care when offered. Enhanced prenatal care services will only improve outcomes

if women use these services in the right way. Since many women do not use them

appropriately (Piper et al. 1995), the theoretical benefits are generally not achieved.

         Influenza vaccinations in low-risk populations yield cost effectiveness ratios of

about $1,700 per QALY, lower than what we estimate. The treatment of severe

hypertension yields a cost effectiveness ratio of $17,000. Similarly, regular pap smears

every 3 years yields a ratio of $17,000 per QALY. Finally, coronary artery bypass

surgery costs approximately $34,000 to $48,000 dollars per QALY depending on the

exact procedure. Relative to other medical interventions, intensive care for low birth

weight infants fares well.

         One issue not captured in our analysis thus far is the controversial question about

what the loss is from death of very low weight infants. One may judge our estimates of

the benefits of this care as too high, because the children who do not survive are more or

less “replaceable”. It seems clear that families are less upset by the death of a very

premature infant than by the death of a normal birth weight infant. But how can this be

quantified?14 And are all children really replaceable? For some women who are

increasingly delaying childbearing, seeking fertility treatments, or who because of careers

face high opportunity costs of childbearing, the “replacement” costs may be high.




         14
            An interesting thought experiment is to imagine how a couple at 22-25 weeks of pregnancy
might respond to the following scenario: “You have just given birth to an extremely low birth weight
infant. You may choose between aggressive care for your pre-term infant or you may receive the cash
equivalent of the PDV of all current and future costs for the child, about 150 to 200 thousand dollars, for
use on your next child.” How many parents would accept the money?




                                                     27
       One way to gain a lower bound estimate of returns to intensive care is to assume

that society places no value on saving the life of a premature infant. Instead, assume that

society values only improvements in the quality of life for those infants who survive

without the technology advances of the past 30 years. In other words, assume

replacement costs are zero. We performed a cost-benefit analysis similar to that shown in

table 9, but assuming that no gains were made in neonatal mortality among low birth

weight infants since 1960. Under this assumption, gains come in the form of increased

QALYs and the decreased cost associated with a reduction in severe problems. Without

gains in survival for low birth weight infants, we calculate negative returns to increased

spending on neonatal care. The gains do not seem great enough to outweigh the costs.

Costs rise by about $38,000 over the last 30 years, but the health benefits rise by only

$21,000.15 The issue of replacement cost is an important issue for future research.

VII. Conclusions

       Medical spending growth for infants has been explosive over the last several

decades. It is natural to question what we buy with the additional spending. In the case

of infant survival, we can answer relatively clearly: spending an additional $40,000 per

low birth weight infant has increased survival by 11.8 years on average, or 10.5 quality-

adjusted years.

       Our estimated rate of return to increased spending on low birth weight infants is

enormous – over 500 percent. Put another way, the cost per year of quality-adjusted life

is about $3,700. This figure is low even at high discount rates. While the cost-

effectiveness of certain other medical interventions such as prenatal care or influenza

       15
            This estimate is particularly conservative because we based estimates of the disability



                                                     28
shots for infants may be greater than that for neonatal intensive care, this intervention

compares favorably with many highly valued medical interventions such as preventive

care for cervical cancer and coronary artery bypass surgery.

       Because neonatal intensive care provides one of the few examples where we can

accurately estimate the returns to medical spending, our results are encouraging. In the

case of newborns, on average, medical spending for aggressive care at birth is worth it.




References

Anspach, Renée R., 1997, Deciding Who Lives, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Baker, Jeffrey P., 1996, The Machine in the Nursery: Incubator Technology and the
        Origins of Newborn Intensive Care, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
        Press.
Bell, Felicitie C., Alice H. Wade and Stephen C. Gross, 1992, Life Tables for the U.S.
        Social Security Area, 1900-2080, Actuarial Study 107. Baltimore: U.S. Social
        Security Administration, Office of the Actuary.
Boyle, M., et al., 1983, “Economic evaluation of neonatal intensive care of very-low-
        birth-weight infants, New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 308: 1330-37.
Costa, Dora, 1998, Understanding the Twentieth Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
        Among Older Men, NBER Working Paper No. W6859. Cambridge, MA:
        National Bureau of Economic Research. December.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber, 1996, “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of
        Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 104(6): 1263-96.
Cutler, David M., and Ellen Meara, 1998, The Medical Costs of the Young and Old: A
        Forty-Year Perspective, in Frontiers in Aging, David Wise ed., Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, David M., and Elizabeth Richardson, 1997, “Measuring the Health of the U.S.
        Population, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997: 217-271.
Cutler, David M., and Elizabeth Richardson, 1998, “The Value of Health: 1970-1990,”
        AEA Papers and Proceedings,” Vol. 88(2) 97-100.
Cutler, David M., and Elizabeth Richardson, 1999, “Your Money and Your Life: The
        Value of Health and What Affects It,” Working Paper # 6895, Cambridge, MA,
        January.
Lewit, Eugene, et al., 1995, “The Direct Cost of Low Birth Weight,” The Future of
        Children, Vol. 5(1): 35-56.

       improvement and QALY improvement on conservative estimates taken from previous literature.


                                               29
Lubchenco, Lula O. et al., 1963, “Sequelae of Premature Birth: Evaluation of Premature
        Infants of Low Birth Weights at Ten Years of Age,” American Journal of
        Diseases of Children, 106: 101-15.
Manton, Kenneth et al., 1997, “Chronic Disability Trends in Elderly United States
        Populations: 1982-1994, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
        94:2593-2598.
Meltzer, David, 1997, “Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness
        Analysis,” Working Paper # 5946, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research, February.
Newhouse, Joseph P., 1992, Newhouse, “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare
        Loss?” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 6 (3). p 3-21.
Paneth, Nigel S., 1995, AThe Problem of Low Birth Weight,@ The Future of Children,
                        5(1):19-34.
Piper, Joyce, et al., 1990, “Effects of Medicaid Eligibility Expansion on Prenatal Care
        and Pregnancy Outcome in Tennessee,” Journal of the American Medical
        Association, 264(17): 2219-23.
Pomerance JJ et al., 1978, “Cost of living for infants weighing 1,000 grams or less at
        birth,” Pediatrics. 61(6): 908-10.
Rogowski Janet, 1998, “Cost-effectiveness of care for very low birth weight infants,”
        Pediatrics. 102(1 Pt 1): 35-43.
Schoendof, Kenneth C., 1997, “Birth Weight and Age-Specific Analysis of the 1990 U.S.
        Infant Mortality Drop: Was it Surfactant?” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent
        Medicine, Vol. 151: 129-134.
Shapiro, S. et al., 1983, “Changes in Infant Morbidity Associated With Decreases in
        Neonatal Mortality,” Pediatrics, 72: 408-15.
Stevenson, et al., 1998, “Very Low BirthWeight Outcomes of the National Institute of
        Child Health and Human Development Neonatal Research Network, January
        1993 through December 1994,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
        179(6): 1632-39.
Tolley , George, Donald Kenkel, and Robert Fabian, eds., 1994, Valuing Health for
        Policy: An Economic Approach. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 1988, Healthy Children: Investing in
        the Future, OTA-A-345, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
        pp. 73-235.
Viscusi, W. Kip, 1993, “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Eocnomic
        Literature, 31: 1912-46.
Williams, Ronald L. and Peter M. Chen, 1982, “Identifying the Sources of the Recent
        Decline in Perinatal Mortality Rates in California,” New England Journal of
        Medicine, Vol. 306: 207-14.




                                          30
Appendix 1a: The Birth Weight Distribution in the U.S. 1950-1990

                    Birth Weight Distribution (percentage)                      Annual
                 1950        1960          1985         1990                   % Change

<1000 g         0.50%         0.60%         0.60%         0.60%                    0.5%
1000-1499g        0.6           0.7           0.6           0.6                    0.0%
1500-1999 g       1.4           1.5           1.3           1.3                    -0.2%
2000-2499 g       4.9           5.1           4.2           4.4                    -0.3%
2500-2999 g      18.1          18.5          15.9          16.1                    -0.3%
3000-3499 g      37.7          38.0          36.7          36.8                    -0.1%
3500-3999        27.1          26.8          30.0          29.3                    0.2%
4000-4499 g       7.7           7.5           9.2           9.0                    0.4%
4500 + g          2.1           1.5           1.9           1.8                    -0.4%
Sources: 1950-60 data from "A study of infant mortality from linked records: Comparison of
Neonatal Mortality From Two Cohort Studies, United States, January-March 1950 and 1960".
1985 data from: U.S. Vital Statistics "Linked Birth-Death Files 1985," Chapter 6, table 4,
1990 data based on authors' calculations using linked birth-death files.

Appendix 1b: The Birth Weight Distribution in Massachussets, 1972-1994
                                 Birth Weight Distribution (percentage)                       Annual
                 1972         1978        1982          1986         1990           1994     % Change

<=1000 g        0.41%        0.39%        0.42%        0.39%        0.43%           0.44%     0.3%
1001-1500g        0.4          0.4          0.5          0.4          0.4             0.4     -0.3%
1501-2000 g       1.1          1.0          0.8          0.9          0.8             0.9     -0.9%
2001-2500 g       4.2          3.7          3.3          3.1          3.0             3.2     -1.3%
2501-3000 g      18.3         16.0         14.8         14.2         14.1            14.0     -1.2%
3001-3500 g      40.0         38.4         37.5         36.0         36.2            36.2     -0.5%
3501-4000 g      27.1         29.6         31.3         32.1         32.1            32.1     0.8%
4001-4500 g       7.2          8.7          9.5         10.6         10.9            10.9     1.9%
4501 + g          1.4          1.8          2.0          2.3          2.1             2.0     1.6%

Sources: Based on Authors' Calculations using Massachussets Vital Statistics Data




                                                  31
Appendix 2: Estimating Life Expectancy by Birth Weight



Traditional cohort life tables are computed as follows:

                           Tx
e& x = life expectancy =                                                                 x = 1, 2, 3, 4
                           Lx


T x = total life years lived by cohort at age x = L x + L x +1 + L x + 2 + ... + L119
                                                                                 x = 0, 1, 2, 3...119

L x = expected life years lived at age x by cohort = l x − .5 ⋅ d x                     x = 1, 2, 3, 4


L0 = expected life years lived in 1 st year of life by cohort = l 0 −1 f 0 ⋅ d 0


1   f 0 = separation factor, or average fraction of a year not lived
 by those who die in 1 st year

l x = # of individuals in cohort at age x = l x −1 ⋅ (1−1 q x −1 )                      x = 1, 2, 3, 4


d x = # of deaths in cohort at age x = l x ⋅1 q x                                        x = 1, 2, 3, 4


1 qx   = one − year probability of death at age x


l 0 = # of individuals in cohort at age 0 = 100,000

For each birth weight group within each sex, the value of 1q0, or the average probability

of death before age one was replaced with the actual probability of death within that birth

weight group. Then, values of 1f0 were replaced in each gender-cohort-birth weight

group such that the weighted average of life expectancy by birth weight group and gender

would equal that of the population in that cohort. So for example, in 1960, the actual

male distribution of infant deaths by age at death (<7 days, 7-27, 28-365) was multiplied

by the fraction of year not lived for infants who died at a given age. Male infants who

died before 7 days were assumed to have not lived for .9969 of the first year. Those

dying between 7 and 27 days did not live .9795 of the first year, and those dying from age


                                                             32
28-365 were assumed to not live for .6055 of the first year. The values of “fraction of

year not lived” for by gender, cohort, and age at death used are shown in the table below.

Fraction of year not lived
                                      1960                      1990
                               Male       Female         Male      Female

Under 7 daysa                 0.9969      0.9964       0.9969      0.9964
7-28 daysb                    0.9795      0.9780       0.9794      0.9780
28-365 daysc                  0.6055      0.5945       0.7726      0.8301
a – For males(females), this assumes a 95(90) percent chance of death at age 1
day and 5(10) percent chance of death at 3.5 days.

b - For males(females), this assumes a 95(90) percent chance of death at age 7
days and 5(10) percent chance of death at age 17 days.

c – This value was selected so that given the values used above, the weighted
average life expectancy over gender and birth weight groups would equal the
life expectancy shown in published cohort life tables.




                                                    33
Table 1: Analysis of Medical Technology Changes

             Costs                                Benefits

          Birth Costs                     Value of being alive
    Subsequent medical costs
         Costs of living
Table 2: The probability of neonatal death and birth weight, U.S. Vital Statistics 1990
                                                         Standard                           Standard
                                        Coefficient        Error           Coefficient        Error

Mother's age                              -0.0007*        0.0001             -0.0003*       0.0001
Mother's age squared                      1.3e-05*        1.2e-06             4.1e-06*      9.7e-07
Other non-white mother                    -0.00035        0.0002             -0.0004*       0.00020
Black mother                               0.0051*        0.0001             -0.0007*       0.0001
Mother's education
      Some HS                             -0.00016         0.0002             -0.0002        0.0002
      HS Degree                            -0.0004         0.0002             -0.0000        0.0002
      Some College                         -0.0004         .00024             -0.0002        0.0002
      College Degree+                     -0.0007*         0.0002             -0.0002        0.0002
      Education not stated                 0.0031*         0.0003             0.0018*        0.0003
Single mother?                             0.0013*         0.0001             -0.0001        0.0001
Prenatal care in 2nd trimester           -0.00161*         0.0001            -0.0002*        0.0001
Prenatal care in 3rd trimester           -0.00353*         0.0002             -0.0001        0.0002
No prenatal care                          0.02279*         0.0003             0.0037*        0.0003
Unknown prenatal care                     0.01213*         0.0003             0.0025*        0.0003
Used alcohol during pregnancy?             0.0008*         0.0002            -0.0007*        0.0002
Used tobacco during pregnancy?            0.00067*         0.0001            -0.0009*        0.0001
Birth weight dummies:
      500-999 g                                                              -0.5191*        0.0011
      1000-1499 g                                                            -0.8175*        0.0011
      1500-1999 g                                                            -0.8581*        0.0010
      2000-2499 g                                                            -0.8762*        0.0010
      2500-2999 g                                                            -0.8820*        0.0010
      3000-3499 g                                                            -0.8833*        0.0010
      3500-3999 g                                                            -0.8838*        0.0010
      4000-4499 g                                                            -0.8835*        0.0010
      5000-8165 g                                                            -0.8796*        0.0013
      Unknown                                                                -0.6240*        0.0014
R-squared                                          0.003                              0.325
Observations                                     2,982,529                          2,982,529

* indicates p-value < .05.
Dependent variable = 1 if baby died within 28 days of birth. The omitted categories for race,
education, prenatal care, and birth weight are: White, 0-8 years education, prenatal care in first
trimester, and 0-500 grams respectively.
Table 3a: Neonatal Deaths in the U.S. per 100 Live Births, 1950-90

                            1950           1960           1985          1990                           Annual % ∆

      <1000 g                87.2          91.3           57.2           48.3                             -1.5%
    1000-1499 g              55.1          52.2           10.5            6.7                              -5.3
    1500 1999 g              21.1          18.1            3.4            2.7                              -5.2
    2000 2499 g               5.0           4.1            1.1            0.8                              -4.5
    2500-2999 g               1.3           1.0            0.3            0.2                              -4.1
    3000-3499 g               0.7           0.5            0.2            0.1                              -4.4
    3500-3999 g               0.6           0.4            0.1            0.1                              -4.9
    4000-4499 g               0.8           0.4            0.1            0.1                              -5.7
      4500+ g                 1.4           0.9            0.3            0.2                              -5.4


Sources: 1950-60 data from "A study of infant mortality from linked records: Comparison of Neonatal Mortality From Two Cohort Studies,
United States, January-March 1950 and 1960". 1985 data from: U.S. Vital Statistics "Linked Birth-Death Files 1985," Chapter 6, table 4,
1990 data based on authors' calculations using linked birth-death files.
Table 3b: Neonatal Deaths per 100 Live Births in Massachusetts, 1972-94

                             1972            1978            1982           1986    1990   1994   Annual % ∆

      <1000 g                 79.8           71.7            68.4            60.3   48.7   44.3     -2.7%
    1000-1499 g               43.4           18.4            16.4             5.9   10.4    6.1      -8.9
    1500 1999 g               12.5            5.4             5.2             2.5    1.8    2.0      -8.4
    2000 2499 g                2.3            1.5             1.3             1.2    1.0    0.7      -5.4
    2500-2999 g                0.5            0.4             0.3             0.3    0.2    0.2      -4.2
    3000-3499 g                0.2            0.1             0.2             0.1    0.1    0.1      -6.5
    3500-3999 g                0.2            0.1             0.1             0.1    0.1    0.1      -5.9
    4000-4499 g                0.1            0.1             0.1             0.1    0.1    0.0      -8.7
      4500+ g                  0.2            0.2             0.2             0.4    0.1    0.2      -0.1

Sources: Based on Authors’ Calculations using Massachussets Vital Statistics Data
Table 4: Explaining Improvements in Infant Mortality
                                                         U.S.    Massachusetts
Measure                                                1950-90     1972-94

Annual change in infant mortality                      -3.1%        -5.0%


Contribution of:
           Change in birth weight distribution          -4.2%        4.5%
          Birth weight-specific survival               107.1%       95.4%
                               <1500 g                 35.2%        43.3%
                               1500-2500 g               31.3        23.9
                               2501+ g                   40.6        28.1
Table 5: Timeline for the history of care for critically ill newborns

     1878         First incubator developed in France for regulating temperature of newborn
                  environment.

                  Julius Hess opened the first fully developed pre-term nursery (incubator
     1922
                  station) at Sarah Lawrence Children’s Hospital (affiliated with Michael
                  Reese in Chicago).


     1960s        First NICUs started. Early attempts at modifying ventilators for tiny
                  infants began. Other innovations to maintain temperature & nutrition of
                  pre-term infants. For term babies, obstetric monitoring began in the 1960s.

                  There were major improvements in ventilators for pre-term infants.
                  Neonatal-perinatal medicine became a board-certified subspecialty of
     1970s        pediatrics in 1975. By 1976, over 125 NICUs existed in North America.
                  By the end of >70s, the edge of viability was at 1000 grams, 28-29 weeks
                  By 1979, Prob[Death | bw=1000 g] ∼ .90

                  Major innovations in the late 1980s include: Antenatal corticosteroid
                  treatments to speed up maturation; tocolytics, or medication for delaying
     1980s        pre-term delivery (this can be combined with corticosteroids for
                  accelerating antenatal development); high-speed ventilation to deliver
                  more frequent, smaller puffs of air. Clinical trials of surfactant to treat
                  infants with respiratory distress syndrome began.

                  Surfactant use approved by FDA. Broader use of corticosteroids,
                  Proliferation of high-frequency ventilation. Pharmaceutical treatments to
                  treat open patent ductus arteriosus. Babies who need surgery to correct
     1990s        defects get the surgery faster due to better coordination between OB/Gyn
                  and neonatology and sub-specialties. By 1995, over 700 NICUs in North
                  America. By 1999, the edge of viability is at 23-24 weeks (600-700 g).
                  P[Death | weight=1000 g]=.10.
Table 6: Costs of Care for Low Birth Weight Births (in 1990 $)
                                                                                                   Medical Costs per
Medical Costs         Study                       Country        Birth Cohort      Birth Weight       Live Birth

                      Boyle et al. 1983           Canada           1973-76      < 1500 g               $28,725

                      Office of
                      Technology
                      Assessment 1988               U.S.            1970's      < 2500 g                6,850

                      Pomerance et al.
                      1978                          U.S.            1970        < 1000 g                44,874

                      Lewit et al. 1988             U.S.            1988        <1000 g                 35,354
                                                                                1000-2499               11,048
                                                                                >=2500 g                2,099
                      Rogowski 1998                 U.S.           1986-87      < 1500 g                61,668
                                                                                     <1000 g            67,766
                                                                                     1000-1499 g        56,557
Table 7: Health Problems and Costs by Birth Weight, 1960 &1990

                                                                                                       Annual Costs | Problems
                                                       Pr[Problems]           Average costs at birth    (without special ed.)
                                                   1960             1990       1960         1990         1960         1990
Pr[Problems] by birth weight
      < 1000 g                                      0.68            0.66        $0         $67,766
      1000-1499 g                                   0.68            0.28         0          56,557
      1500-2499 g                                   0.23            0.23         0          11,048
      2500+                                         0.01            0.01         0          2,099


All Birth weights                                  0.033           0.028        $0          $3,330       $4136       $8,271
                                                                                                        ($2,959)    ($5,919)


See text for a description of the source for rates and costs of disability.
Table 8: Age-adjusted measures of child health by birth weight
Sample of non-institutionalized children aged 0-17 from Health Interview Surveys,
1981 and 1988 Child Health Supplements
                                                                         %∆
Outcome                             1981            1988               1981-88      t-stat
% SRHS=Excellent?
        < 1500 g                   70.4%         70.8%                   0.6        0.08
        1501-2500 g                 70.6          70.7                   0.1        0.03
        2501-4500 g                 70.6          71.2                   0.8        1.59
        > 4500 g                    70.6          71.5                   1.3        0.37

                                  in major       in usual
% With Activity Limitation         activity      activity
          < 1500 g                  5.0%          14.0%                 NA
          1501-2500 g                5.5            8.8                 NA
          2501-4500 g                1.7            3.9                 NA
          > 4500 g                   3.4            5.2                 NA

# of Short-stay hospital days
in last 12 months
             < 1500 g              0.310          0.285                  -8.5       0.05
             1501-2500 g           0.293          0.268                  -8.8       0.23
             2501-4500 g           0.327          0.333                   1.7       0.49
             > 4500 g              0.347          0.298                 -15.0       0.95

# of Short-stay hospital
episodes in last 12 months
             < 1500 g              0.053          0.055                  2.7        0.52
             1501-2500 g           0.055          0.052                 -6.7        2.10
             2501-4500 g           0.060          0.060                  0.6        1.78
             > 4500 g              0.061          0.055                 -9.8        4.50

# of Doctor Visits in last 12 months
            < 1500 g                 2.82         3.08                   8.5        0.06
            1501-2500 g              2.88         2.95                   2.7        0.04
            2501-4500 g              3.05         3.10                   1.7        0.27
            > 4500 g                 3.00         2.94                  -2.2        0.06

# of behavior problems on
32 point behavior index
            < 1500 g                0.74          0.74                   1.0        0.03
            1501-2500 g             0.77          0.80                   3.0        0.11
            2501-4500 g             0.73          0.72                  -2.4        0.98
            > 4500 g                0.81          0.79                  -2.4        0.15

% Repeated Grade in
School?
         < 1500 g                  10.7%          8.6%                 -21.6        2.94
         1501-2500 g                10.5           9.7                  -7.9        1.62
         2501-4500 g                 9.6           9.0                  -6.5        12.02
         > 4500 g                   11.0           9.9                 -10.5        4.42
Table 9: Cost Benefit Calculation Assuming Discount Rate = 0.03
                                                                                       Birthweight
                                                          <1000                1000-1499        1500-2499    >=2500
1960         Life Expectancy | Birth                        6.5                   35.9             71          77.3
             QALY                                          0.78                   0.78            0.89         0.96
             Pr[Problems]                                  0.68                   0.68            0.23         0.01

             Value of Life                              $465,180               $1,741,128      $2,688,515   $2,949,694
             Total Costs                                 $16,871                $57,440         $24,180       $1,093

1990         Life Expectancy | Birth                       38.2                   73.1            78.8         80.3
             QALY                                          0.78                   0.88            0.89         0.96
             Pr[Problems]                                  0.66                   0.28            0.23         0.01

             Value of Life                            $1,801,663               $2,673,145      $2,765,862   $2,978,061
             Total Costs                               $166,861                 $104,517        $50,861       $3,834

Rate of Return Calculation for Low Birth Weight Infants

                                                          <1000                1000-1499       1500-2499    >= 2500 g    All lbw infants

1960-90 Change in costs                                $149,991                  $47,077        $26,681      $2,742         $39,042
        Change in value                               $1,336,484                $932,017        $77,347      $28,367       $238,248
             Rate of Return                              791%                    1880%           190%         935%           510%
             [10,0% discount rates]                   [408, 1084]              [270, 3172]      [3, 924]    [7, 6037]      [46, 1022]
Refer to the text for descriptions of calculations and definitions of terms.
Table 10: Cost effectiveness: Costs per QALY for selected medical interventions
                                                                                            Birth weight

Intervention                                           <1000             1000-1500         1500-2500         >2500         All Weights < 2500 g

Neonatal Care                                          $6,101              $1,290            $3,833           $955                  $3,726


Compared with other interventions
Prenatal Care                                     Cost savings**
Influenza vaccination age < 3 years                   $1,745
Neonatal Care for All LBW Infants                     $3,726
Pap Smear every 3 years, ages 20-74                  $17,000
Treatment of severe hypertension                     $17,000
Coronary Artery Bypass                           $33,600-$48,300


Source: Cost-effectiveness numbers (except for prenatal and neonatal care) based on those reported in Meltzer, 1997.
** Prenatal Care estimates based on the following: OTA, 1988 reports that prenatal care costs $380 ($453 in '90 $) and reduces p(LBW) by 50 %. Given
a rate of LBW of 7%, this implies a 3.5 percentage point reduction in low birth weight, or an additional QALE of .27 for each newborn whose mother
received prenatal care. Given the prevented cases of low birth weight, this reduces expected costs for a given child and so the net cost savings due to
prenatal care is $4,214.
                                     Figure 1: Infant mortality rates and fetal mortality ratios since 1900

                           200


                           150
Deaths/1,000 live births




                                                                              I n f a n t M o rta lity R a te       Expanded Infant
                                                                                                                     M o rta lity R a t e
                                                                              F e t a l M o rta lity R a tio

                           100


                           50


                            0
                                 0        10        20        30        40        50           60              70         80          90
                                      5        15        25        35        45         55            65             75         85          95

                                                                              Year
           Note: Expanded Infant Mortality = (Infant+Fetal Deaths)/(1000 Live Births+Fetal Deaths)
          Fig. 2: Trends in Infant Deaths by Decade, 1950-95
                Trend in infant deaths 1950s                                                  Trend in infant deaths 1960s
35                                                                             35

30                                                                             30

25                                                                             25

20                                                                             20

15                                                                             15

10                                                                             10

 5                                                                              5
     50    51    52      53     54          55        56      57     58   59        60   61    62      63     64           65       66      67      68   69
                                     Year                                                                        Year

                Infant Mortality Rate            Fetal Mortality Ratio                        Infant Mortality Rate             Fetal Mortality Ratio



                Trend in infant deaths 1970s                                                  Trend in infant deaths 1980s
35                                                                             35

30                                                                             30
25                                                                             25
20                                                                             20
15                                                                             15

10                                                                             10
 5                                                                              5
     70    71    72      73     74          75        76      77     78   79        80   81     82     83      84          85        86     87      88   89
                                     Year                                                                           Year

                Infant Mortality Rate            Fetal Mortality Ratio                        Infant Mortality Rate             Fetal Mortality Ratio


                Trend in infant deaths 1990s
35

30
25
20
15

10
 5
     90    91    92      93     94          95        96      97     98   99
                                     Year

                Infant Mortality Rate            Fetal Mortality Ratio
                                                  F ig. 3 A n n u a l C h a n g e s in D e a ths/1 0 0 0 L ive B irt h s
Annual Change in Deaths/1000 Live Births
                                           0 .5


                                             0


                                           -0.5


                                             -1


                                           -1.5
                                                    1950-60         1960-70      1970-80       1980-90         1990-94

                                                     Infa n t D e a ths   F e ta l D e a ths   Infa n t + F e ta l D e a ths

                Note: Infant Mortality Rate = Deaths < 1 year of age per 1,000 live births
                Fetal Mortality Ratio = Fetal Deaths per 1,000 live births
                                              F ig. 4 a P e rce n t o f I n f a n t s W h o D ie W i t h i n 2 8 D a y s o f B i r t h
                                                                    U nite d S ta te s V ita l S ta t i s t i c s D a ta
                                    100
                                     90
         % Who Die Before 28 Days

                                     80
                                     70
                                                                                 1950           1960           1985        1990
                                     60
                                     50
                                     40
                                     30
                                     20
                                     10
                                         0
                                         <=1000 g       1501-2000 g     2501-3000 g     3501-4000 g       4501 + g
                                                1001-1500g      2001-2500 g     3001-3500 g     4001-4500 g



                                              F ig. 4 b P e r c e n t o f I n f a n t s W h o D ie W i t h i n 2 8 D a ys of Birth
                                                                     M a s s a c h u s e tts V ita l S ta tistics

                                    80
% Who Die Before 28 Days




                                    70

                                    60
                                                                          1972           1982           1990
                                    50
                                                                          1978           1986           1994
                                    40

                                    30

                                    20

                                    10

                                     0
                                     <=1000 g       1501-2000 g     2501-3000 g     3501-4000 g       4501 + g
                                            1001-1500g      2001-2500 g     3001-3500 g     4001-4500 g

                                                                                    Birth W e ight
                                       F ig. 5 : Change in G e n e ra l H e a lth S tatus by Birth W e ight, 1 9 8 1 - 9 1
                                       0 .8
                                      0.79
                                      0.78
% of children in "excellent" health




                                      0.77
                                      0.76
                                      0.75
                                      0.74
                                      0.73
                                      0.72
                                      0.71
                                       0 .7
                                                     1981                      1988                       1991
                                                               <1500 g      1500-2499 g       2500+ g

             Source: '81 and '88 data from the National Health Interview Survey Child Health Supplements
             91 data from the National Maternal & Infant Health Survey Follow-up. Data are weighted to reflect
             population & age-adjusted by age in months to correct for differences in age distribution across samples.
