                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TAXATION AND HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO
                            COMPOSITION: U.S. EVIDENCE FROM THE
                                      1980s AND 1990s


                                             James M. Poterba
                                            Andrew A. Samwick




                                            Working Paper 7392
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7392


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 1999



We received helpful comments from Rochelle Antoniewicz, Alan Auerbach, Joel Dickson, Roger Gordon,
Stefan Hochguertel, William Randolph, Karl Scholz, Doug Shackelford, Joel Slemrod, and seminar
participants at Wharton, Dartmouth, Michigan, Kellogg, Tilburg, the NBER, and the AFA. Arthur
Kennickell provided assistance with the use of the Surveys of Consumer Finances. We thank Dan
Bergstresser for excellent research assistance and the National Science Foundation, the Smith-
Richardson Foundation, and the Nelson Rockefeller Fund in Economics for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by James M. Poterba and Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition:
U.S. Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s
James M. Poterba and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 7392
October 1999
JEL No. H24, G11


                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper explores the relationship between household marginal income tax rates, the set of assets
that households own, and the portfolio shares accounted for by each of these assets. It analyzes data from
the 1983, 1989, 1992, and 1995 Surveys of Consumer Finances and develops a new algorithm for
imputing federal marginal tax rates to households in these surveys. The empirical findings suggest that a
household’s marginal tax rate has an important effect its asset allocation decisions. The probability that a
household owns tax-advantaged assets is strongly related to its tax rate on ordinary income. In addition,
the amount of investment through tax-deferred accounts such as 401(k) plans and IRAs is an increasing
function of the household’s marginal tax rate. Holdings of corporate stock, which is taxed less heavily than
interest bearing assets, and of tax-exempt bonds are also increasing in the household’s marginal tax rate.
Holdings of heavily taxed assets, such as corporate bonds and interest-bearing accounts, decline as a share
of wealth as a household’s marginal tax rate increases.


James M. Poterba                                                       Andrew Samwick
Department of Economics                                                 Department of Economics
MIT                                                                    Dartmouth College
E52-350                                                                6160 Rockefeller Hall
50 Memorial Drive                                                     Hanover, NH 03755-3514
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                             and NBER
and NBER                                                             samwick@dartmouth.edu
poterba@mit.edu
        The federal income tax places different tax burdens on different types of capital income. Interest

and dividends are included in ordinary income, while capital gains are taxed at a preferential rate, and then

only upon realization. Interest on state and local government bonds is tax-exempt. Different individuals

also face different federal marginal income tax rates, ranging in the late 1990s from 0 to just over 40

percent. The range was even larger prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Taxation generates potentially

significant differences between the pre-tax and the post-tax returns available to individual investors. It also

creates variation in the relative tax burdens on different assets facing different investors.

        There have been relatively few empirical studies of how taxation affects portfolio allocation,

although a substantial body of research has considered the theory of household portfolio choice in the

presence of differential taxation. The lack of research on portfolio structure is due in part to the relative

scarcity of reliable information on the asset holdings of the high-wealth households who hold a significant

share of financial assets. Since 1983, however, the Federal Reserve Board has sponsored a triennial Survey

of Consumer Finances that provides high-quality information on asset holdings. This survey includes a

substantial number of high net worth households. In this paper, we exploit these data to explore how taxes

affect portfolio choice.

        We classify all financial assets into one of eight categories and examine the effect of taxes on both

the decision to own assets in each category and the decision of how much of the portfolio to allocate to each

asset. We follow two empirical strategies. The first focuses on the cross-sectional relationship between

marginal tax rates and portfolio structure in each of the Surveys of Consumer Finances. Theoretical models

of differential taxation and portfolio structure yield their clearest predictions with respect to such cross-

sectional patterns. Unfortunately, because marginal tax rates are a function of a household’s taxable

income, which in turn is a function of its labor income and its income from assets, it can be difficult to

disentangle income effects from tax rate effects in the cross-section.

        For this reason, we also develop a second empirical approach that uses the repeated cross-

sections of the Survey of Consumer Finances. While the theoretical basis for interpreting how systematic
changes in the structure of marginal tax rates affect household portfolio structure is less solid than that

for analyzing cross-sectional patterns, the source of the identifying variation in tax rates is much clearer.

Using repeated cross sections also provides us with a much larger data set than any one cross-section, and

it offers more variation in marginal tax rates than any single cross-section.

        This paper is divided into seven sections. The first summarizes existing models of portfolio choice

in the presence of differential capital income taxation. It provides the conceptual basis for our subsequent

empirical work. This section includes a discussion of the tax treatment of assets held in tax-deferred

accounts, such as Individual Retirement Accounts and 401(k) plans. These accounts break the traditional

link between a financial asset’s characteristics, such as a bank deposit, a corporate bond, or an equity mutual

fund, and its tax treatment. Section two summarizes previous empirical work on how taxes affect portfolio

composition, and places our empirical strategy in context.

        Section three describes the Survey of Consumer Finances data that we analyze, explains our

procedure for imputing marginal tax rates to households in the survey, and presents some information on the

changing pattern of marginal income tax rates over our sample years. The fourth section outlines our

econometric framework for analyzing which assets households own and the portfolio shares allocated to

each of these assets. Section five presents our empirical findings on the discrete decisions households make

about whether to hold particular asset categories. Section six presents parallel results on the amounts that

households choose to invest in different asset categories. In each of these sections, we present findings from

both the 1995 SCF cross-section and the repeated cross-sections database. We also develop illustrative

results that describe how changes in marginal tax rates might affect the structure of household portfolios.

There is a brief conclusion.



1. Portfolio Choice with Differential Taxation

        If all assets are riskless, and if different investors face different marginal tax rates on different

assets, then investors should segregate into asset clienteles. Miller (1977) builds on this simple but



                                                        2
powerful point in his model of corporate leverage decisions. He assumes that there are only two portfolio

assets, corporate debt and corporate equity. He further assumes that investors are not taxed on the income

of corporate equities, but that they are taxed on interest payments from corporate bonds. In this setting,

investors facing high tax rates should specialize in equity, while investors in lower tax brackets should hold

only corporate debt. In Miller’s (1977) equilibrium, the supply of debt and equity adjusts so that those

households with marginal tax rates above (below) the corporate rate hold only equity (debt).

        The basic insight of clientele formation generalizes to the many-asset case, provided all assets have

the same risk characteristics. The highest tax bracket investors should hold only the most tax-advantaged

assets and the lowest tax bracket investors should hold only the least tax-advantaged assets.

        The insight of clientele formation still influences portfolio choice in the presence of uncertain

returns, but under plausible assumptions, strict clienteles no longer arise. Auerbach and King (1983),

Brennan (1970), and McDonald (1983) are the theoretical studies that provide the most direct analysis of

equilibrium portfolio choice in the presence of differential taxation. Auerbach and King (1983) show that if

investors can obtain all possible pre-tax return streams from assets with their own most-preferred tax

treatment, then strict portfolio clienteles will emerge. The condition that leads to this result is very strong.

Consider what it requires there are two classes of securities, stocks and bonds, which are taxed differently.

It must be possible for an investor who prefers bonds to be able to obtain any pre-tax return stream that is

available on an equity security from a portfolio of bonds as well. This condition seems unlikely to be

satisfied in practice, even with more than two asset categories.

        If investors cannot span the set of pre-tax returns with assets from the asset class that they prefer for

tax reasons, then they will hold portfolios determined by both their tax preferences and their risk

preferences. The simplest case to consider is that of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). Equilibrium

portfolio allocations in the CAPM without taxes are such that every investor holds a combination of the

market portfolio and the riskfree asset. Every investor owns every asset, and all investors hold the same

share of their risky asset portfolio in each risky asset. When the CAPM framework is expanded to allow for



                                                        3
differential taxation of ordinary income and capital gains, and to allow for investor heterogeneity in tax

rates, as in Auerbach and King (1983), investors hold a combination of two portfolios of risky assets. One

is the market portfolio, which still represents the most efficient means of diversifying risk, and the other is a

portfolio of assets on which the investor is lightly taxed compared to other investors. That is, investors who

face high tax rates deviate from the market portfolio toward lightly taxed assets, and those with low tax rates

deviate into more heavily taxed assets.

        While our empirical work does not develop tests of the structural equations generated by the after-

tax CAPM, the predictions of this model motivate our empirical work. We investigate whether households’

deviations from the average portfolio are systematically related to their marginal tax rates.

        The foregoing discussion assumes that specific assets have immutable tax and return characteristics.

Bonds, for example, generate highly taxed income, and offer less risky returns than corporate equities.

Recent institutional changes in the tax environment confronting savers in the United States and many other

nations has eroded the plausibility of this assumption. The rise of tax-deferred retirement saving accounts

has expanded the set of investment options available to most investors. Many households can now choose

not only whether to hold a particular asset, but also whether to hold such an asset in their taxable account or

in a tax-deferred account. Because investments in tax-deferred accounts are taxed differently than the same

investments would be if they were not held in these accounts, this results in an expanded set of individual

investment options.

        The two most popular tax-deferred saving vehicles in the United States are Individual Retirement

Accounts and 401(k) plans. Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1998) explain that both became widely available

beginning in the early 1980s. Both types of accounts allow investors to defer taxes on accruing capital

income until the account balances are drawn down, typically in retirement. Withdrawals from these

accounts are taxed as ordinary income, and are subject to an additional 10 percent penalty tax if they are

made before age 59 1/2. 401(k) plans frequently offer an additional rate-of-return enhancement: employers

may match worker contributions to these plans, often at rates as high as 50 or 100 percent.



                                                        4
         Investing through tax-deferred accounts is one way that investors who face otherwise high marginal

tax rates may be able to reduce the tax burden on their capital income. It also raises a new set of issues,

which Shoven (1998) labels the “asset location problem.” This concerns where assets with different risk

and tax characteristics should be located: in a taxable account, or in the tax-deferred account? The asset

location problem has only started to receive attention from researchers, and it is not clear what guidelines

investors use in choosing which assets to hold in their tax-deferred accounts.

         The Survey of Consumer Finances provides some information on asset allocation patterns in tax-

deferred accounts. In 1995, for example, 50.3 percent of assets in IRAs and 62.7 percent of assets in

defined contribution pension plans were held in corporate stocks or mutual funds investing primarily in

corporate stocks. These fractions suggest that many households hold relatively low-tax assets, such as

corporate stock, in their tax-deferred accounts. It is possible that some households face constraints on the

set of assets that they can hold in their tax-deferred accounts. For example, some employers may invest

their matching contributions only in corporate stock. The importance of such constraints, however, is not

clear.

         For our purposes, the key point about tax-deferred accounts is that the incentive to invest through

these accounts is an increasing function of an investor’s marginal tax rate on investment income outside the

tax-deferred account. Consider an investor who faces an ordinary income tax rate of τ, and who has an

investment horizon of T. If this investor holds a taxable bond, which yields an annual (continuously

compounded) return of r, then after T years, his after-tax wealth per dollar of initial investment is er(1-τ)T.

         Now consider what happens if the same investor allocates 1/(1-τ) dollars to a tax-deferred account.

This is the amount of before-tax income that would generate one dollar of after-tax income. If the investor's

marginal tax rate at the time of retirement were the same as that when the dollar was earned, then at

retirement he would have erT. The ratio of wealth in the tax-deferred investment to that in the taxable

investment is erτT, which is clearly increasing in the investor’s marginal tax rate. In our empirical work, we

test whether households facing higher marginal tax rates invest more through tax-deferred accounts.



                                                         5
2. Empirical Evidence on Taxation and Portfolio Choice

        Several previous studies have developed empirical evidence on how taxes affect portfolio choice.

Feldstein (1976), King and Leape (1998), Hubbard (1985), Scholz (1994), and Samwick (forthcoming) are

the studies that are most directly related to our analysis. Each of these studies examines how taxation

affects the portfolio decisions of U.S. households.

        Feldstein (1976) analyzed portfolio data from the 1962 Survey of Financial Characteristics of

Consumers, which was conducted when the top marginal tax rate in the federal income tax code was 91

percent. He found that a household’s income had a substantial effect on the mix of assets it held,

conditional on household net worth. His primary finding was that equity-holding was more common among

higher income than lower-income households. In essence, this study used the pattern of asset holdings by

income class, along with the link between income and tax rates, to conclude that tax rates affect portfolio

choice. However, these results do not uniquely identify a model in which taxes affect portfolio choice. Any

other model in which income, or a characteristic of households that is correlated with income, directly

affects portfolio choice is also consistent with this evidence.

        King and Leape (1998) present related evidence on the relationship between marginal tax rates and

portfolio choice. They find that tax variables affect the set of assets that investors decide to hold, but they

find very limited support for a link between tax rates and the fraction of the household’s portfolio that is

held in different assets. They analyze data from a 1978 survey conducted by SRI International, and find that

many investors have zero holdings of many broad asset categories such as corporate stock, corporate bonds,

and tax-exempt bonds. They also find that most investors who hold tax-favored assets such as equity or tax-

exempt bonds also hold more heavily taxed assets, contrary to the prediction of simple clientele models.

        Hubbard’s (1985) study of data collected by the U.S. President’s Commission on Pension Policy

also finds a strong effect of taxes on asset allocation. The estimates in this study of the marginal tax rates

facing different households, which are based on the NBER TAXSIM program, are substantially better than



                                                        6
those in other studies, and they are more like the estimates that form the basis for our analysis. This study

moves beyond Feldstein’s (1976) analysis by including marginal tax rates, as well as income, as explanatory

variables for portfolio structure. The results suggest that variation in marginal tax rates, conditional on

income, helps to explain differences in portfolio structure across households.

        Scholz (1994) examines changes in portfolio structure over time and the potential role of taxation in

driving these changes. His analysis, based on the 1983 and 1989 Surveys of Consumer Finances, finds

relatively small changes in portfolio structure between these two years even though the Tax Reform Act of

1986 significantly affected marginal tax rates for many households. One notable exception is some

restructuring of household debt into the tax-favored mortgage category. Maki (1996) provides further

evidence of the shift toward mortgage borrowing. Yet as Gordon’s (1994) comments suggest, the long-term

nature of many investments, particularly those in real estate, personal businesses, and common stock, may

make it difficult to find portfolio adjustments only three years after a major tax reform such as that in 1986.

(A similar argument can be raised with respect to our analysis. Since we relate cross-sectional portfolio

patterns to current tax rates, we may not capture potentially important dynamic adjustments.) The other

difficulty with evaluating Scholz' (1994) findings is that when there are systematic changes in the tax

structure, it can be difficult to determine how the portfolio of a given household should vary as a function of

its tax rate. The predicted portfolio change can depend on the tax changes facing all households.

        Samwick’s (forthcoming) analysis is also concerned with changes in portfolio structure that may

have been induced by the tax reforms of the last two decades. This study uses an earlier version of the tax

imputation algorithm that we apply in the current paper, along with a less detailed econometric specification

than the one used here, to examine time-series changes in both real and financial portfolio holdings. Despite

the clear cross-sectional relationship between marginal tax rates and portfolio structure that we find below,

the main result of Samwick’s (forthcoming) analysis is that changes in the portfolio composition of different

net worth groups over time are not primarily due to changes in their marginal tax rates.

        In addition to these five studies of the broad issue of household portfolio structure, a number of



                                                       7
other studies, summarized in Poterba (1999), have examined specific aspects of the link between taxation

and investor behavior. Two sorts of studies are particularly notable in the current context. The first are

those that explore whether investor marginal tax rates affect the dividend yield on investor portfolios. Most

of these studies, most recently Scholz (1992), suggest that taxpayers facing higher dividend tax burdens hold

lower-yield stocks, although this effect is substantively small.

        The second set of related studies are those that explore which households hold tax-exempt bonds.

Feenberg and Poterba (1991) find that in 1988, roughly 85% of tax-exempt debt was held by taxpayers with

marginal tax rates of 28% or above. Slightly less than ten percent of individual holdings of tax-exempt debt

were reported by taxpayers with marginal rates of less than 20%. This suggests that even the lowest-taxed

assets in the financial spectrum are in some cases held by taxpayers with relatively low marginal tax rates, in

contrast to the predictions of simple clientele models. This may be the result of inertia in portfolio choice,

transitory fluctuations in marginal tax rates, or other factors.

        Our summary has focused on previous work that explores the structure of household portfolios in

the United States. There is less work on taxation and household portfolio structure in other nations, largely

because of data limitations. Agell and Edin’s (1990) study of taxes and portfolio structure in Sweden and

Hochguertel’s (1998) work on household portfolios in the Netherlands are notable exceptions.



3. Data Summary

        This section presents the empirical background for our data analysis. It begins by describing the

Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), along with summary information on the households in this survey and

the structure of their portfolios. It also describes the algorithm that we use to impute marginal tax rates to

households in the SCF, and shows how the distribution of marginal tax rates changed between the 1983 and

1995 surveys.

3.1 The Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983-1995

        The Surveys of Consumer Finances are a series of triennial surveys of the United States



                                                         8
population designed to collect comprehensive data on household wealth. The 1983 survey was designed

to be the first of a panel, but the re-interview surveys yielded only two thirds of the original sample in

1986 and one third in 1989. New households supplemented the “panel” households in the 1989 sample,

and all waves since 1989 have been conducted as unrelated cross-sections using the same survey

questionnaire and sample design. The years of the surveys span the major tax reform in 1986, and the

more modest reform in 1993. Because of the small sample size and limited detail on asset categories in

the 1986 SCF, we do not use this survey in our analysis.

        A key aspect of the SCFs is the oversampling of high-income households. Each SCF sample is

comprised of an area-probability sample of the United States population and a sample of households

drawn from an Internal Revenue Service file of high-income returns. Oversampling based on income

helps to equalize the probability of each dollar of wealth in the economy—rather than each household in

the population—appearing in the sample.1 The distinction is important when analyzing the distribution

of assets and liabilities that are highly concentrated. One drawback of the SCF is that to preserve the

anonymity of the high-income households in the sample, the household’s state of residence is not

reported. This precludes the calculation of the household’s state income tax rate.

        To study how taxes affect the allocation of financial assets, we classify the financial assets

enumerated in the SCF into eight categories based on their tax treatment. These categories are taxable

equity held directly, taxable equity held in mutual funds, equity held in tax-deferred accounts, bonds held

in tax-deferred accounts, tax-exempt bonds, taxable bonds, interest bearing accounts, and other financial

assets. We now present a more detailed description of each component and its general tax treatment:

        Taxable Equity Held Directly. This category includes all holdings of stocks outside of mutual

funds and tax-deferred retirement accounts, including brokerage accounts, investment trusts, investment

clubs, and shares in a company where a household member is employed. Dividend payments to


1
 The sampling design and construction of the sample weights that allow the two samples to be used together is
discussed in Avery, Elliehausen, and Canner (1984a, b), Heeringa, Conner and Woodburn (1994), Kennickell and
Woodburn (1992, 1997), and Kennickell, McManus, and Woodburn (1995).


                                                       9
households are taxed each year at the household’s marginal tax rate on ordinary income. Capital gains

and losses are taxed at the household’s capital gains tax rate when the gains are realized, not when they

accrue. This results in an effective tax rate below the statutory rate.

           Taxable Equity Held in Mutual Funds. This category includes all holdings of stocks in mutual

funds. Tax treatment is the same as in directly held equity, with the exception that mutual funds generate

both short- and long-term capital gains in the course of normal operations, even if households do not sell

or redeem their shares. Short-term capital gains are subject to the household’s ordinary income tax rate.

           Assets Held in Tax-Deferred Accounts. This category includes all assets held in Individual

Retirement Accounts (IRAs), Keogh plans for the self-employed, and defined contribution (DC) pension

plans, including 401(k) plans and employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs). Equity holdings include all

of the specific assets listed under taxable equity above. Bond holdings include all of the forms listed

under taxable bonds and tax-exempt bonds below, as well as all responses not specifically coded as

equity.2 As explained in the previous section, income on assets held in tax-deferred accounts is not

taxed until money is withdrawn from the account. Withdrawals are taxed at the household’s ordinary

income tax rate.

           Tax-Exempt Bonds. This category includes all state and municipal bonds, whether held directly,

in money market accounts, or in mutual funds, but not in tax-deferred retirement accounts. Interest from

these assets is tax-exempt. Capital gains or losses resulting from sales prior to maturity are taxed at the

household’s marginal tax rate on capital gains.

           Taxable Bonds. This category includes federal government bonds, corporate bonds, and foreign

bonds, whether held directly or in mutual fund accounts, but not in tax-deferred retirement accounts.

Interest payments on these assets are taxed each year at the household’s marginal tax rate on ordinary

income. Capital gains and losses on these assets are taxable at the household’s capital gains tax rate only

if the assets are sold before maturity. This category also includes savings bonds, which generate interest


2
    Retirement account asset allocations were not reported in the 1983 SCF, so we impute them based on 1989 data.


                                                          10
income that is taxed as ordinary income but only when the bonds are redeemed.

        Interest Bearing Accounts. This category includes checking accounts, saving accounts,

certificates of deposit, and money market accounts (except those that are invested in tax-exempt assets).

Income from these accounts is taxed each year at the investor’s marginal ordinary income tax rate.

        Other Financial Assets. This category consists primarily of the cash value of whole life insurance

policies and trust accounts. These assets generally receive some form of tax-preferred treatment, since

the annual appreciation in the value of these assets is not taxed, but is deferred to a future date.

3.2 Summary Information on Portfolio Holdings

        Table 1 presents summary information on the ownership probabilities for the asset categories in

each of the SCF data sets that we analyze. There are several clear patterns in the data. First, the

ownership of tax-deferred accounts increases substantially between 1983 and 1995. Less than one

household in five had a tax-deferred account with equities in 1983, compared with nearly one household

in three by 1995. The ownership of tax-deferred accounts with bond investments also rises, but not as

sharply, over this period. Second, there is considerable variation in the distribution of assets across

households. For example, less than half of the households hold stock in any form. This variation

suggests that motives other than diversification are required to explain household portfolio choice. The

limited degree of stock market participation has generated substantial recent research interest; see

Vissing-Jorgensen (1999) for an overview of this literature.

        Table 2 shows the probability of a household holding each of the various asset categories,

conditional on positive holdings of the other asset categories. For all asset categories except taxable stocks

and stock mutual funds, we combine ownership of assets directly with ownership through intermediaries

such as mutual funds. The table does not suggest the presence of strong, tax-related asset clienteles. For

example, about thirteen percent of the households who hold taxable bonds also hold tax-exempt bonds, and

56 percent of the households who own tax-exempt bonds also own taxable bonds. Over half of the

households who own equity either directly or through taxable mutual funds also own equity in tax-deferred



                                                      11
accounts, and nearly half of those who hold bonds in their tax-deferred accounts also hold some equity in

their tax-deferred accounts.

        Table 2 reveals interesting portfolio patterns that may not be directly linked to tax-motivated

behavior. More than forty percent of the households who hold stock through a mutual fund also own stock

directly, while only one quarter of those who report direct equity holdings also report indirect holdings.

This may reflect the presence of substantial numbers of small investors who directly own stock in only one

or two firms, and are not using equity investment as an important part of a long-term financial plan.

        Tables 3 and 4 provide additional information on the structure of household portfolios. The first

panel of Table 3 shows the average household’s portfolio share for each asset category. The average

portfolio share for directly held equity is 4.46 percent in 1995, and this share declines during our sample

period. The average share of interest bearing accounts, by contrast, is 56 percent. It is important to

remember that these are averages that weight all households equally; they differ from the dollar-weighted

share of each asset class in total portfolio value.

        These statistics change dramatically when we compute conditional portfolio shares by averaging the

portfolio shares for each asset only across those households that report positive holdings of the asset. In this

case, the average share of directly held corporate stock rises to 25 percent, and the average share of tax

exempt bonds, which are held by relatively few investors, rises from 1.3 percent to 22.5 percent. The

dramatic difference between the conditional and the unconditional statistics is explained by the fact that

many households report zero holdings of many asset categories.

        Table 4 presents a different measure of the role of each asset in the portfolio: the fraction of the

aggregate household portfolio that is accounted for by each asset category. These numbers are weighted

average household portfolio shares, with each household weighted by the product of its sample weight and

its total financial assets. The share of interest bearing accounts in the aggregate portfolio, 25 percent, is

significantly smaller than the household-weighted average portfolio share of these assets. In 1995, 25

percent of household financial assets was in tax-deferred accounts.



                                                       12
        Table 4 tracks the decline indirect ownership of corporate stock and the rise in equity mutual fund

ownership over our sample period. In 1983, directly-held corporate stock accounted for more than 26

percent of total household financial assets. By 1992, this share had fallen to 17.6 percent. Partly as a result

of rising share prices, it climbed to 19 percent by 1995. At the same time, the share of equity mutual funds

in household financial assets rose from less than one percent in 1983 to 8.5 percent in 1995. This growth in

mutual fund ownership does not include the coincident growing ownership of equity mutual funds through

tax-deferred accounts. The table shows that “other financial assets,” primarily the cash value of whole life

insurance and the value of assets in trust accounts, account for almost 15 percent of the total assets of the

household sector.

3.3 Marginal Tax Rates on Investment Income, 1983-1995

        To understand the empirical basis for our cross-sectional studies of tax rates and asset holding, it is

important to understand the shifting patterns over time in marginal tax rates for U.S. households. In 1983,

the top marginal tax rate on interest and dividend income was 50 percent. This represented a substantial

decline from the pre-1981 tax regime, when the top tax rate on such capital income flows was 70 percent.

In 1983, long-term capital gains were taxed at a marginal tax rate equal to 40 percent of the statutory

marginal tax rate on dividends and interest. This implied a top rate of 20 percent for high-income taxpayers.

The decline in top marginal income tax rates that resulted from the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 is

potentially important, because the structure of portfolio holdings in 1983 may partly reflect choices made

under an earlier tax regime with higher marginal tax rates on dividend and interest income.

        The first major tax reform during the time period spanned by our survey data is the Tax Reform Act

of 1986. TRA86 continued the reduction in top marginal tax rates that had been part of ERTA, but it also

eliminated the capital gains tax preference for most taxpayers. For very high-income taxpayers, TRA86

reduced marginal tax rates from 50 percent in 1986 to 39 percent in 1987 to 28 percent in 1988. TRA86

also introduced a hump-shaped pattern in marginal tax rates, with some taxpayers below the highest income




                                                      13
groups facing a 33 percent marginal tax rate.3

         TRA86 eliminated the tax preference for realized capital gains that had been in effect in earlier

years, although the tax rate on such gains was capped at 28 percent. This resulted in an increase in the

statutory tax rate on gains for many high-income taxpayers with realized gains. For some high-income

taxpayers, the post-1986 tax code retained an advantage for capital gains relative to dividend or interest

income, but the statutory rate differential was only 5 percent in the early post-reform years.4

         A minor tax reform in 1990, and a more substantial change in 1993, partially reversed the changes

in the top marginal tax rate that had been enacted in 1986. The 1990 tax reform, which affected tax returns

for 1991 and subsequent years, replaced the “hump shaped” distribution of marginal tax rates under the

1986 law, 15-28-33-28, with an alternative 15-28-31 structure. Thus, it raised the top marginal tax rate on

the highest income households to 31 percent. The 1993 reform, enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA93), was a further step in this direction. It raised the top marginal tax

rate to 36 percent for joint filers with incomes above $140,000 ($115,000 for single filers), and to 39.6

percent (36 percent plus a 10 percent surtax) for individual or married taxpayers with taxable incomes of

more than $250,000. Many high-income taxpayers face tax rates above this statutory maximum of 39.6

percent as a result of the phase-out provisions governing various deductions. OBRA93 also further

increased the share of Social Security benefits that could be subjected to tax from 50 to 85 percent.

         Neither the 1990 nor the 1993 tax reforms affected the top marginal tax rate on capital gains. By

1993, the tax rate differential between ordinary income, including dividends and interest, and realized

capital gains, exceeded 12 percent for many high-income taxpayers. The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997,

which was enacted after the final year of SCF data that we analyze was collected, reduced the top capital

gains tax rate from 28 percent to 20 percent.


3
  TRA86 also included up to 50 percent of Social Security benefits in taxable income for high-income recipients.
Since investment income is a component of taxable income, this change raised the marginal tax rate on investment
income for this group. Our tax calculator incorporates this.
4
  Even when the statutory rate on capital gains equals that on dividends, the effective tax rate on capital gains can be less
than that on dividends as a result of tax deferral for unrealized but accrued gains.


                                                             14
        The effects of these various reforms can be summarized as follows. First, TRA86 reduced the

incentive for high-income taxpayers to receive portfolio income in the form of capital gains rather than

dividend or interest. These incentives for holding investments that generate capital gains rather than

ordinary income should be greatest in the 1983 SCF. After 1993, the incentive for receiving capital gains

increased, although it did not return to pre-1986 levels. Second, TRA86 reduced the incentive for high-

income taxpayers to hold tax-exempt debt. It should have resulted in less concentrated ownership of

municipal bonds and tax-exempt bond funds, simply as a result of the overall reduction in marginal tax

rates. Third, TRA86 raised the capital gains tax rate, and thereby increased the benefit from tax-efficient

management of capital gains and losses. Ceteris paribus, this should have discouraged high-income

taxpayers from owning mutual funds, which do not necessarily optimize their tax liabilities, and encouraged

direct ownership of gains-producing assets. Finally, TRA86 reduced the incentive for high-income

taxpayers to invest through tax-deferred accounts, although OBRA93 partly reversed this. TRA86 also

reduced the tax benefits of IRAs by eliminating the possibility of pre-tax contributions for households with

incomes above certain thresholds. It also reduced the contribution limits on 401(k) plans from $30,000

(unindexed) to $7,245 (indexed).

        Two notes of caution are important when considering how the personal tax reforms of the last two

decades have affected the incentives for portfolio investments. First, the foregoing discussion does not

consider tax changes on firms that might, in general equilibrium, affect the structure of household portfolios.

For example, the reduction in corporate tax rates in 1986 placed the top personal tax rate (28 percent)

below the top corporate tax rate (34 percent) and changed the incentives for organizing both investment and

other activities in corporate vs. individual form. Fluctuation in the corporate tax rate also should have

changed the incentives for corporations to finance their activities with debt versus equity securities, thereby

altering the supply of assets to the household sector. Our empirical strategy asks whether, at a given point

in time, those households with higher marginal tax rates are more likely to hold tax-favored assets. This is

not affected by the potential presence of corporate tax changes, but it is important to recognize that these



                                                      15
changes can also have important effects on portfolio structure. Analyzing how major tax reforms affect

portfolio structure requires a general equilibrium framework that considers asset supplies as well as asset

demands.

        Second, our analysis of cross-sectional patterns in portfolio structure and tax rates provides

information on how a change in a household’s marginal tax rate might affect its portfolio structure. It does

not necessarily provide information on the consequences of major changes in the tax system, since such

changes affect the marginal tax rates of many households, and relative tax burdens can be a critical factor in

portfolio choice.

3.4 Estimating Marginal Tax Rates for SCF Households

        To assess each household’s tax incentive for holding different assets, we estimate each SCF

household’s marginal tax rate on ordinary investment income. Although this tax rate is not the only

relevant aspect of tax policy for portfolio decisions, many of the tax incentives, especially the differences

in these incentives across households, are the direct result of cross-sectional variation in this tax rate.

Our algorithm, which is described in the appendix, uses information on household income and

demographic structure to estimate marginal tax rates.

        One difficulty with using a household’s marginal tax rate on another dollar of investment income

to measure tax incentives is that this marginal tax rate measure may itself be affected by portfolio

choices. To avoid this problem, we calculate marginal tax rates as the difference in a household’s tax

liability at a base level of income, T(YB) and that base level of income (YB) plus an increment ∆. The tax

liability at the incremented income level is T(YB + ∆). Given our two estimates of total tax liability, we

calculate the household's marginal tax rate as [T(YB + ∆) - T(YB)]/∆.

        The marginal tax rate is a non-decreasing function of base income, which can in turn be affected

by a household’s portfolio choices. A household that allocates its entire portfolio to tax advantaged

assets reduces its taxable income and, consequently, it may face a lower marginal tax rate than a

household that holds a portfolio of the same value invested in more heavily taxed assets.



                                                      16
        To purge the marginal tax rate calculation of this endogeneity, the base amount and the

increment must be unrelated to the household’s portfolio allocation decision. We define the base level of

income for a household by artificially setting its investment income from interest, tax-exempt interest,

dividends, and capital gains to zero. This choice of the base amount generates a “first dollar” marginal

tax rate on investment income. The increment to income that we use to calculate the household's

marginal tax rate is five percent of the household’s total financial assets or $100, whichever is greater.

We choose five percent to approximate the nominal return on taxable interest bearing assets over the

sample period. If this increment to taxable income moves the household from one tax bracket to another,

the estimated marginal tax rate will be an average of the marginal tax rates corresponding to each of the

two income brackets.

        Figure 1 summarizes our estimates of the marginal tax rate pattern in 1983, 1989, and 1995. We

do not present 1992 because the tax code is very similar to that in 1989, and adding a fourth line makes

the figure more difficult to read. The horizontal axis represents the percentiles of the distribution of the

marginal tax rate on ordinary income in each year. The vertical axis represents the value of the marginal

tax rate, in percentage points. The distribution of marginal tax rates in each year is the result of applying

the tax-calculating algorithm to each household in the SCF sample, and then weighting each SCF

household by its sampling weight.

        The figure shows that in each year, roughly 25 percent of the households face a zero marginal tax

rate. These are households whose current income is low enough that they do not have to pay tax. Beyond

this point, the 1983 schedule is substantially different from that of the other three years, with many short,

flat portions denoting tax brackets, on the way up to a top rate of 50 percent. The effect of TRA86 in

compressing the tax brackets is shown by the long, flat portions of the 1989 schedule, first at 15 percent

and then at 28 percent, rising up to a top rate of 33 percent. The 1995 distribution is quite similar to that

for 1989, except at the highest percentiles. There, the marginal tax rates in 1995 are higher than the

comparable rates in 1989.



                                                     17
        Summary statistics can further document the changing pattern of marginal tax rates. The average

marginal tax rate in 1983 was 17.4 percent, compared with 14.1 percent in 1989 and 14.8 percent in

1995. The tax changes for high-income households that were enacted in 1990 and 1993 raised the

marginal tax rates at the top of the distribution, and these changes resulted in an increase in the average

for all households. The 1990 and 1993 reforms had little effect, however, on households in the bottom

two thirds of the taxable income distribution.

        Figure 2 is similar to Figure 1, but it does not weight households by sampling probabilities. The

presence of the high-income sample (which has low sample weights) is evident in the expansion of the

tax brackets at the top of the distribution. The difference between Figures 1 and 2 highlights the

oversampling of high-income households in the SCF. It is precisely this oversampling that makes the

SCF more attractive than other surveys for studying how taxes affect portfolio decisions by high-income

households.



4. Econometric Framework

        We analyze two aspects of the household portfolio problem: the decision of whether or not to

allocate any funds to a given asset category, and the decision of how much to allocate to each asset category.

We estimate probit models for asset ownership and tobit models for portfolio shares as a function of the

marginal tax rate, controlling for a range of income, wealth, and demographic variables discussed below. A

statistically significant coefficient estimate on the variable measuring the household’s marginal tax rate

supports the view that taxes affect portfolio behavior.

        To formalize our analysis, we denote positive holdings of asset j by household i with an indicator

variable, Dij, set equal to unity if household i holds asset j and to zero otherwise. Analogously, we define Sij

as the share of asset j in household i’s portfolio of financial assets. In each of these cases, we define a latent

variable that indicates the household's preferred choice. In the probit case, the latent variable D*ij indicates

the desire to own the asset:



                                                        18
(1)      Di*, j = X i β j + e i , j .

In the tobit case, the latent variable indicates the share of the household’s portfolio that would notionally be

allocated to the asset:

(2)      S i*, j = X i γ j + u i , j

Each tobit is estimated allowing for censoring both at zero—when the household does not hold the asset—

and at one—when the household invests its entire portfolio in one asset class. Censoring at zero is much

more common than censoring at one. The standard deviation of ui,j is denoted by σj.

        Equilibrium models of portfolio choice and taxation, as we noted above, predict which households

in a cross-section should hold particular assets, and how much of their portfolio they should allocate to these

assets, as a function of the household’s position in the marginal tax rate distribution. In any equilibrium,

households with high marginal tax rates are predicted to hold portfolios that are skewed toward tax

advantaged assets.

        Unfortunately, it is difficult to compare marginal tax rates across years because the entire

distribution of tax rates changes over time. For example, a marginal tax rate of 33 percent is the maximum

in 1989 but only the 80th percentile in 1983. We therefore take a two-part approach to analyzing the SCF

data. First, we estimate probit and tobit models on each cross-section data set. We present full results for

the 1995 sample year and subsequently compare the effects of marginal tax rates across cross-sectional

estimates for all sample years. Second, both to increase the precision of the estimated coefficients and to

exploit the variation in tax rates that is due to tax reform, we also present results for all four SCF sample

years pooled. When we estimate probit or tobit models on the pooled data, we include dummy variables for

the sample year, so that the marginal tax rate variable (like all explanatory variables) is rescaled to reflect its

deviation from the year-specific mean. The pooled data set provides a larger data sample than the sample

from any single year.

        We estimate these models for eight different asset classes in each sample. One potential difficulty




                                                        19
with our approach is that the errors in the latent variable models that generate asset demand are correlated

across equations. In our specifications, however, the set of explanatory variables, Xi, is the same for all

asset classes. If the specifications were linear, they would form a system of seemingly unrelated regressions

in which the coefficient estimates, βj and γj, would not depend on the cross-equation correlation matrix.

Due to the nonlinearity of the probit and tobit functional forms, however, the value of the likelihood

function can be improved by maximizing jointly over these coefficients and the parameters of the

correlation matrix.

        Estimating eight-variate probit and tobit models is a non-trivial computational problem. When we

experimented with smaller four-dimensional systems, we either had difficulties avoiding numerically

unstable regions of the parameter space, or achieving convergence in reasonable time frames. To obtain

some information on the nature and importance of these cross-correlations, however, we estimated a set of

bivariate probits and bivariate tobits, considering each possible pair of asset classes. There were very few

substantial changes in the coefficients in either of the probit or tobit models relative to the coefficients that

we estimated in the univariate models. We therefore present estimates of the coefficients under the

assumption that the correlation matrices for the errors in the latent variable equations, (1) and (2), are

diagonal. We also report our estimates of the correlation matrices from the bivariate equations.

        Two complications arise in the tobit specifications for portfolio shares but not in the discrete

choice probit equations. The first is that the marginal effect of each explanatory variable on the portfolio

share in asset j must sum to zero across all assets. These restrictions need not apply to the marginal

effects in the ownership probits, because ownership of one financial asset does not preclude ownership of

any other. In a system of linear regressions, this condition is true of the coefficients because it is true in

the data. Due to the nonlinearity in the tobit, this restriction must be imposed for every variable.

        As shown in Greene (2000, p. 909), the marginal effect of explanatory variable k on the expected

portfolio share is given by:




                                                        20
                  ( )
            dE S i,j                    1 − γ ’j X i        − γ ’j X i   
(3)
                 dX   k
                           =    ∑i    
                                         σj
                                                         −
                                                         
                                                              
                                                               σj
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                                  k
                                                                                  j
                                                                         

where Φ denotes the cumulative standard normal distribution function, the summation on the right hand

side of (3) is over households in the sample, and Xk is the kth element of the vector of explanatory

variables that we use to explain portfolio holdings. Intuitively, the marginal effect of the variable X k on

the amount that household I holds in asset j is simply the product of its coefficient in the equation for the

jth asset, and the probability that the latent variable for a given observation falls between the upper and

lower limits associated with the Tobit. The constraint that a change in explanatory variable k has no

effect on the sum of all portfolio shares therefore requires:

                  dE S i,j( )                    1 − γ ’j X i        − γ ’j X i   
(4)        ∑          dX   k
                                =   ∑j ∑i      
                                                  σj
                                                                  −
                                                                  
                                                                       
                                                                        σj
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                           k
                                                                                           j   = 0.
             j
                                                                                  

Imposing these restrictions (one for each explanatory variable k) on the coefficients requires estimating the

system of eight equations jointly because the restriction for each explanatory variable depends on all of the

parameters in all of the equations. However, when we assume that the errors in different equations are

uncorrelated, the log-likelihood function is the sum of the log-likelihood functions for each separate asset

demand equation. This simplifies the estimation problem, because we can evaluate eight univariate normal

integrals, rather that the eight-dimensional normal integral that would be associated with the problem

assuming correlated errors.

           The second complication in the portfolio share tobits is that 1,170 households (7.57 percent of the

15,451 total) report no holdings of any financial assets.5 We assume, for estimating the tobits but not the

probits, that these households have some holdings of interest bearing accounts that are not reported in the

survey. We therefore assume that these households are censored at 1 for interest bearing accounts and 0 for

all other assets. The estimated coefficients are similar in size and significance when these households are


5
    There are 390 such households (9.51 percent) in 1983, 238 (7.57 percent) in 1989, 268 (6.86 percent) in 1992, and



                                                                       21
excluded from the sample and when we adopt this crude data fix.

        We control for many other explanatory variables that might also influence household portfolio

decisions through their correlation with household risk aversion or investment opportunities. These include

categorical variables for household income, net worth, and basic demographic attributes, such as age,

gender, marital status, and education of the household head. We defined the head of a married household to

be the spouse with the higher labor income or, if both spouses earn the same income (usually zero), the

older spouse. We also include dummy variables for the occupation and industry of the head of household.

The occupation categories are Executives or Professionals; Clerical, Technical, and Sales; Service

Workers; Crafts; Laborers; Farmers; Retired; and Not in the Labor Force. The industry categories are

Agriculture and Forestry; Mining, Construction, and Manufacturing; Services; and Public

Administration.

        Table 5 shows the proportions of the sample respondents in each of the discrete categories for each

cross-sectional survey. These proportions are not weighted by sample weights and hence do not necessarily

reflect the overall population. All income and net worth categories are reported in thousands of constant

1995 dollars. Comparing sample years, the income tabulations show movement toward higher real income

categories, away from income levels under $50,000 and toward income levels over $75,000. Most of the

change occurred between the 1983 and 1989 surveys, as the distributions for 1989 and 1995 are quite

similar. There was also movement toward higher net worth categories, with categories under $250,000

losing observations and categories over $250,000 gaining observations. These changes partly reflect the

increase in real incomes, and especially real net worth, over the period that we study.



5. Empirical Findings: Asset Ownership Patterns

        This section presents our estimates of probit models of asset ownership. Table 6 shows the

coefficients and standard errors for each of the eight asset categories for the 1995 survey year. The


274 (6.37 percent) in 1995.


                                                      22
coefficient for the marginal tax rate is positive and statistically significant in the equations for taxable equity

mutual funds, tax-deferred equity, tax-deferred bonds, and tax-exempt bonds. All of these assets are taxed

less heavily than interest bearing accounts. Among the assets that are taxed at less than the ordinary

marginal tax rate, only taxable equity held directly has a statistically insignificant coefficient. The asset

categories that generate income that is taxed at the ordinary income tax rate, such as taxable bonds, interest

bearing accounts, and other financial assets, have positive but statistically insignificant coefficients. These

results suggest that higher marginal tax rates are associated with greater ownership of tax-advantaged assets.

        The coefficients on the income and wealth categories are also informative. Most asset categories

show an increasing probability of ownership at higher income and wealth levels. For the income

coefficients, most of the increase occurs in moving from income under $15,000 (the omitted category) to

income levels up to $50,000. Similarly, for the net worth coefficients, most of the increase occurs in

moving from net worth under $50,000 to net worth levels up to $250,000. Beyond those levels, there is

little additional effect of income or wealth on the ownership probabilities. The exceptions in both cases are

for taxable equity held directly and tax-exempt bonds, which show steady increases in ownership

probabilities as income and wealth increase, even at high income and wealth levels and even after

controlling for the household’s marginal tax rate.

        The remaining rows of the table show the coefficients for the demographic variables. Higher

education, at least through the level of a college degree, is associated with a higher probability of

ownership for each of the assets. There are a variety of patterns of ownership by age across assets. For

households over age 25, the probability of owning tax-deferred equity decreases with age. The same is

true for taxable bonds, up to age 65. For tax-exempt bonds, households over age 65 have much higher

probabilities of ownership, other things equal. Poterba and Samwick (1997) present a more detailed

analysis of the age profiles of asset ownership and portfolio allocation, along with tests for the

differences in portfolio composition across birth cohorts. None of the coefficients on the gender of the

household head are statistically significant. Married households are significantly more likely than



                                                        23
unmarried households to own equity and bonds in tax-deferred accounts. They are significantly less

likely to own tax-exempt bonds and more likely to own taxable bonds.

        The next two tables show the effect of including additional years of data in the analysis. Table 7

presents the results for the eight probits for asset ownership estimated on all four waves of the SCF pooled

together. The coefficient for the marginal tax rate in all of the specifications for assets that are taxed more

heavily than interest bearing accounts is again positive in all equations. The coefficient is statistically

significant in all equations except for that for other financial assets. Ownership probabilities continue to be

increasing functions of income, net worth, and education, especially when moving up the first two or three

categories. The coefficients on age and other demographic variables are also similar to those in Table 6.

        Table 8 presents the marginal effects of the marginal tax rate in each equation when estimated on

each sample year separately and on all sample years pooled together.6 Asterisks next to a number indicate

that the coefficient on which the marginal effect is based is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.

For example, the value of 0.4076 for taxable equity mutual funds in the pooled sample indicates that

increasing a household’s marginal tax rate by 0.1, or 10 percentage points, would increase the probability of

ownership by 0.04076, or about 4 percentage points. The second panel of the table shows that this

increment is 57.2 percent of the baseline ownership probability (7.12 percent) that we reported in Table 1.

        When expressed as a percentage of the baseline ownership probabilities, the effect of a 10-

percentage point increase the marginal tax rate varies considerably across asset categories. Both tax-exempt

bonds and taxable equity mutual funds show large effects of the marginal tax rate. The increases are 49.7

and 37.5 percent in 1995, respectively, and the effects are even larger in the pooled sample. In contrast, the

three categories taxed as ordinary income—taxable bonds, interest bearing accounts, and other financial

assets—show smaller percentage effects. The same is true of taxable equity held directly. The percentage

effects of a 10 percentage point change in the marginal tax rate on holdings of tax-deferred accounts were

about 20 percent for both equity and bonds in 1983. Over time, the absolute effects (shown in the top panel)




                                                        24
have fallen and the baseline ownership probabilities have increased, resulting in substantially smaller

percentage effects, approximately 8 percent of baseline, by 1995.

           The econometric results presented in Tables 6 through 8 show that ownership decisions for

different financial assets are correlated through the effects of observable variables such as the marginal tax

rate, income, and wealth. Ownership decisions may also be correlated through the presence of unobservable

factors, which are captured in the error terms in the latent variable equations. To investigate the nature of

these correlations, Table 9 shows the correlation matrix of the residuals from all possible pairs of bivariate

probits for pairs of asset classes. These estimates are based on the pooled sample. All of the correlations

are positive, indicating that once a household owns assets in any one asset class, it is more likely to own

assets in each of the other asset classes as well, even conditioning on income and wealth. The of the

correlations involving tax-deferred bonds, tax-deferred equity, and other financial assets are smaller than

those involving tax-exempt bonds and equity mutual funds.

           The positive correlations may have several explanations. One is that establishing ownership of one

asset, such as an equity mutual fund, reduces the marginal cost of establishing ownership of other assets.

For example, once an investor does enough research and pays the fees to own a stock index fund, it may be

easier for to establish ownership of a municipal bond fund at the same fund family. Another possibility is

that potential investors differ in their costs—out of pocket, psychic, and otherwise—of researching

investment options and making investments. Those who face lower costs, for example because they are

more skilled at library or internet research, may be more likely to invest in not just one, but many, asset

categories.



6. Empirical Findings: The Allocation of Household Portfolios

           We now turn to our findings for household portfolio shares, which correspond to our estimates of

tobit models. Our estimation procedure accounts for the censoring of portfolio shares at both zero and one


6                           k                                                                                k
    The marginal effect of x in the probit equation for asset j equals the sample average value of φ(βj’xi)βj .


                                                             25
and constrains the sum of the marginal effects of each explanatory variable across the eight portfolio shares

to be zero. As in the previous section, we first present results for the 1995 survey year, followed by results

for the pooled sample. We then discuss the marginal effects of tax rate changes on the structure of

household portfolios.

        Table 10 shows the coefficients and standard errors for each of the eight tobit equations for the

1995 survey year. An increase in the marginal tax rate leads to statistically significant increases in the share

of the portfolio allocated to taxable equity in mutual funds and to tax-exempt bonds. It leads to a significant

decrease in the portfolio share allocated to interest bearing accounts. The coefficients for both equity and

bonds in tax-deferred accounts are positive but insignificant. Taxable equity held directly, taxable bonds,

and other financial assets have negative coefficients that are not statistically significant.

        Marginal effects are presented in Table 11, with asterisks indicating statistical significance of the

coefficient at the 5 percent level. Once again the estimates describe the effect of a ten percentage point

increase in the marginal tax rate of a single household, holding constant the marginal tax rates of all other

households. A 10 percentage point increase in the marginal tax rate increases the household’s portfolio

share in taxable equity mutual funds by 0.1*0.0495 = 0.00495, or 0.495 percentage points. This is

approximately 17 percent of the underlying unconditional average portfolio share of 2.87 percent, repeated

(from Table 3) in the top row of the table. The same tax rate increase would induce a 0.334 percentage

point (28 percent) increase in the share in tax-exempt bonds and a 0.926 percentage point (2 percent)

reduction in the share allocated to interest bearing accounts.

        Tables 10 and 11 also show the effects of income, net worth, and demographics on portfolio shares.

Higher levels of income are associated with higher portfolio shares of taxable equity held directly, tax-

exempt bonds, and taxable bonds and lower portfolio shares of interest bearing accounts and other financial

assets. Higher levels of net worth are associated with lower portfolio shares of tax-deferred equity, tax-

deferred bonds, and interest bearing accounts and with higher portfolio shares of all other financial assets.

Higher levels of education are associated with lower portfolio shares of interest bearing accounts and other



                                                        26
financial assets and with higher portfolio shares of all other assets except tax-deferred bonds. There is little

systematic effect of age and gender. Married households tend to have greater portfolio shares of tax-

deferred equity and bonds and lower portfolio shares of interest bearing accounts, taxable equity held

directly, and tax-exempt bonds.

         Tables 12 and 13 present estimates analogous to those in Tables 10 and 11, but now for the pooled

SCF sample. For the marginal tax rate, there are some differences in the results for the pooled sample and

those for the 1995 sample. The coefficients on directly held equity and taxable bonds are positive, but still

statistically insignificant, in the pooled sample. The marginal effect on tax-deferred bonds is nearly twice as

large in the pooled as in the 1995 sample. The marginal effect on interest bearing accounts is about 50

percent larger in magnitude. Despite these differences, the overall patterns are similar in the two cases. A

10-percentage point increase in the marginal tax rate is predicted to result in about 1.7 percent of the

portfolio shifting from interest bearing accounts and other financial assets to taxable equity mutual funds,

tax-deferred equity and bonds, and tax-exempt bonds. 7

         As in the probit models in the previous section, we also consider the correlation matrix for the

residuals from the eight separate tobit equations. To estimate the correlation matrix, we fix the coefficients

at the values estimated from the pooled sample, i.e. at the coefficients shown in Table 12. For each pair of

tobit models, we then maximize the joint likelihood function as a function of the correlation between the

residuals in the two latent variable equations. Table 14 presents the resulting correlation estimates. There

are two groups of assets. The first group consists of interest bearing accounts, other financial assets, and

tax-deferred bonds. With one exception, namely the correlation between tax-deferred equity and tax-

deferred bond holdings, the correlations between these assets and all other asset categories are negative.

The second group consists of all three types of equity, tax-exempt bonds, and taxable bonds. These


7
  Recall that in our estimation procedure, the marginal effects of each variable are constrained to sum to zero across the
eight equations. This involves 36 (33) constraints in the pooled (annual) sample. No single Lagrange multiplier on
these constraints is estimated to be statistically significantly different from zero, and the p-value for the joint significance
of the multipliers is 0.1068 for the 1995 sample year. For the pooled sample and for the cross-sectional estimates for all
other years, the p-value exceeds 0.6.


                                                              27
categories are positively correlated with each other, suggesting that when households decide to allocate their

portfolio to any one of these assets, they are also likely to increase their portfolio shares for other assets in

this group. This may reflect underlying differences in the financial sophistication that investors need to

participate in each of these asset markets, or it may reflect other factors.

        Finally, we consider what our estimates suggest about the marginal effects of the tax rate on

portfolio choices. Table 15 shows these marginal effects for all sample years. As in the ownership probits

summarized in Table 8, the largest percentage effects are for equity mutual funds and tax-exempt bonds.

This is in part because the unconditional average shares for these assets are fairly low. The effect of the

marginal tax rate on the share in tax-deferred accounts is positive in all sample years. In the 1995

estimation, we estimate that a ten percentage point increase in the marginal tax rate increases the portfolio

shares of tax-deferred bonds and equity by about 4 percent of baseline. The effect on interest bearing

accounts is always negative and significant, and the effect on other financial assets is negative and

significant in all years except 1983.



7. Conclusions and Future Directions

        A household’s marginal tax rate on ordinary income displays a substantial correlation both with the

set of assets that the household owns and with the share of the household’s portfolio that is allocated to

various asset categories. The results are broadly consistent with simple theoretical models of portfolio

selection in the presence of taxes. Households with higher marginal income tax rates are more likely to own

tax-advantaged assets such as publicly traded stock and tax-exempt bonds than are comparable households

with lower marginal tax rates. They are also more likely to hold assets in tax-deferred accounts such as

IRAs, Keoghs, and defined contribution pension plans. These findings emerge in our analysis both of

ownership decisions and of the allocation of portfolio shares. They also emerge even after we control for

differences in income and net worth across households; these are factors that may have confounded some

previous studies of taxation and portfolio choice. While we find that higher marginal tax rate households are



                                                        28
more likely to hold equities, which are tax favored relative to bonds, we also find that they are likely to hold

equity mutual funds, rather than directly held stocks. Dickson and Shoven (1995) note that many equity

mutual funds impose much higher taxes on their investors than the investors would face if they purchased

stocks directly.

        The findings presented here suggest several directions for further research. One of the most

important concerns the efficiency cost of tax-induced distortions in portfolio structure. We have not yet

estimated a structural model of household portfolio behavior. A natural next step would involve specifying

and estimating such a model, and using it to calculate the deadweight loss imposed by the tax system.

        A second potential extension concerns asset supply. Our results suggest that a tax change like that

in 1993, which increased the marginal tax rate on households at the top of the income distribution, should

increase the demand among these households for tax-exempt bonds and for investments through tax-

deferred accounts. The move from taxable to tax-deferred accounts can be accomplished without any

changes in the supplies of assets in the economy. To increase the holdings of tax-exempt bonds among

high-income households, however, it is necessary to either reduce the holdings among lower-income

households, or to increase the supply of these bonds. Combining our demand-side analysis with a plausible

model of asset supply, and studying the resulting patterns of asset allocation in general equilibrium, is a

natural direction for additional work.

        Another set of issues that we have not explored concerns non-portfolio risks, nontraded assets, and

the structure of portfolio demands. A substantial recent literature, particularly Heaton and Lucas (1997),

has considered the link between risky human capital and household demand for common stock. There is

some evidence that households with greater risk exposure through their labor income are less likely to hold

risky corporate equities. While our control variables for income, net worth, and demographics proxy for the

risk in human capital, combining a detailed analysis of tax incentives with information on other factors that

may influence household demands for risky assets seems like a natural venue for future exploration.

        Finally, we have not considered the speed and method of portfolio adjustment in the aftermath of a



                                                      29
tax change. Our analysis cannot shed light on whether investors sell existing asset holdings to adjust their

portfolios when tax reform shifts the relative after-tax returns on different assets, or whether adjustment

takes place primarily through differential purchasing patterns for new assets. This distinction could have

important implications for the time horizon over which household portfolios adjust. Kennickell and Starr-

McCluer (1996) present descriptive statistics on the panel of the SCF covering 1983 and 1989. These data

may yield further insight on the dynamics of portfolio adjustment. The role of tax changes in stimulating

asset sales and in portfolio adjustment more generally is another direction for extending this work.




                                                      30
                                            REFERENCES

Agell, Jonas and Per-Anders Edin. “Marginal Taxes and the Asset Portfolios of Swedish Households,”
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics 92 (1990), 47-64.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Mervyn A. King. “Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and Debt-Equity Ratios: A General
    Equilibrium Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1983): 587-609.

Avery, Robert B., Gregory E. Elliehausen, and Glenn B. Canner. “Survey of Consumer Finances,
    1983.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 70 (1984a): 679-692.

Avery, Robert B., Gregory E. Elliehausen, and Glenn B. Canner. “Survey of Consumer Finances,
    1983: A Second Report.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 70 (1984b): 857-868.

Brennan, Michael J. (1970). "Taxes, Market Valuation, and Corporate Financial Policy," National Tax
    Journal 23, 417-427.

Dickson, Joel, and John Shoven (1995). “Taxation and Mutual Funds: An Investor Perspective,” in J.
    Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 9 (Cambridge: MIT Press), 151-181.

Engen, Eric M. and William G. Gale (1996). “Tax Preferred Assets and Debt, and the Tax Reform Act
    of 1986: Some Implications for Fundamental Tax Reform.” National Tax Journal 49 (September),
    331-340.

Feenberg, Daniel R., and James M. Poterba. “Which Households Own Municipal Bonds? Evidence from
    Tax Returns.” National Tax Journal XLIV (December 1991): 93-103.

Feldstein, Martin S. “Personal Taxation and Portfolio Composition: An Econometric Analysis.”
     Econometrica 44 (July 1976): 631-649.

Gordon, Roger. “Comments,” in J. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality (Cambridge: MIT
    Press, 1994), 268-274.

Greene, William H. Econometric Analysis. Fourth Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2000.

Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas. “Savings Behavior and Portfolio Choice: Evidence from the Tax Data.”
    Manuscript, Kellogg School, Northwestern University, 1997.

Heeringa, Steven G., Judith H. Conner, and R. Louise Woodburn. “The 1989 Surveys of Consumer
    Finances Sampling Design and Weighting Documentation.” Manuscript, Survey Research Center,
    University of Michigan, 1994.

Hochguertel, Stefan. Households’ Portfolio Choices. Ph.D. dissertation, CentER for Economic Research,
    Tilburg University, June 1998.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. “Personal Taxation, Pension Wealth, and Portfolio Composition,” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 67 (1985), 53-60.

Kennickell, Arthur B. 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances: Technical Manual and Codebook. Washington:
    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1995.


                                                  31
Kennickell, Arthur B., Douglas A. McManus, and R. Louise Woodburn. “Weighting Design for the 1992
   Survey of Consumer Finances.” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board, December 1996.

Kennickell, Arthur B. and Martha Starr-McCluer. “Household Saving and Portfolio Change: Evidence from
    the 1983-89 SCF Panel.” Manuscript, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
    1996.

Kennickell, Arthur B., and R. Louise Woodburn. “Estimation of Household Net Worth Using Model-
    Based and Design-Based Weights: Evidence from the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.”
    Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board, 1992.

Kennickell, Arthur B., and R. Louise Woodburn. “Consistent Weight Design for the 1989, 1992, and
    1995 Surveys of Consumer Finances and the Distribution of Wealth.” Manuscript, Federal Reserve
    Board, August 1997.

King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape. “Wealth and Portfolio Composition: Theory and Evidence.”
    Journal of Public Economics 69 (August 1998), 155-193.

Leape, Jonathan I. “Taxes and Transaction Costs in Asset Market Equilibrium.” Journal of Public
    Economics 33 (1987): 1-20.

Maki, Dean M. “Portfolio Shuffling and Tax Reform.” National Tax Journal 49 (September 1996): 317-
    330.

McDonald, Robert. “Government Debt and Private Leverage.” Journal of Public Economics 22 (1983),
   303-325.

Miller, Merton. “Debt and Taxes.” Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977): 261-275.

Poterba, James M., "Taxation, Risk-Taking, and Household Portfolio Behavior," mimeo, MIT, 1999.

Poterba, James M., and Andrew A. Samwick. “Household Portfolio Allocation Over the Lifecycle," NBER
     Working Paper 6185, 1997.

Poterba, James M., and David A. Wise. “Individual Financial Decisions in Retirement Saving Plans and the
     Provision of Resources for Retirement,” in M. Feldstein, ed., Privatizing Social Security (Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1998).

Poterba, James M., Steven Venti, and David A. Wise. "“Implications of Rising Personal Retirement
     Saving," in D. Wise, ed., Frontiers of the Economics of Aging: Volume 7 (Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press, 1998), 125-167.

Samwick, Andrew. “Portfolio Responses to Taxation: Evidence From the End of the Rainbow,”
   Manuscript, forthcoming in J. Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas Shrug? (Cambridge, Harvard University Press
   forthcoming).

Scholz, John Karl. “A Direct Examination of the Dividend Clientele Hypothesis.” Journal of Public
    Economics 49 (1992): 261-285.




                                                  32
Scholz, John Karl. “Portfolio Choice and Tax Progressivity: Evidence from the Surveys of Consumer
    Finances,” in J. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality (New York: Cambridge
    University Press, 1994).

Shoven, John. “The Location and Allocation of Assets in Pension and Conventional Savings Accounts,”
    NBER Working Paper 7007, Cambridge, MA, 1998.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, "Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice Heterogeneity:
     Nonfinancial Income and Participation Cost Structures," Mimeo, Department of Economics,
     University of Chicago, 1999.




                                                  33
                 APPENDIX: ESTIMATING MARGINAL TAX RATES IN THE SCF

         Our algorithm for estimating marginal tax rates proceeds line-by-line down the Form 1040 and
other relevant tax schedules. Filing status is determined by the household’s marital status, with all
married households assumed to file a joint return. Personal exemptions are estimated based on marital
status and the number of dependents in the household under age 18. The SCF reports information on
many of the components of total income. Wages and salaries, taxable interest, tax-exempt interest,
dividends, alimony received, rents and royalties, business income, and farm income are all
straightforward and similarly defined in the SCF and for tax purposes.
         Other components of income required for the 1040 are not reported in the SCF, or are not
reported in as much detail on the survey. We have no data on refunds of state and local income taxes,
other gains, and IRA distributions, so we set these income components to zero. All pension and
unemployment compensation that is reported is assumed to be taxable. Another approach would be to
impute aggregate amounts or taxable shares based on reports of analogous quantities in the IRS Statistics
of Income. Refining the precise calculations of marginal tax rates is the subject of work in progress.
Social Security benefits are taxed according to the formula appropriate to each year.
         The remaining component of adjusted gross income (AGI) is adjustments to total income. The
self-employment tax is applied to all business and farm income. Households are assumed to claim the
maximum IRA deductions consistent with their reported balances and individual earnings. The SCF also
includes data on alimony paid, and this is an adjustment to income. There is no data on any other
adjustments that are allowed on form 1040, such as moving expenses, so we set these items to zero.
Subtracting the total adjustments from total income gives the household’s AGI.
         The next step in the computations is to estimate the household’s possibility of itemizing
deductions on Schedule A. The SCF reliably reports information on interest payments and charitable
contributions. Deductions for local taxes are based on the reported value of real estate and personal
property subject to tax. Itemization is determined by comparing the sum of these deductions to the
standard deduction appropriate for the household’s age and filing status. The lack of reported
information on other possible deductions, such as medical expenses, state and local income taxes,
casualty losses, and job expenses is the biggest handicap in calculating tax rates in the SCF. The
household’s exemptions and deductions are then subjected to the limits based on income in the later
survey years. Subtracting them from AGI yields the household’s taxable income. Applying the
appropriate tax rate schedule to taxable income gives the household’s tax liability. Total taxes include
this amount plus self-employment and alternative minimum taxes. We did not compute tax credits such
as the Earned Income Credit, since the SCF does not contain the information needed to evaluate many of
the credits.
         The household’s marginal tax rate on any type of income can be calculated by running this
algorithm twice—once with a base amount and then with the base amount plus an increment. The
difference in the total taxes divided by the increment.




                                                   34
                             Figure 1: Marginal Tax Rates by Year, Weighted

                    50




                    40
Marginal Tax Rate




                    30




                    20




                    10




                     0
                         0   10   20     30    40         50       60     70   80   90   100
                                                      Percentile

                                               1983       1989     1995
                             Figure 2: Marginal Tax Rates by Year, Not Weighted

                    50




                    40
Marginal Tax Rate




                    30




                    20




                    10




                     0
                         0    10    20     30    40         50       60     70   80   90   100
                                                        Percentile

                                                 1983       1989     1995
                        Table 1: Ownership Probabilities, by Year

                                    Pooled         1995      1992      1989       1983
Directly Held Equity                 17.88        16.41     18.13     17.91      19.08
Equity Mutual Funds                   7.12        11.26      8.35      5.86       3.03
Tax-Deferred Equity                  24.00        30.40     25.67     20.42      19.51
Tax-Deferred Bonds                   29.38        30.54     30.35     30.54      26.10
Tax-Exempt Bonds                      5.74         6.44      6.79      6.40       3.31
Taxable Bonds                        26.40        26.17     27.29     28.14      23.99
Interest Bearing Accounts            86.90        87.22     87.24     85.52      87.63
Other Financial Assets               43.08        42.96     44.56     48.29      36.52
Source: Author’s tabulations from the Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983-1995.
Notes:
 1) Households are weighted by sample weights in each year.
 2) Sample years are equally weighted in the pooled sample.
                                Table 2: Conditional Probabilities of Asset Ownership, SCF 1995

                                  Directly     Equity    Tax      Tax                Tax                     Interest  Other
                                   Held        Mutual  Deferred Deferred            Exempt      Taxable     Bearing Financial
                                  Equity       Funds    Equity   Bonds              Bonds        Bonds      Accounts   Assets
Directly Held Equity                100.00       28.23     52.61    45.38              19.27       49.65         99.72    60.10
Equity Mutual Funds                   41.13     100.00     58.86    45.85              29.36       57.08         99.56    57.28
Tax-Deferred Equity                   28.40      21.81   100.00     54.36              11.26       41.58         97.63    53.13
Tax-Deferred Bonds                    24.38      16.91     54.10  100.00                9.68       39.66         96.96    52.96
Tax-Exempt Bonds                      49.11      51.35     53.14    45.92             100.00       55.60         98.84    67.27
Taxable Bonds                         31.13      24.56     48.30    46.28              13.68      100.00         98.00    58.10
Interest Bearing Accounts             18.76      12.86     34.03    33.95               7.30       29.41        100.00    46.33
Other Financial Assets                22.96      15.02     37.60    37.66              10.09       35.40         94.08  100.00
Notes:
 1) Each entry is the probability that a household owns the asset in the column, conditional on owning the asset in the row.
 2) Households are weighted by sample weights in each year.
                         Table 3: Average Portfolio Shares, by Year

                                   Unconditional Averages

                                     Pooled       1995         1992        1989         1983
Directly Held Equity                   4.46        4.15         4.34        4.40         4.94
Equity Mutual Funds                    1.36        2.87         1.48        0.84         0.25
Tax-Deferred Equity                    7.83       11.77         8.10        5.76         5.70
Tax-Deferred Bonds                    10.04       10.78        10.92       10.57         7.89
Tax-Exempt Bonds                       1.29        1.19         1.74        1.54         0.68
Taxable Bonds                          3.70        3.75         3.90        3.89         3.24
Interest Bearing Accounts             55.97       49.71        54.41       56.99        62.76
Other Financial Assets                15.36       15.78        15.11       16.00        14.54

                                    Conditional Averages

                                     Pooled        1995        1992        1989          1983
Directly Held Equity                  24.93        25.28      23.94        24.58        25.89
Equity Mutual Funds                   19.13        25.53      17.78        14.39          8.23
Tax-Deferred Equity                   32.64        38.73      31.55        28.21        29.22
Tax-Deferred Bonds                    34.16        35.30      35.97        34.60        30.22
Tax-Exempt Bonds                      22.45        18.45      25.55        24.13        20.60
Taxable Bonds                         14.00        14.34      14.28        13.83        13.52
Interest Bearing Accounts             64.40        56.99      62.37        66.64        71.62
Other Financial Assets                35.65        36.73      33.91        33.14        39.81
Source: Author’s tabulations from the Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983-1995.
Notes:
 1) Households are weighted by sample weights in each year.
 2) Sample years are equally weighted in the pooled sample.
 3) The unconditional average refers to all households. The conditional average refers to
    only those households who have positive amounts of the asset.




                        Table 4: Aggregate Portfolio Shares, by Year

                                     Pooled       1995      1992        1989            1983
Directly Held Equity                   20.61      18.99     17.61      19.39            26.43
Equity Mutual Funds                     3.84       8.48      3.57        2.44            0.88
Tax-Deferred Equity                    10.23      14.76     12.36        8.02            5.80
Tax-Deferred Bonds                     11.35      11.17     13.66      11.72             8.86
Tax-Exempt Bonds                        8.01       6.93      8.91        9.06            7.15
Taxable Bonds                           6.40       6.75      6.01        6.59            6.27
Interest Bearing Accounts              24.81      19.31     24.38      27.84            27.73
Other Financial Assets                 14.73      13.61     13.49      14.95            16.87
Financial Assets (Billions of 1995 $):            8,840     7,082      7,088            5,391
Source: Author’s tabulations from the Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983-1995.
Notes:
 1) Households are weighted by sample weights in each year.
 2) Sample years are equally weighted in the pooled sample.
                        Table 5: Sample Composition, by Year

                               Pooled        1995         1992        1989         1983
Income
 0 - 15                         19.11       16.70        18.23       19.66        22.06
 15 - 25                        14.10       13.63        13.88       11.61        16.70
 25 - 50                        24.89       24.80        21.97       23.19        29.08
 50 - 75                        12.64       12.63        12.03       13.27        12.75
 75 - 100                        6.11        6.65         6.63        6.65         4.63
 100 - 250                      10.30       11.51        11.88       11.20         6.82
 250 +                          12.85       14.07        15.39       14.41         7.97

Net Worth
0 - 50                          36.12       33.68        35.33       31.72        42.80
50 - 100                        12.43       11.89        10.14       11.17        16.13
100 - 250                       16.41       14.82        15.03       17.31        18.72
250 - 1000                      15.00       16.14        15.23       17.72        11.48
1000 +                          20.04       23.47        24.27       22.08        10.87

Education
Some High School                18.82       13.63        15.31       20.24        26.52
High School Diploma             25.83       25.08        24.17       25.61        28.37
Some College                    19.60       21.75        19.64       18.14        18.43
College Degree                  17.66       20.28        20.61       16.99        12.60
Post College                    18.10       19.26        20.28       19.03        14.09

Age
Under 25                         4.67        4.65         4.63        3.05         5.95
25 - 34                         17.07       16.00        16.18       14.70        20.86
35 - 44                         21.25       21.66        21.79       22.05        19.72
45 - 54                         19.54       21.63        19.92       19.85        16.74
55 - 64                         15.93       14.96        14.90       17.66        16.62
65 +                            21.53       21.10        22.58       22.69        20.11

Female                          34.86       36.01        35.23       34.97        33.22
Married                         66.14       66.85        65.69       68.22        64.22

Households (Millions)                        99.01       95.92       93.02        83.92
Observations                   15451          4299        3906        3143          4103
Source: Author’s tabulations from the Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983-1995.
Notes:
1) Tabulations are not weighted.
2) Income and Net Worth are reported in thousands of 1995 dollars.
3) Demographic characteristics pertain to the head of household.
4) Occupation and Industry categories are included in regressions but not reported.
                   Table 6: Probit Estimates for Financial Asset Ownership, 1995

              Taxable Equity         Taxable Equity          Tax-Deferred            Tax-Deferred
              (Directly Held)        (Mutual Funds)             Equity                  Bonds

Parameter    Coeff.   Std Error    Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.   Std Error
Constant      -2.2745    0.3680     -2.3369    0.3856       -1.9020    0.3290       -1.7500    0.3333

MTR           0.0352      0.2394     1.0932      0.2492      0.6063      0.2319     0.6964     0.2267

Income
 15 - 25      0.3472      0.1150     0.1728      0.1416      0.4770      0.1093     0.3722     0.0961
 25 - 50      0.5930      0.1080     0.4258      0.1294      0.7521      0.1023     0.6378     0.0921
 50 - 75      0.6934      0.1247     0.3877      0.1446      0.8578      0.1202     0.5632     0.1111
 75 - 100     0.8196      0.1390     0.4093      0.1570      0.9632      0.1367     0.4666     0.1272
 100 - 250    0.8127      0.1360     0.3872      0.1528      0.9154      0.1366     0.5681     0.1258
 250 +        1.1706      0.1499     0.3258      0.1641      0.8807      0.1509     0.2901     0.1397

Net Worth
50 - 100      0.3011      0.0951     0.3890      0.1068      0.3095      0.0776     0.4445     0.0744
100 - 250     0.6247      0.0866     0.6013      0.0996      0.3912      0.0777     0.5372     0.0731
250 - 1000    0.8842      0.0919     1.0895      0.1022      0.4717      0.0852     0.5803     0.0809
1000 +        1.3438      0.1083     1.1749      0.1174      0.3965      0.1056     0.4666     0.0992

Education
High Schl     0.3329      0.1089     0.2104      0.1208      0.1776      0.0930     0.2325     0.0824
Some Col      0.4272      0.1116     0.2748      0.1222      0.3150      0.0952     0.2349     0.0862
Col Deg       0.6461      0.1138     0.5141      0.1233      0.4653      0.1003     0.2815     0.0926
Post Col      0.6711      0.1165     0.6406      0.1260      0.4948      0.1032     0.2760     0.0962

Age
25 - 34       0.0574      0.1700    -0.2160      0.1746      0.3868      0.1372     0.1399     0.1317
35 - 44      -0.0686      0.1686    -0.2366      0.1715      0.2889      0.1376     0.2597     0.1299
45 - 54      -0.1170      0.1700    -0.2966      0.1736      0.2062      0.1402     0.1737     0.1322
55 - 64      -0.0350      0.1754    -0.2693      0.1777      0.1118      0.1471     0.3276     0.1376
65 +          0.1236      0.1778    -0.2963      0.1812     -0.3321      0.1542     0.1903     0.1422

Female       -0.0103      0.0569    -0.0003      0.0598      0.0122      0.0523     0.0795     0.0505
Married      -0.0395      0.0637     0.0870      0.0663      0.1626      0.0566     0.2080     0.0550
              Table 6: Probit Estimates for Financial Asset Ownership, 1995, Continued

               Tax-Exempt                Taxable             Interest Bearing      Other Financial
                 Bonds                    Bonds                 Accounts               Assets

Parameter    Coeff.   Std Error    Coeff.   Std Error       Coeff.  Std Error      Coeff. Std Error
Constant      -3.5558    0.4709     -2.5103    0.3436        1.4014    0.4697       -0.7415 0.3084

MTR           0.8311     0.2629      0.0894        0.2253    0.6534      0.5050      0.1673   0.2246

Income
 15 - 25     -0.2267     0.1701      0.3300        0.0993    0.5557      0.0970      0.0427   0.0791
 25 - 50      0.1269     0.1423      0.6067        0.0936    1.0198      0.1194      0.1738   0.0776
 50 - 75      0.4507     0.1540      0.6477        0.1101    1.2520      0.2185      0.1198   0.0976
 75 - 100     0.2345     0.1710      0.7162        0.1269    1.0093      0.3013      0.0657   0.1162
 100 - 250    0.4280     0.1630      0.6140        0.1238    1.1886      0.3447      0.0818   0.1143
 250 +        0.7312     0.1757      0.6925        0.1366    0.6474      0.4823      0.2270   0.1329

Net Worth
50 - 100      0.3202     0.1553      0.3769        0.0775    0.5002      0.1196      0.3396   0.0702
100 - 250     0.6628     0.1348      0.5897        0.0760    0.9932      0.1586      0.5295   0.0690
250 - 1000    1.1019     0.1333      0.7602        0.0831    1.0104      0.2053      0.7256   0.0780
1000 +        1.4560     0.1442      0.8404        0.1000    0.9944      0.3827      0.8997   0.0982

Education
High Schl     0.4524     0.1508      0.2983        0.0860    0.3164      0.0903      0.3394   0.0734
Some Col      0.6489     0.1501      0.3675        0.0899    0.5044      0.1017      0.3983   0.0776
Col Deg       0.7178     0.1498      0.4427        0.0937    1.0693      0.1729      0.4165   0.0845
Post Col      0.8249     0.1511      0.5438        0.0980    0.9048      0.2282      0.3932   0.0900

Age
25 - 34       0.0328     0.3452       0.0750       0.1358   -0.0208      0.1268      0.0689   0.1102
35 - 44      -0.0255     0.3382       0.0599       0.1353   -0.0009      0.1298     -0.0205   0.1098
45 - 54      -0.0546     0.3382      -0.1899       0.1391   -0.1136      0.1445      0.1156   0.1128
55 - 64       0.0593     0.3392      -0.3062       0.1440    0.3461      0.1674      0.1991   0.1191
65 +          0.3843     0.3385      -0.0721       0.1472    0.9345      0.1718      0.2923   0.1238

Female       -0.0248     0.0684      -0.0108       0.0511    0.0871      0.0856     -0.0703   0.0482
Married      -0.1432     0.0790       0.2744       0.0556   -0.0006      0.0913      0.0060   0.0525
               Table 7: Probit Estimates for Financial Asset Ownership, Pooled Sample

              Taxable Equity         Taxable Equity           Tax-Deferred              Tax-Deferred
              (Directly Held)        (Mutual Funds)              Equity                    Bonds

Parameter    Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.   Std Error
Constant      -2.1486    0.1174      -3.3175    0.1608      -2.3522    0.1124       -2.0053    0.1032

MTR           0.3371      0.1418      1.0394     0.1667      0.8172      0.1378         1.0033    0.1320

Income
 15 - 25      0.3481      0.0597      0.2494     0.0880      0.3910      0.0615         0.3888    0.0527
 25 - 50      0.5281      0.0582      0.3707     0.0830      0.6601      0.0585         0.6110    0.0514
 50 - 75      0.6513      0.0686      0.3067     0.0933      0.7864      0.0684         0.6448    0.0620
 75 - 100     0.7662      0.0787      0.3972     0.1014      0.7508      0.0788         0.6629    0.0731
 100 - 250    0.8727      0.0781      0.3535     0.0998      0.8721      0.0798         0.6622    0.0737
 250 +        1.0933      0.0867      0.3521     0.1065      0.8664      0.0875         0.5204    0.0814

Net Worth
50 - 100      0.2708      0.0488      0.3422     0.0697      0.2588      0.0427         0.3119    0.0404
100 - 250     0.5826      0.0442      0.5570     0.0640      0.3978      0.0411         0.4863    0.0387
250 - 1000    0.9258      0.0487      0.9958     0.0659      0.4440      0.0472         0.5935    0.0445
1000 +        1.3257      0.0607      1.0926     0.0764      0.3157      0.0599         0.4717    0.0572

Education
High Schl     0.3441      0.0496      0.2686     0.0707      0.1961      0.0465         0.2733    0.0412
Some Col      0.4794      0.0524      0.3584     0.0727      0.2898      0.0490         0.2837    0.0444
Col Deg       0.6910      0.0546      0.5359     0.0733      0.4381      0.0517         0.3182    0.0482
Post Col      0.6454      0.0561      0.6348     0.0743      0.4328      0.0532         0.3804    0.0498

Age
25 - 34      -0.0323      0.0846     -0.0933     0.1232      0.2977      0.0792         0.1938    0.0734
35 - 44      -0.1153      0.0849     -0.0396     0.1210      0.2878      0.0795         0.2645    0.0734
45 - 54      -0.1038      0.0857     -0.0996     0.1219      0.2977      0.0809         0.2945    0.0746
55 - 64      -0.0257      0.0875      0.0037     0.1232      0.3223      0.0832         0.3994    0.0767
65 +          0.1282      0.0905      0.0142     0.1254     -0.1344      0.0885         0.1152    0.0805

Female       -0.0202      0.0314      0.0560     0.0371      0.0323      0.0298         0.0642    0.0286
Married      -0.0739      0.0344      0.0606     0.0410      0.1280      0.0319         0.1866    0.0304
Year 1989    -0.0369      0.0459      0.3506     0.0648      0.1756      0.0463         0.2186    0.0414
Year 1992    -0.1403      0.0370      0.5359     0.0502      0.2669      0.0356         0.1208    0.0330
Year 1995    -0.1992      0.0358      0.7417     0.0477      0.4375      0.0339         0.0589    0.0321
             Table 7: Probit Estimates for Financial Asset Ownership, Pooled Sample, Continued

                   Tax-Exempt               Taxable             Interest Bearing       Other Financial
                     Bonds                   Bonds                 Accounts                Assets

Parameter       Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.  Std Error      Coeff. Std Error
Constant         -3.2979    0.2028      -1.8348    0.0973       0.2921    0.1402       -1.0424 0.0862

MTR              1.1312      0.1667      0.4159       0.1314    1.1809      0.2695      0.1523    0.1304

Income
 15 - 25         0.1152      0.1020      0.2712       0.0495    0.4915      0.0509      0.1183    0.0407
 25 - 50         0.3683      0.0900      0.5403       0.0486    0.8338      0.0648      0.2450    0.0416
 50 - 75         0.5432      0.1003      0.6008       0.0595    1.0421      0.1162      0.2624    0.0536
 75 - 100        0.5881      0.1070      0.6541       0.0704    0.6692      0.1735      0.1613    0.0660
 100 - 250       0.7406      0.1056      0.5663       0.0703    0.6813      0.1901      0.1828    0.0664
 250 +           1.0356      0.1118      0.6660       0.0778    0.3905      0.3064      0.3243    0.0766

Net Worth
50 - 100         0.3955      0.0891      0.3710       0.0406    0.5827      0.0615      0.3837    0.0363
100 - 250        0.5672      0.0787      0.5638       0.0391    0.9269      0.0771      0.5517    0.0355
250 - 1000       0.9898      0.0781      0.7054       0.0445    0.9096      0.1135      0.7122    0.0420
1000 +           1.3945      0.0851      0.7267       0.0563    1.1655      0.2605      0.9612    0.0565

Education
High Schl        0.2872      0.0769      0.3267       0.0409    0.4754      0.0447      0.1936    0.0350
Some Col         0.4226      0.0780      0.4193       0.0441    0.7023      0.0572      0.2790    0.0388
Col Deg          0.5552      0.0768      0.4793       0.0474    1.0530      0.0947      0.2906    0.0433
Post Col         0.6208      0.0772      0.5188       0.0493    1.1044      0.1258      0.2395    0.0458

Age
25 - 34          -0.1604     0.1810      0.0096       0.0675    -0.0895     0.0677      0.0069    0.0579
35 - 44          -0.2071     0.1788     -0.0866       0.0680    -0.1177     0.0707      0.0222    0.0583
45 - 54          -0.2257     0.1788     -0.2486       0.0698    -0.0803     0.0776      0.0737    0.0599
55 - 64           0.0282     0.1789     -0.2498       0.0716     0.3032     0.0855      0.1393    0.0621
65 +              0.2722     0.1797     -0.1348       0.0745     0.8937     0.0907      0.2071    0.0651

Female            0.0338     0.0402      0.0057       0.0279    -0.0421     0.0451     -0.0418    0.0264
Married          -0.1323     0.0443      0.1516       0.0300     0.0694     0.0473      0.0908    0.0280
Year 1989         0.3230     0.0621      0.0426       0.0419    -0.1033     0.0578      0.3342    0.0384
Year 1992         0.3391     0.0497      0.0699       0.0331    -0.0340     0.0503      0.2412    0.0309
Year 1995         0.3147     0.0481      0.0380       0.0319    -0.0855     0.0495      0.1593    0.0301
                          Table 8: Probit Marginal Effects for MTR, by Year

                                    Pooled           1995           1992           1989           1983
Directly Held Equity                0.1246 *       0.0130         0.2455         0.1414         0.1263
Equity Mutual Funds                 0.4076 *       0.4221 *       0.3462 *       0.6510 *       0.0110
                                             *
Tax-Deferred Equity                 0.3048         0.2196 *       0.1934         0.4957 *       0.3729 *
Tax-Deferred Bonds                  0.3686 *       0.2571 *       0.2720 *       0.2087 *       0.5693 *
                                           *              *              *              *
Tax-Exempt Bonds                    0.4378         0.3200         0.4245         0.6382         0.2324
Taxable Bonds                       0.1552 *       0.0331         0.2770 *       0.1155         0.2546
Interest Bearing Accounts           0.3122 *       0.1716         0.3306 *       0.3181         0.5638 *
Other Financial Assets              0.0526         0.0575         0.0689         0.0688         0.1480

                     Effect of a 10 Percentage Point MTR Increase on Ownership
                             (Percent of Baseline Ownership Probabilities)

                                      Pooled           1995         1992            1989           1983
Directly Held Equity                    7.0%           0.8%        13.5%           7.9%           6.6%
Equity Mutual Funds                    57.2%         37.5%         41.5%        111.2%            3.6%
Tax-Deferred Equity                    12.7%           7.2%         7.5%          24.3%         19.1%
Tax-Deferred Bonds                     12.5%           8.4%         9.0%           6.8%         21.8%
Tax-Exempt Bonds                       76.3%         49.7%         62.5%          99.7%         70.1%
Taxable Bonds                           5.9%           1.3%        10.2%           4.1%         10.6%
Interest Bearing Accounts               3.6%           2.0%         3.8%           3.7%           6.4%
Other Financial Assets                  1.2%           1.3%         1.5%           1.4%           4.1%
Notes:
 1) Marginal tax rates and ownership probabilities are measured on a scale of 0 - 1.
 2) The top panel is the marginal effect of a unit increase in the marginal tax rate on the expected
    probability of ownership.
 3) The bottom panel divides 10 percent of the estimate in the top panel by the corresponding
    ownership probabilities reported in Table 1.
 4) Asterisks indicate statistical significance of the corresponding coefficient at the 5 percent level.
                         Table 9: Estimated Correlation Matrices from Bivariate Probits, Pooled Sample

                                 Directly     Equity        Tax         Tax          Tax                    Interest      Other
                                  Held        Mutual      Deferred    Deferred      Exempt      Taxable     Bearing      Financial
                                 Equity       Funds        Equity      Bonds        Bonds       Bonds       Accounts      Assets
Directly Held Equity
Equity Mutual Funds                  0.2825
Tax-Deferred Equity                  0.2064      0.2136
Tax-Deferred Bonds                   0.0832      0.0261      0.2964
Tax-Exempt Bonds                     0.3250      0.3966      0.1599      0.0928
Taxable Bonds                        0.2604      0.4355      0.1134      0.1054       0.3484
Interest Bearing Accounts            0.3263      0.3648      0.2077      0.1476       0.3589      0.2780
Other Financial Assets               0.1205      0.0938      0.0829      0.0699       0.0935      0.1426      0.2164
Note: The entry for each cell is the estimated correlation parameter from a bivariate probit estimated on the assets listed in the
      corresponding row and column of the table.
                       Table 10: Tobit Estimates of Financial Asset Shares, 1995
                         Adding Up Constraints Imposed on Marginal Effects

              Taxable Equity           Taxable Equity           Tax-Deferred          Tax-Deferred
              (Directly Held)          (Mutual Funds)              Equity                Bonds

Parameter    Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error
Constant      -0.5681    0.1132       -0.5688    0.1299       -0.4481    0.1082      -0.4737    0.1408

MTR          -0.0786       0.0790      0.2897      0.0795      0.1265      0.0769    0.1125     0.0850

Income
 15 - 25      0.0811       0.0335      0.0154      0.0384      0.1110      0.0307    0.1179     0.0346
 25 - 50      0.1496       0.0324      0.0651      0.0361      0.1883      0.0291    0.1752     0.0328
 50 - 75      0.1638       0.0397      0.0556      0.0428      0.2459      0.0366    0.1432     0.0400
 75 - 100     0.2139       0.0443      0.0460      0.0476      0.3021      0.0417    0.1047     0.0445
 100 - 250    0.2086       0.0438      0.0386      0.0460      0.2623      0.0407    0.1395     0.0446
 250 +        0.3243       0.0475      0.0077      0.0494      0.2120      0.0448    0.0011     0.0476

Net Worth
50 - 100      0.0510       0.0309      0.0788      0.0345      0.0520      0.0279    0.1128     0.0287
100 - 250     0.1418       0.0282      0.1303      0.0320      0.0268      0.0272    0.1068     0.0267
250 - 1000    0.2174       0.0301      0.2454      0.0312     -0.0042      0.0294    0.0777     0.0294
1000 +        0.3947       0.0351      0.2573      0.0358     -0.0866      0.0346    0.0080     0.0355

Education
High Schl     0.0536       0.0314      0.0365      0.0325      0.0432      0.0268    0.0495     0.0305
Some Col      0.0797       0.0330      0.0672      0.0331      0.0807      0.0273    0.0349     0.0316
Col Deg       0.1166       0.0341      0.1231      0.0345      0.1225      0.0291    0.0385     0.0345
Post Col      0.1221       0.0344      0.1563      0.0349      0.1213      0.0300    0.0465     0.0357

Age
25 - 34       0.0305       0.0445     -0.0658      0.0514      0.1422      0.0398    0.0425     0.0427
35 - 44      -0.0309       0.0427     -0.0542      0.0510      0.1498      0.0404    0.1095     0.0415
45 - 54      -0.0381       0.0434     -0.0564      0.0520      0.1275      0.0407    0.0826     0.0418
55 - 64      -0.0234       0.0452     -0.0413      0.0530      0.0805      0.0426    0.1437     0.0443
65 +          0.0395       0.0451     -0.0583      0.0533     -0.0614      0.0445    0.0864     0.0451

Female       -0.0075       0.0184      0.0046      0.0190     -0.0005      0.0174    0.0220     0.0179
Married      -0.0598       0.0212      0.0168      0.0215      0.0346      0.0194    0.0607     0.0204
σ             0.3633       0.0082      0.3254      0.0113      0.4019      0.0075    0.4163     0.0090
               Table 10: Tobit Estimates of Financial Asset Shares, 1995, Continued
                       Adding Up Constraints Imposed on Marginal Effects

               Tax-Exempt                Taxable             Interest Bearing         Other Financial
                 Bonds                    Bonds                 Accounts                  Assets

Parameter    Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error      Coeff.  Std Error         Coeff. Std Error
Constant      -0.8438    0.0918      -0.4782    0.0688       1.2831    0.1311          0.0218 0.1060

MTR           0.2253      0.0762     -0.0097       0.0478   -0.1402      0.0699       -0.1044    0.0711

Income
 15 - 25     -0.0586      0.0406     0.0597        0.0255   -0.1499      0.0372       -0.0369    0.0353
 25 - 50      0.0074      0.0397     0.0889        0.0228   -0.2956      0.0343       -0.0353    0.0335
 50 - 75      0.0709      0.0449     0.0999        0.0262   -0.3056      0.0383       -0.0726    0.0383
 75 - 100     0.0268      0.0501     0.1012        0.0279   -0.2901      0.0414       -0.1204    0.0416
 100 - 250    0.0728      0.0472     0.0767        0.0274   -0.2741      0.0418       -0.1295    0.0400
 250 +        0.1562      0.0502     0.1197        0.0296   -0.2687      0.0458       -0.1058    0.0432

Net Worth
50 - 100      0.0456      0.0423     0.0468        0.0181   -0.2271      0.0282        0.0841    0.0296
100 - 250     0.1145      0.0353     0.0817        0.0177   -0.2945      0.0267        0.0869    0.0280
250 - 1000    0.2324      0.0367     0.1072        0.0187   -0.3541      0.0278        0.0779    0.0288
1000 +        0.3321      0.0392     0.1273        0.0206   -0.4102      0.0330        0.1184    0.0336

Education
High Schl     0.0585      0.0379     0.0495        0.0210   -0.1805      0.0335        0.0813    0.0321
Some Col      0.0981      0.0382     0.0696        0.0222   -0.2277      0.0337        0.0769    0.0324
Col Deg       0.1071      0.0395     0.0731        0.0221   -0.2610      0.0342        0.0428    0.0329
Post Col      0.1274      0.0405     0.0964        0.0235   -0.2741      0.0344        0.0212    0.0332

Age
25 - 34      -0.0064      0.0567     -0.0153       0.0371   -0.1007      0.0539        0.0123    0.0532
35 - 44      -0.0355      0.0542     -0.0210       0.0366   -0.0693      0.0540       -0.0391    0.0525
45 - 54      -0.0491      0.0546     -0.0663       0.0371   -0.0493      0.0547        0.0054    0.0536
55 - 64      -0.0155      0.0557     -0.0919       0.0375   -0.0661      0.0554        0.0121    0.0547
65 +          0.0666      0.0554     -0.0173       0.0382   -0.0524      0.0564        0.0429    0.0565

Female       -0.0079      0.0197     0.0016        0.0117    0.0136      0.0170       -0.0288    0.0179
Married      -0.0435      0.0229     0.0433        0.0137   -0.0181      0.0192       -0.0299    0.0198
σ             0.2996      0.0118     0.2552        0.0090    0.4019      0.0052        0.4381    0.0082
                                           Table 11: Marginal Effects from Tobits, 1995

                Directly        Equity           Tax             Tax            Tax                           Interest         Other
                 Held           Mutual         Deferred        Deferred        Exempt         Taxable        Bearing         Financial
Parameter       Equity          Funds           Equity          Bonds          Bonds           Bonds         Accounts         Assets
Uncond.
Avg Share          0.0415         0.0287         0.1177          0.1078          0.0119         0.0375          0.4970          0.1578

                            *              *               *               *              *              *               *
Constant          -0.1584        -0.0971         -0.1689         -0.1666        -0.1250        -0.1427          0.8478          0.0110

                                           *                                              *                              *
MTR               -0.0219         0.0495         0.0477          0.0396          0.0334        -0.0029         -0.0926         -0.0526


Income
                            *                              *               *                             *               *
15 - 25            0.0226         0.0026         0.0418          0.0415         -0.0087         0.0178         -0.0991         -0.0186
                            *                              *               *                             *               *
25 - 50            0.0417         0.0111         0.0710          0.0616          0.0011         0.0265         -0.1953         -0.0178
                            *                              *               *                             *               *
50 - 75            0.0457         0.0095         0.0927          0.0504          0.0105         0.0298         -0.2019         -0.0366
                            *                              *               *                             *               *               *
75 - 100           0.0596         0.0079         0.1139          0.0368          0.0040         0.0302         -0.1917         -0.0607
                            *                              *               *                             *               *               *
100 - 250          0.0582         0.0066         0.0988          0.0491          0.0108         0.0229         -0.1811         -0.0653
                            *                              *                              *              *               *               *
250 +              0.0904         0.0013         0.0799          0.0004          0.0231         0.0357         -0.1776         -0.0533


Net Worth
                                           *                               *                             *               *               *
50 - 100           0.0142         0.0135         0.0196          0.0397          0.0068         0.0140         -0.1500          0.0424
                            *              *                               *              *              *               *               *
100 - 250          0.0395         0.0223         0.0101          0.0376          0.0170         0.0244         -0.1946          0.0438
                            *              *                               *              *              *               *               *
250 - 1000         0.0606         0.0419         -0.0016         0.0273          0.0344         0.0320         -0.2340          0.0392
                            *              *               *                              *              *               *               *
1000 +             0.1100         0.0439         -0.0327         0.0028          0.0492         0.0380         -0.2710          0.0597


Education
                                                                                                         *               *               *
High Schl          0.0149         0.0062         0.0163          0.0174          0.0087         0.0148         -0.1193          0.0410
                            *              *               *                              *              *               *               *
Some Col           0.0222         0.0115         0.0304          0.0123          0.0145         0.0208         -0.1504          0.0388
                            *              *               *                              *              *               *
Col Deg            0.0325         0.0210         0.0462          0.0135          0.0159         0.0218         -0.1725          0.0216
                            *              *               *                              *              *               *
Post Col           0.0340         0.0267         0.0457          0.0163          0.0189         0.0288         -0.1811          0.0107


Age
                                                           *
25 - 34            0.0085        -0.0112         0.0536          0.0150         -0.0010        -0.0046         -0.0665          0.0062
                                                           *               *
35 - 44           -0.0086        -0.0093         0.0564          0.0385         -0.0053        -0.0063         -0.0458         -0.0197
                                                           *               *
45 - 54           -0.0106        -0.0096         0.0481          0.0291         -0.0073        -0.0198         -0.0326          0.0027
                                                                           *                             *
55 - 64           -0.0065        -0.0070         0.0303          0.0506         -0.0023        -0.0274         -0.0437          0.0061
65 +               0.0110        -0.0100         -0.0232         0.0304          0.0099        -0.0052         -0.0346          0.0216


Female             -0.0021          0.0008       -0.0002        0.0077        -0.0012         0.0005        0.0090             -0.0145
                            *                                           *                             *
Married            -0.0167          0.0029         0.0130       0.0214        -0.0065         0.0129       -0.0120             -0.0151
Notes:
1) Marginal tax rates and portfolio shares are measured on a scale of 0 - 1.
2) The first row is the unconditional average share as reported in Table 3.
3) Each cell is the marginal effect of a unit increase in the marginal tax rate on the expected portfolio share.
4) Asterisks indicate statistical significance of the corresponding coefficient at the 5 percent level.
             Table 12: Tobit Estimates of Financial Asset Shares, Pooled Sample, Continued
                          Adding Up Constraints Imposed on Marginal Effects

                 Tax-Exempt                Taxable             Interest Bearing      Other Financial
                   Bonds                    Bonds                 Accounts               Assets

Parameter     Coeff.   Std Error     Coeff.   Std Error       Coeff.  Std Error      Coeff. Std Error
Constant       -0.7967    0.0458      -0.3438    0.0248        1.3234    0.0374       -0.0573 0.0352

MTR             0.2836     0.0513      0.0111        0.0305   -0.2117      0.0420     -0.1089   0.0423

Income
 15 - 25        0.0128     0.0255      0.0566        0.0132   -0.1638      0.0196     -0.0071   0.0183
 25 - 50        0.0532     0.0244      0.1007        0.0125   -0.2807      0.0187      0.0008   0.0179
 50 - 75        0.0900     0.0293      0.1160        0.0149   -0.3157      0.0214     -0.0286   0.0210
 75 - 100       0.1205     0.0321      0.1233        0.0168   -0.3091      0.0236     -0.0784   0.0234
 100 - 250      0.1611     0.0309      0.0971        0.0166   -0.3094      0.0241     -0.0894   0.0235
 250 +          0.2447     0.0326      0.1478        0.0180   -0.3374      0.0258     -0.0679   0.0251

Net Worth
50 - 100        0.0531     0.0247      0.0494        0.0101   -0.1898      0.0154      0.0948   0.0156
100 - 250       0.0902     0.0216      0.0739        0.0094   -0.2578      0.0142      0.0856   0.0146
250 - 1000      0.2141     0.0219      0.0919        0.0103   -0.3124      0.0154      0.0597   0.0156
1000 +          0.3382     0.0245      0.1002        0.0122   -0.3700      0.0185      0.1294   0.0190

Education
High Schl       0.0405     0.0208      0.0601        0.0105   -0.1457      0.0160      0.0349   0.0153
Some Col        0.0689     0.0220      0.0842        0.0114   -0.1941      0.0168      0.0441   0.0161
Col Deg         0.0913     0.0217      0.0798        0.0117   -0.2219      0.0172      0.0141   0.0167
Post Col        0.1070     0.0221      0.0897        0.0122   -0.2168      0.0172     -0.0188   0.0167

Age
25 - 34        -0.0484     0.0375      -0.0313       0.0197   -0.0509      0.0291      0.0038   0.0276
35 - 44        -0.0639     0.0368      -0.0524       0.0195   -0.0619      0.0290      0.0050   0.0276
45 - 54        -0.0802     0.0367      -0.0854       0.0198   -0.0582      0.0293      0.0044   0.0280
55 - 64        -0.0162     0.0368      -0.0772       0.0201   -0.0881      0.0296     -0.0046   0.0284
65 +            0.0598     0.0370      -0.0332       0.0206   -0.0555      0.0303      0.0115   0.0291

Female          0.0032     0.0123      0.0047        0.0067    0.0046      0.0098     -0.0149   0.0101
Married        -0.0468     0.0135      0.0115        0.0074   -0.0287      0.0108      0.0160   0.0109
Year 1989       0.0779     0.0182      0.0098        0.0101   -0.1014      0.0149      0.0369   0.0147
Year 1992       0.0933     0.0147      0.0150        0.0079   -0.1125      0.0118      0.0277   0.0117
Year 1995       0.0703     0.0139      0.0116        0.0075   -0.1436      0.0112      0.0245   0.0115
σ               0.3265     0.0070      0.2582        0.0051    0.4218      0.0027      0.4491   0.0044
                                     Table 13: Marginal Effects from Tobits, Pooled Sample

                Directly        Equity           Tax             Tax            Tax                            Interest         Other
                 Held           Mutual         Deferred        Deferred        Exempt         Taxable         Bearing         Financial
Parameter       Equity          Funds           Equity          Bonds          Bonds           Bonds          Accounts         Assets
Uncond.
Avg Share          0.0446         0.0136          0.0783         0.1004          0.0129         0.0370           0.5597          0.1536

                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *
Constant          -0.1501        -0.0863         -0.1864         -0.1821        -0.1003        -0.0960           0.8285         -0.0274

                                           *               *               *              *                               *               *
MTR                0.0065         0.0242          0.0415         0.0735          0.0357         0.0031          -0.1325         -0.0520


Income
                            *                              *               *                              *               *
15 - 25            0.0240         0.0037          0.0249         0.0360          0.0016         0.0158          -0.1026         -0.0034
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *
25 - 50            0.0355         0.0055          0.0463         0.0534          0.0067         0.0281          -0.1757          0.0004
                            *                              *               *              *               *               *
50 - 75            0.0444         0.0036          0.0647         0.0549          0.0113         0.0324          -0.1976         -0.0137
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *               *
75 - 100           0.0552         0.0063          0.0640         0.0558          0.0152         0.0344          -0.1935         -0.0374
                            *                              *               *              *               *               *               *
100 - 250          0.0601         0.0045          0.0734         0.0511          0.0203         0.0271          -0.1937         -0.0427
                            *                              *               *              *               *               *               *
250 +              0.0797         0.0034          0.0646         0.0239          0.0308         0.0413          -0.2112         -0.0324


Net Worth
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *               *
50 - 100           0.0112         0.0070          0.0142         0.0207          0.0067         0.0138          -0.1188          0.0453
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *               *
100 - 250          0.0306         0.0116          0.0160         0.0304          0.0114         0.0206          -0.1614          0.0409
                            *              *                               *              *               *               *               *
250 - 1000         0.0582         0.0221          0.0085         0.0256          0.0270         0.0257          -0.1956          0.0285
                            *              *               *                              *               *               *               *
1000 +             0.0951         0.0233         -0.0189         -0.0003         0.0426         0.0280          -0.2317          0.0618


Education
                            *              *                               *                              *               *               *
High Schl          0.0189         0.0055          0.0078         0.0205          0.0051         0.0168          -0.0912          0.0167
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *               *
Some Col           0.0293         0.0083          0.0148         0.0159          0.0087         0.0235          -0.1215          0.0211
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *
Col Deg            0.0451         0.0127          0.0238         0.0167          0.0115         0.0223          -0.1389          0.0067
                            *              *               *               *              *               *               *
Post Col           0.0397         0.0157          0.0235         0.0273          0.0135         0.0250          -0.1357         -0.0090


Age
                                                           *               *
25 - 34           -0.0065        -0.0030          0.0314         0.0230         -0.0061        -0.0087          -0.0318          0.0018
                            *                              *               *                              *               *
35 - 44           -0.0145        -0.0002          0.0365         0.0372         -0.0080        -0.0146          -0.0388          0.0024
                                                           *               *              *               *               *
45 - 54           -0.0123        -0.0015          0.0388         0.0433         -0.0101        -0.0238          -0.0364          0.0021
                                                           *               *                              *               *
55 - 64           -0.0069         0.0015          0.0354         0.0509         -0.0020        -0.0216          -0.0551         -0.0022
                                                                           *
65 +               0.0106         0.0018         -0.0038         0.0224          0.0075        -0.0093          -0.0347          0.0055

                            *
Female            -0.0056         0.0015          0.0019         0.0047          0.0004         0.0013           0.0029         -0.0071
                            *                              *               *              *                               *
Married           -0.0147         0.0009          0.0081         0.0187         -0.0059         0.0032          -0.0179          0.0077
                            *              *               *               *              *                               *               *
Year 1989         -0.0104         0.0093          0.0115         0.0228          0.0098         0.0027          -0.0635          0.0177
                            *              *               *               *              *                               *               *
Year 1992         -0.0152         0.0149          0.0234         0.0182          0.0118         0.0042          -0.0704          0.0133
                            *              *               *               *              *                               *               *
Year 1995         -0.0174         0.0228          0.0470         0.0138          0.0089         0.0032          -0.0899          0.0117
Notes:
1) Marginal tax rates and portfolio shares are measured on a scale of 0 - 1.
2) The first row is the unconditional average share as reported in Table 3.
3) Each cell is the marginal effect of a unit increase in the marginal tax rate on the expected portfolio share.
4) Asterisks indicate statistical significance of the corresponding coefficient at the 5 percent level.
                         Table 14: Estimated Correlation Matrices from Bivariate Tobits, Pooled Sample

                                 Directly     Equity       Tax          Tax         Tax                     Interest     Other
                                  Held        Mutual     Deferred     Deferred     Exempt       Taxable    Bearing      Financial
                                 Equity       Funds       Equity       Bonds       Bonds         Bonds     Accounts      Assets
Directly Held Equity
Equity Mutual Funds                    0.0825
Tax-Deferred Equity                    0.0207      0.0740
Tax-Deferred Bonds                    -0.0898    -0.0877      0.0481
Tax-Exempt Bonds                       0.0481      0.2114     0.0091      -0.0494
Taxable Bonds                          0.0493      0.2597    -0.0305      -0.0362    0.1568
Interest Bearing Accounts             -0.3527    -0.2435     -0.4175      -0.4032   -0.2879       -0.3108
Other Financial Assets                -0.0900     -0.0707    -0.1069      -0.1101   -0.0906       -0.0458      -0.5734
Note: The entry for each cell is the value of the correlation parameter that maximizes the likelihood function for a bivariate
      tobit for the assets listed in the corresponding row and column of the table when the coefficients are fixed at their
      values in Table 12.
                        Table 15: Tobit Marginal Effects for MTR, by Year

                                    Pooled           1995           1992          1989           1983
         Directly Held Equity       0.0065        -0.0219         0.0192        0.0048        -0.0151
        Equity Mutual Funds         0.0242 *       0.0495 *       0.0177        0.0355 *      -0.0010
        Tax-Deferred Equity         0.0415 *       0.0477 *       0.0419        0.0509         0.0637 *
         Tax-Deferred Bonds         0.0735 *       0.0396 *       0.0720         0.0052        0.1080 *
                                           *              *              *              *
          Tax-Exempt Bonds          0.0357         0.0334         0.0423         0.0636        0.0094
              Taxable Bonds         0.0031        -0.0029         0.0279        -0.0148        0.0020
    Interest Bearing Accounts      -0.1325 *      -0.0926 *      -0.0631        -0.0926       -0.1835 *
       Other Financial Assets      -0.0520 *      -0.0526 *      -0.1579 *      -0.0528        0.0165

                  Effect of a 10 Percentage Point MTR Increase on Portfolio Share
                         (Percent of Baseline Unconditional Average Share)

                                    Pooled          1995           1992           1989           1983
         Directly Held Equity        1.5%          -5.3%           4.4%           1.1%          -3.1%
         Equity Mutual Funds        17.8%          17.2%          11.9%          42.1%          -4.0%
         Tax-Deferred Equity         5.3%           4.1%           5.2%           8.8%          11.2%
          Tax-Deferred Bonds         7.3%           3.7%           6.6%           0.5%          13.7%
           Tax-Exempt Bonds         27.7%          28.1%          24.4%          41.2%          13.8%
               Taxable Bonds         0.8%          -0.8%           7.2%          -3.8%           0.6%
    Interest Bearing Accounts       -2.4%          -1.9%          -1.2%          -1.6%          -2.9%
       Other Financial Assets       -3.4%          -3.3%         -10.4%          -3.3%           1.1%
Notes:
1) Marginal tax rates and portfolio shares are measured on a scale of 0 - 1.
2) The top panel is the marginal effect of a unit increase in the marginal tax rate on the expected
   portfolio share.
3) The bottom panel divides 10 percent of the estimate in the top panel by the corresponding
   unconditional average portfolio shares reported in Table 2.
4) Asterisks indicate statistical significance of the corresponding coefficient at the 5 percent level.
