NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEENAGE CHILDBEARING AND ITS LIFE
CYCLE CONSEQUENCES: EXPLOITING A
NATURAL EXPERIMENT

V. Joseph Hotz
Susan Williams McElroy
Seth G. Sanders

Working Paper 7397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7397

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1999

This research was supported, in part, by NICHD Grant No. R01 HD-31590. We wish to thank Sarah
Gordon, Stuart Hagen, Terra McKinnish, Charles Mullin, Carl Schneider and Daniel Waldram for able and
conscientious research assistance on this project. We wish to thank Robert Moffitt, Frank Furstenberg,
Arleen Leibowitz, John Strauss, Susan Newcomer, Arline Geronimus and participants in the Workshop on
Low Income Populations at the Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
for helpful comments on an earlier draft and Frances Margolin, Hoda Makar, and Simon Hotz for their
editorial assistance. We especially wish to thank Robert Willis for numerous helpful discussions during the
course of this study. All remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by V. Joseph Hotz, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Teenage Childbearing and Its Life Cycle Consequences:
Exploiting a Natural Experiment
V. Joseph Hotz, Susan Williams McElroy, and
Seth G. Sanders
NBER Working Paper No. 7397
October 1999
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we exploit a “natural experiment” associated with human reproduction to
identify the effect of teen childbearing on subsequent educational attainment, family structure, labor
market outcomes and financial self-sufficiency. In particular, we exploit the fact that a substantial
fraction of women who become pregnant experience a miscarriage (spontaneous abortion) and thus
do not have a birth. If miscarriages were purely random and if miscarriages were the only way, other
than by live births, that a pregnancy ended, then women, who had a miscarriage as a teen, would
constitute an ideal control group with which to contrast teenage mothers. Exploiting this natural
experiment, we devise an Instrumental Variables (IV) estimators for the consequences of teen
mothers not delaying their childbearing, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
1979 (NLSY79). Our major finding is that many of the negative consequences of not delaying
childbearing until adulthood are much smaller than has been estimated in previous studies. While we
do find adverse consequences of teenage childbearing immediately following a teen mother’s first
birth, these negative consequences appear short-lived. By the time a teen mother reachers her late
twenties, she appears to have only slightly more children, is only slightly more likely to be single
mother, and has no lower levels of educational attainment than if she had delayed her childbearing
to adulthood. In fact, by this age teen mothers appear to be better off in some aspects of their lives.
Teenage childbearing appears to raise levels of labor supply, accumulated work experience and labor
market earnings and appears to reduce the chances of living in poverty and participating in the
associated social welfare programs. These estimated effects imply that the cost of teenage
childbearing to U.S. taxpayers is negligible. In particular, our estimates imply that the widely held
view that teenage childbearing imposes a substantial cost on government is an artifact of the failure
to appropriately account for pre-existing socioeconomic differences between teen mothers and other
women when estimating the causal effects of early childbearing. While teen mothers are very likely
to live in poverty and experience other forms of adversity, our results imply that little of this would
be changed just by getting teen mothers to delay their childbearing into adulthood.
V. Joseph Hotz
Department of Economics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hotz@ucla.edu
Susan Williams McElroy
Heinz School of Public Policy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
smcelroy+@andrew.cmu.edu

Seth G. Sanders
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
sanders@econ.umd.edu

1.

Introduction
There is growing concern in the United States about the number of children born to teen-

age mothers and the proportion of these births that occur out of wedlock. In reaction to these
trends, a report by the National Research Council concluded, “adolescent pregnancy and childbearing are matters of substantial national concern” (Hayes, 1987, p. ii). Part of the concern over
teenage childbearing in the United States stems from its apparent adverse impacts on teenage
mothers. Over the past several decades, social scientists have documented a strong association
between the age at which a woman has her first child and the economic and social indicators of her
subsequent well-being. Most of these studies find that women who bear children as teenagers are
subsequently less likely to complete high school, less likely to participate in the labor force, more
likely to have low earnings, and less likely to marry than are women who do not have children as
teenagers. The apparent adverse consequences of teenage childbearing for the educational attainment and skill development of the mother are particularly problematic in light of mounting evidence that the earnings prospects of unskilled workers have declined substantially over the last
20 years (see Bound and Johnson 1992; Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce 1993). As a result, adolescent
mothers, and their children, are likely to spend a substantial fraction of their lifetimes in poverty
(see Upchurch and McCarthy, 1990, and Card, 1981).
As has been highlighted in the current debate over reforming the U.S. welfare system, teenage mothers and their children constitute a growing proportion of those receiving various forms of
public assistance. Government programs, such as the Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) program, have become a major source of support for the children of teenage mothers.
Thus, the apparent costs of teenage childbearing are not borne solely by the teenage mothers, but
also by U.S. taxpayers. Moreover, because teenage mothers work less over their lifetimes, these

1

women will end up contributing little to the tax revenues needed to finance the governmental assistance they receive.
Unfortunately, estimating the causal effects of teenage childbearing is not straightforward. The evidence typically cited is based on the observed statistical association between early
childbearing and the subsequent socioeconomic attainment of teenage versus non-teenage mothers. This evidence may reflect a causal influence of early childbearing on the outcomes of teenage mothers. Alternatively, it may simply reflect differences between the type of women who
bear children as teens and those that avoid this. Presumably if the two groups of women are substantially different in other aspects that effect socioeconomic outcomes, then it is difficult to assess whether the birth or these other factors are responsible for the poorer outcomes of teenage
mothers relative to other women.
At issue is how to obtain reliable estimates of the causal effects of teenage childbearing,
i.e., the answer to the following question: What would have been the adolescent mother’s (behavioral) outcome if she had not had a child as a teen? For obvious reasons, the use of experimental methods is simply not an option for conducting this evaluation. One cannot conduct trials
in which teenage women are assigned or denied children via a randomizing mechanism. Consequently, the design for studies of the effects of teenage childbearing must be based on nonexperimental (or quasi-experimental) methods. Such methods are subject to the challenge of selection bias, i.e., that selective differences between women who have children as teenagers and
those who do not bias estimate of causal impacts.
A number of econometric strategies have been used in the literature on the effects of
teenage childbearing to deal with selection bias. The most common approach used is to control
for observable characteristics (race, family structure, etc.) in order to account for the differences

2

between teen mothers and the women to which they are compared. (See Waite and Moore
(1978), Card and Wise (1978), Hofferth and Moore (1979), Upchurch and McCarthy (1990),
Marini (1984), and McElroy (1996) as examples of this strategy.) This approach requires that,
conditional on observed differences between teen mothers and the comparison groups used to
measure counterfactual outcomes, births are random. Clearly, this is a strong assumption and, as
we show below, it’s validity is dubious. A second econometric approach models the joint process
determining the woman’s decision to bear a child as a teenager as well as the maternal outcome
of interest (education, labor supply, poverty status, etc.). (See Ribar, 1992, Ribar, 1994, and
Lundberg and Plotnick, 1989, as examples of this strategy.) Such studies typically rely on a rational choice framework that suggests that it is women with lower returns to work and education
that have children as teens. Such models maintain a different, but equally strong, set of assumptions in order to identify the effects of early childbearing. A third approach employed in the past
uses the outcomes of an adolescent mother’s sisters who did not have a child as a teenage to construct counterfactual outcomes for teen mothers. (See Geronimous and Korenman, 1992, and
Hoffman, Foster, and Furstenberg, 1993.) The validity of this method requires that, within a family, births are random to sisters. In the presence of changing circumstances within a family, such
as the wealth of parents or what they learn about their children over time, this assumption will
not be met.1
In an innovative paper, Grogger and Bronars (1993) make use of a “naturally-occurring”
experiment to estimate causal effects of early childbearing.2 In particular, they make use of the

1

Hao, Hotz, and Jin (1999) develop a game-theoretic model of parental-daughter interactions over teenage childbearing decisions in which parents differentially treat older versus younger daughters so as to reduce the incidence
of teen births. Their empirical tests reject the results that births are random across daughters within the same family.

2

Bronars and Grogger (1995) use this same twins strategy to identify the causal effect of women having an extra
birth out-of-wedlock on the socioeconomic attainment of such mothers.

3

fact that some teenage mothers have twins at their first birth rather than a single child. Since
twins are beyond the control of the mother, twins can be viewed as randomly assigning some
teenage mothers an “extra” child. By comparing teen mothers whose first birth is twins to those
whose first birth is a single child, Grogger and Bronars estimate the effect of an extra child on a
range of socioeconomic outcomes of teen mothers. As long as twins are random, the differences
in outcomes between teen mothers with twins and those with a single birth measure the causal effect of an extra child without the intrusion of selection bias.
The causal effect identified in the work of Grogger and Bronars is somewhat different
than in the research of others. Typically studies have focused on the effect on maternal outcomes
of having at least one child as a teenager relative to having no children as a teenager. Grogger
and Bronars argue that if an extra child lowers the outcomes of teen mothers that the effect of
having any child as a teen is likely to be at least as large. Grogger and Bronars (1993) also make
an important contribution when they distinguish the immediate consequences of an extra birth (0
to 3 years after the birth) from the longer-term consequences (10 to 13 years after the birth). An
important finding from their work is that many of the negative consequences measured just after
the birth of the extra child diminish over time.
In this paper, we exploit a different “natural experiment” associated with human reproduction to identify the causal effect of teenage mothers not delaying their childbearing on their
subsequent educational attainment, family formation, labor market success, and poverty status.
In particular, we exploit the fact that a substantial fraction of women who become pregnant experience a miscarriage (spontaneous abortion) and thus do not have a birth. If miscarriages were
purely random and if miscarriages were the only way, other than by live births, that a pregnancy
ended, then women, who had a miscarriage as a teen, would constitute an ideal control group

4

with which to contrast teenage mothers. These women would randomly end their pregnancy with
no child while women who had no miscarriage would randomly end their pregnancy with a
child.3 In reality, these ideal conditions do not hold. For example, pregnancies can be terminated
by induced abortions, a choice that is elected by as many as 25% of teenage women who become
pregnant (see Alan Guttmacher Institute, 1994). But, as argued below, we can still exploit the
occurrence of spontaneous abortions (i.e., miscarriages) as an Instrumental Variable (IV) to
identify the effect of teenage childbearing on the same socioeconomic outcomes considered by
Grogger and Bronars (1993) and the other studies in this literature. Moreover, elsewhere4 we
show that this IV estimator is robust to a range of other sources of “contamination” of the “miscarriage-as-a-natural-experiment” used in this paper.
In the next section, we describe the data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
1979 (NLSY79) that we use in this study. In Section 3, we lay out our use of miscarriages as a
natural experiment and show how it can be used to form an Instrumental Variable estimator for
the effect of teen births on maternal outcomes. Therein, we also consider the threats to our inferences due to the possibility that some miscarriages are not random and that fertility events, especially miscarriages and induced abortions, are likely to be under reported in survey data. We discuss how we deal with these complications in this paper and report on findings from our previous
work.
In Section 4, we present our basic findings of the effect of teenage childbearing on human
capital development, family structure, poverty, and self-sufficiency. Our major finding is that
3

Notice the contrast between the miscarriage and non-miscarriage groups more closely measures the contrasts between having a birth as a teenager versus not doing so than does the contrast of an “extra” child generated by the
twins “natural experiment”. However, both our work and Grogger and Bronars measure only the effect of teenage
childbearing among women willing to give birth while the literature as a whole has concentrated on the effect in the
population of all women. In Section 6 we investigate whether our results differ from the literature as a whole because of this sample selection.

5

many of the negative consequences are smaller than estimated elsewhere in the literature and are
short lived. In fact, over the life course, teenage childbearing may actually aid human capital development. In Section 5, we compare our IV estimates with the most common statistical methodology employed in previous studies, namely, regression methods that control for differences in
observable characteristics of early childbearers and women who did not become mothers as
adolescents. These comparisons strongly suggest that the negative consequences previously attributed to teenage childbearing are, in fact, the result of the many unobserved disadvantages not
accounted for by observable background characteristics. Finally, in Section 6, we use our estimates of the causal effects of teenage childbearing to estimate the cost to taxpayers of teenage
childbearing. In Section 7, we offer some concluding comments on our analysis.
2.

Data and Samples Used
In this study, we use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) to

estimate the causal effects of teenage childbearing in the United States. The NLSY79 is a nationally representative sample of young men and women who were between the ages of 14–21 years
old in 1979. Thus, the women in our study were teenagers (i.e., from 13-17) during the years
1971 and 1982. Respondents have been interviewed each year since 1979. We make use of data
through the 1993 interview in our analysis. The female respondents were asked a range of questions about all of their pregnancies and births, as well as about their marital arrangements, educational attainment, labor force experiences, family income and participation in various welfare
programs.
The NLSY79 contains a random sample of women in the U.S. population who were between the ages of 14-21 in 1979 along with supplemental samples of blacks, Hispanics, disad4

See Hotz, Mullin and Sanders (1997).

6

vatnaged whites and women who were enlisted in the military in 1979. Some of our analysis is
based on data from the random sample and the supplemental samples for blacks and Hispanics.5
This sample—which we refer to as the All Women Sample—contains a total of 4,728 women.6
We summarize the data for the All Women Sample in Table 1. Therein, we divide the sample
into teen mothers and women who did not have births as a teenager and then compare estimates
of a number of background characteristics taken for the most part when these women were age
14.7 As is clear from this table, teen mothers come from much more disadvantaged backgrounds
than do women who delay childbearing. For example, teenage mothers grew up in homes that
were poorer. The average annual income of the households in which teenage mothers lived in
1978 was $9,512 versus $17,669 for their counterparts. Teen mothers had parents who were less
educated. The fathers of women who later became teenage mothers completed an average of
only 9 years of school versus 11 years of schooling for the fathers of other women. They were
more likely to grow up in single-parent families (41 percent versus 22 percent). In addition they
were more likely to have been in a family living on welfare when growing up (26 percent versus
15 percent) than women who did not have a child as a teen. Clearly, teenage mothers are different than women who delay childbearing into adulthood in many ways we can observe.
As noted in the Introduction, we exploit the random occurrence of spontaneous abortions
(miscarriages) in order to devise a natural experiment for identifying causal effects of teenage
childbearing on the subsequent socioeconomic attainment of teen mothers. To implement this
5

Where appropriate, we use sampling weights provided with the NLSY79 to account for the use of the minority
oversamples.

6

The random sample and black and Hispanic supplementary samples from the NLSY79 contained 3,108, 1,067, and
751 women, respectively, for a total of 4,926 women. Of this total, we excluded data on 198 women for whom there
was insufficient information to determine the timing of their pregnancies or the resolutions of their first pregnancies.

7

The two exceptions to this in Table 1 are the annual income of the household in which a woman resided, which
was taken in 1978, and the woman’s score on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT), which was administered
to all women in the NLSY79 in 1981.

7

natural experiment, we will focus on a subset of the women in the All Women Sample who reported that they experienced their first pregnancy prior to their eighteenth birthday. (We elaborate on the reasons for and implications of using this subsample below.) We refer to this subsample as the Teen Pregnancy Sample. This sample contains data on 980 women, of which 727
(74.2%) had a pregnancy that ended in a birth, 185 (18.9%) that ended in an induced abortion,
and 68 (6.9%) that ended in a miscarriage. The characteristics of the latter sample are presented
in Table 2. We briefly compare the characteristics of the All Women and Teen Pregnancy Samples drawn from the NLSY79. Note that the characteristics of teen mothers from the All Women
Sample (see Table 1) are extremely similar to teenage mothers in the Teen Pregnancy Sample
(see in Table 2).8 However, the subsample of women who miscarry, which will form the basis
for a comparison group for teen mothers in our natural experiment, are quite different from the
women who are not teen mothers in our All Women Sample. (Other studies typically use the
latter women as their comparison group for teen mothers.) Clearly the socioeconomic status of
women who become pregnant as teens and miscarry (Table 2) is much lower than that of women
who are not teen mothers (Table 1). Finally, it is worth noting that women who become pregnant
as teens and who abort are very similar to women who do not become pregnant prior to age 18 in
terms of pre-pregnancy socioeconomic status (Table 2). It is equally true that they are very similar in pre-pregnancy socioeconomic status to women who do not have a birth prior to age 18
(Table 1). This similarity is important for understanding why the estimates of causal effects of
teenage childbearing derived from our natural experiment tend to differ from the previous literature. While previous studies have attempted to “adjust” for these observable differences when

8

For teenage mothers, the difference between these two samples is only from the time dating convention used. Both
samples contain women who had a child prior to their 18th birthday. The Teen Pregnancy Sample also includes as
teenage mothers women who became pregnant just prior to their 18th birthday who carried the pregnancy to term
after their 18th birthday.

8

estimating the causal effects of teenage childbearing with regression-based methods, such methods need not account for differences in other characteristics that we cannot measure with existing
data. Therefore, we now turn to how our natural experiment based on the existence of randomly
occurring miscarriages can be used to obtain an appropriate comparison group to measure the
counterfactual outcomes for teen mothers.
3.

The Use of Miscarriages as a Natural Experiment (and as an Instrumental Variable)
The use of experimental designs to estimate causal effect, via random assignment of

treatment status, eliminates the problem of selection bias by ensuring that treatment and comparison groups have, on average, the same outcomes in the absence of “treatment.” In our context, a perfect control group would consist of women who are like teenage mothers in all ways
except that they do not have a child. In this section, we discuss how we can exploit a natural experiment in which women who are pregnant as teenagers but experience spontaneous abortions,
or miscarriages. We outline the assumptions required for this natural experiment to identify the
causal effect of teenage childbearing and the consequences for our analysis if they are violated.
Consider the population of women who first become pregnant as adolescents and, thus,
are at risk to become a teen mother. (We shall assume that adolescence is ages between 12 and
18.) Among this set of women, a pregnancy can be resolved in one of three ways: the occurrence
of a birth, an induced abortion or a miscarriage. Let D be the indicator of how the pregnancy is
resolved, where D = B (birth), A (abortion), or M (miscarriage). For now, assume that miscarriages are beyond the control of women, while the births and abortions represent choices by
those who did not experience a miscarriage.9 Among women who experience miscarriages, we
define a woman’s latent status as how a woman would choose to resolve a pregnancy if she did
9

We note that most miscarriages occur very early in a pregnancy so that they almost always occur before women

9

not experience the miscarriage. Let D* = B* if a woman’s latent-status is to have a birth and D*
= A* if her latent status is to have an abortion. Finally, let Y denote outcomes women experience
as an adult age, i.e., at ages greater than 18, and Yk (k = B, A, or M) denote the outcome conditional on the way in which the pregnancy was resolved, and Yk* (k* = B* or A*) denote the outcome that would occur if a woman had a particular latent pregnancy status.10 The outcomes associated with latent statuses are hypothetical in that the econometrician can not observe a woman’s
latent type.
We define the causal effect of interest in this paper as the average effect of a woman
having a birth as a teen versus delaying it—either to an adult age or permanently—on adult outcomes for the population of women whose first birth is as a teen. More precisely, we are interested in identifying (and estimating)

β = E (YB − YB* D = B)

(1)

Angrist and Imbens (1991) refer to this type of causal effect as the selected average treatment
effect (SATE), where “selected” refers to the fact that the causal effect applies to a selected
population.11 (In our context, the selected population is women who have their first births as a
teenager.) Because of this selectivity in the population and the fact that we do not presume that
pregnancies are random events, we can not make inferences about the causal effects of early
childbearing for a randomly chosen teenage woman in the United States.12 Nonetheless, identifying the causal effect defined in (1) is of interest for at least two reasons. First, as we will argue

could choose to have an induced abortion.
10

To simplify notation, we forego indexing outcomes by particular adult age at which they are measured.

11

In the evaluation literature (see Heckman, 1992), this effect is also referred to as the effect of the “treatment on the
treated.”

12

By analogy to the program evaluation literature, the causal effects we focus on are analogous to making inferences
of the effect of a program on those who choose to participate and need not apply to a randomly selected individual
being required to participate in program. See Heckman (1992) for a discussion of the distinctions between and use-

10

below, β is more readily identified from available data than the more speculative causal effect of
the consequences of a teen birth to a randomly selected woman from the population of all
women, regardless of teen childbearing status. Second, identifying β enables one to assess the
potential consequences of completely eliminating teenage childbearing in the U.S. Determining
such effects provide a benchmark against which to judge the potential benefits that could be derived from any particular policy mechanism directed at reducing the incidence of teenage childbearing. In Section 6, we use our estimates to provide a quantitative assessment of such potential
benefits to U.S. taxpayers.
It is apparent from (1) that the problem of estimating β centers on the identification of
E(YB*D=B), since E(YBD=B) is readily obtained from data on women who had their first births
as teenagers. Ideally, one would like to use data on Y for women who have miscarriages as teens
but for which D* = B*. Unfortunately, we cannot identify the members of this group. However,
we do observe the outcome for women who miscarry, denoted by YM, which provides some information about the YB*’s. In particular, E(YM) is equal to

E (YM ) = P* E (YB* ) + (1 - P*) E (YA* ) ,

(2)

where the weighting factor, P*, is the proportion of pregnant women who would have had a birth
if they not miscarried. Solving (2) for the average outcome for latent-birth women, E(YB*), we
obtain
E (YB* ) =

E (YM ) - (1 - P*) E (YA* )
.
P*

(3)

While E(YM) can be identified (and consistently estimated) from observable data on women who
have a miscarriage as a teen, we cannot identify (or readily estimate) either E(YA*) or P* since

fulness of various treatment effect definitions.

11

they, too, require knowing the latent status of women who miscarry as teens.
However, under additional behavioral assumptions, we can achieve identification of β by
exploiting the occurrence of miscarriages as a natural experiment. In particular, suppose that the
following conditions hold:
(i) all miscarriages are random,
(ii) all fertility events are correctly reported,
(iii) having a miscarriage or abortion has the same effect on Y, since neither event results in a
birth as a teenager,
If all miscarriages are random and all fertility events are correctly reported—i.e., assumptions (i)
and (ii) hold—then the fraction of women who would have carried the pregnancy to term among
women who miscarried, P*, must equal the fraction of women who did carry the pregnancy to
term among women who do not miscarry, P. That is, P* = P.13 Furthermore, if only the existence
of a child affects outcomes—i.e., assumption (iii) holds—then, on average, the outcomes for
women who have abortions will be equal to all women in the latent-abortion group. That is,
E(YA*) = E(YA).14 Under these conditions, E(YB*) is equal to:
E (YB* ) =

E (YM ) - (1 - P ) E (YA )
.
P

(4)

It follows that β can be written as a function of statistics which can be identified (and, thus,
readily estimated) from observable data. In particular,

13

This would be true if the fate of the fetus is determined at the time of conception. In reality miscarriages and
abortions occur throughout the nine months of pregnancy. We have used an adjustment to account for the longer exposure time to miscarriages for fetuses being carried to term relative to aborted fetuses with little effect on the results.

14

In the program evaluation literature this is referred to as the “No Hawthorne Effect” assumption, namely, that the
random assignment affects outcomes only through the treatment provided. In our context, this assumption implies
that only the presence (or absence) of a child affects maternal outcomes.

12

β * = E (YB − YB* D = B)
PE (YB ) + (1 − P) E (YA ) − E (YM )
P
E (Y~ M − YM )
=
P
Cov(Y , M% )
=
.
Cov( B% , M% )
=

(5)

where E(Y~M) is the average outcome for women who did not miscarry—since E(Y~M) ≡ PE(YB)
+ (1-P)E(YA)—and B% and M% denote indicator variables equal to 1 if a women D = B and M, respectively, and 0 otherwise.15
Given the definition in (5), it follows that a simple Instrumental Variables (IV) estimator
can be formed for β. Let Y~M denote the sample mean of Y for those observations that do not experience a miscarriage, YM denote the sample mean for those observations that do experience a
miscarriage, and P̂ denote the sample proportion of women who do not experience a miscarriage. Then it follows that an IV estimator for β is
Y −Y
βˆ1IV = ~ M M
Pˆ
 (Y , M% )
Cov
,
=
 ( B% , M% )
Cov

(6)

 ( w , w ) denotes the sample covariance between variables w1 and w2. Miscarriages
where Cov
1
2
( M% ) serve as an instrument for births ( B% ). Thus, our use of the natural experiment of the occurrence of miscarriages to obtain the differences in outcomes by miscarriage status is equivalent to
using miscarriages as an instrumental variable for births.
As noted above, the validity of the identification of β via (5), and of the associated IV es-

15

Note that B% = 0 for all women who have a miscarriage.

13

timator in (6), require that conditions (i)-(iii) hold. Epidemiological evidence suggests that (i)
and (ii) do not hold and condition (iii) is a strong assumption about the influence of miscarriages
on a woman’s subsequent behavior. While the physiology of miscarriages implies that some miscarriages are truly random events,16 some may be induced by pre- and within-pregnancy behaviors of women. In particular, epidemiological studies find that smoking and drinking during
pregnancy, the use of an IUD at conception and conceiving very young, at less than 16 years of
age, all increase the likelihood that a woman miscarries.17 Such behaviors may be correlated with
subsequent outcomes, Y, thereby compromising using miscarriages as a natural experiment (or an
instrumental variable) for analyzing the causal effect of early childbearing births. Other factors,
such as a woman’s socioeconomic status, her nutrition, or her drug use, have not been shown to
increase rates of miscarriage.18
There also is evidence that abortions and possibly miscarriages are underreported in survey data. Jones and Forrest (1992) find that induced abortions are underreported in the
NLSY79—the data source used in this study—by comparing the incidence of abortions reported
by NLSY79 respondents with data on numbers of abortions performed in the U.S. The latter data
is gathered annually by the Alan Guttmacher Institute in a survey of abortion providers in the
U.S. and is thought to provide reliable estimates of the incidence of abortions in the U.S. While
the accuracy of reporting on miscarriages in survey data is more difficult to verify, data from

16

Some miscarriages (spontaneous abortions) are the result of the abnormal formation of the chromosomes of a human fetus and occur at random. As a result of such abnormalities, the fetus is not viable and is expelled from the
womb early in a pregnancy. See Klein, Stein and Susser (1989) for more on the physiology of spontaneous abortions.

17

See Klein, Stein and Susser (1989) for a summary of this evidence.

18

It should be noted that the effect of these factors on birth weight is well documented. See Klein, Stein and Susser
(1989).

14

U.S. Vital Statistics suggests that this fertility event also is underreported in surveys.19 As demonstrated in Hotz, Mullin and Sanders (1997), underreporting of such events can lead to bias
when using the IV estimator proposed in (6).
A systematic assessment of the consequences of violations of conditions (i) through (iii)
for estimating the causal effects of teenage childbearing is undertaken in Hotz, Mullin and Sanders (1997). Therein, these authors show that one cannot point identify the casual effect in (1)—
and, thus, ensure the consistency of the IV in (6)—without knowledge of the latent-statuses of
women who experience miscarriages. However, they do show that one can form non-parametric
bounds on β, even when none of these conditions hold. Furthermore, these bounds are tight as
defined by Horowitz and Manski (1995) and can be derived and non-parametrically estimated
using auxiliary information to form lower bounds on the proportion of miscarriages which are
random and upper bounds on the incidence of underreporting in surveys of abortion and miscarriage events. In their empirical investigation on a subset of outcomes examined here (educational
attainment, annual hours of work and labor market experience. More importantly, the estimated
bounds for the latter two outcomes turn out to be informative in that they are sufficiently tight to
enable rejection of null hypotheses on the signs of the causal effects, such as the lower bound on
the estimated effect of teenage childbearing on earnings is not less than zero. Thus, while the
conditions needed to ensure that using miscarriages as an instrumental variable for teen births
may not hold, any violations do not appear to bias the qualitative inferences drawn from estimates of causal effects of teenage childbearing on the adult outcomes of teen mothers.20

19

U.S. Vital Statistics reports suggest that approximately 45% of pregnancies of teenage women end in births and
41% end in abortions. This implies that 14% of pregnancies to women in this age group end in miscarriages. As one
can see from Table 2, the proportion of women in the NLSY79 who reported that their teenage pregnancy ended in a
miscarriage is only 6.9%.

20

We note that it is unclear whether it is empirically important that condition (i) is violated, i.e., that some miscarriages are not random. If miscarriages were random then characteristics unaffected by the miscarriage (race, etc.)

15

In the next section, we present three sets of IV estimates of the causal effects of teen
births on a woman’s adult outcomes. One set consists of the simple IV estimator defined in (6).
Note that this estimator is equivalent to estimating the following regression equation,

Yia = α a + β1,a B%i + ε ia ,

(7)

where Yia denotes the outcome for the ith woman when she is age “a”, εia is a disturbance term
and β1,a is the age-specific causal effect defined (1). Using M% i to instrument B%i , we produce IV
estimates, βˆ1,IVa , given in (6). We also present IV estimates that control for various sets of covariates, Xia, via the regression function

Yia = α a + β 2, a B%i + θ ′ X ia + ε ia ,

(8)

and again using M% i to instrument for B%i . We report IV estimates of β2,a for two sets of covariates: one that includes a set of behavioral factors known to be related to miscarriages and another
set that includes these behavioral factors plus personal and family background characteristics of
the ith women measured prior to a woman’s first teenage pregnancy. The first set includes variables, such as smoking, drinking and use of an IUD prior to the pregnancy,21 that epidemiological studies have found to influence the incidence of miscarriages. We control for them to minimize potential bias in our IV estimators of causal effects that might arise because some miscar-

should in expected value be equal between women who miscarry and women who do not. Table 3 presents the same
background characteristics as presented in Tables 1 and 2 except we now divide the Teen Pregnancy Sample into
two groups—women who miscarried their teen pregnancy and women who did not. Examining the mean of the 9
pre-pregnancy background characteristics, in no case is the mean for women who miscarry statistically different
than for women who do not miscarry.
21

The NLSY79 records smoking and drinking behavior of teenagers. Unfortunately the data on contraceptive use is
recorded only for pregnancies that end in births. Therefore we can only condition on smoking and drinking behavior
but not on IUD use. This is unlikely to bias our results as the use of an IUD among teenagers is extremely rare. In
1988, of women less than age 18 who were sexually active on an on going basis 38% used the pill, 29% used condoms, 28% used no contraception and only 5% used any other form of birth control including the IUD (See AGI report, 1994). Given the relative risk of pregnancy from these contraceptive practices the proportion of teenage pregnancies that occurred while using an IUD is very small. Further it is not clear that IUD use would be correlated with
adult outcomes such as educational attainment.

16

riages may have been behaviorally-induced. In the second set of covariates, we include the background characteristics listed in Tables 1 and 2 in order to improve the efficiency of the IV estimators of causal effects.
Because we have a small number of women who have miscarriages in our data, we also
present a third set of IV estimates in Section 5 based on the following, more parsimonious, specification of the regression function in (8)
Yia = α + η1ai + η2 ai2 + K + ηK aiK + β 0 B%i + β1 B%i ⋅ ai + β 2 B%i ⋅ ai2 + K + β J B%i ⋅ aiJ + θ ′ X ia + ε ia ,

(9)

where ai denotes the adult age at which the outcome, Y, is measured and K and J are the orders of
the age polynomials used for this particular outcome. In this specification, M% i and its interactions with age polynomials are used to instrument for B%i and its interactions with the woman’s
age. While the use of these interactions with age polynomial potentially distort the causal effect
of teenage childbearing for outcomes at particular ages, we employ them in an attempt to increase the precision of our estimates of causal effects and the power of statistical tests on their
significance.
Finally, for all of the regressions in which we pool data across different ages for the same
woman, we correct for temporal dependence in the estimated standard errors of parameter estimates using the method of Huber (1967).
4.

Estimates of the Causal Effects of Delaying Childbearing on Adult Outcomes among
Teen Mothers
In this section we present the estimated effects of teenage childbearing on: (a) indicators

of human capital accumulation; (b) sources of financial support, (c) measures of poverty; and (d)
indicators of family structure. These are the outcomes that have been examined in previous
studies of the effects of teenage childbearing on mothers. We distinguish between two types of

17

effects of early childbearing on a teenage mother’s subsequent socioeconomic status: permanent
effects and those that represent temporary substitution of behaviors over the life course. Even if
teenage childbearing raises the cost of some activities in the short-run, there is scope for substitution between activities at some point in time and over time. A key question we address is
whether teenage mothers substitute activities in order to minimize the impact of a teenage birth
on their lives.
Table 4 presents estimates of the long-term impact of teenage childbearing. The table
presents the effect of teenage childbearing on maternal outcomes measured when the women is
28 years old, more than 10 years after the birth of her first child.22 Column 1 of Table 4 presents
the non-parametric IV estimates defined in (6). Column 2 presents estimates of effects that control for smoking prior to pregnancy, drinking prior to pregnancy and age at conception.23 Column
3 contains IV estimates that also are for a number of background characteristics that may be correlated with maternal outcomes.24 Finally, column 4 provides estimates based on the specification in (9) where age is entered as a polynomial. In general, the estimates are extremely similar
across specifications.
While previous studies have concluded that teenage childbearing has negative effects on
human capital development, we find little evidence to support this. We do find modest evidence
that having a child as a teenager lowers the rate of high school completion. Our non-parametric
IV estimate in Column 1 shows that teen childbearing lowers the probability of completing high
22

This is the oldest age at which all cohorts of women in the NLSY79 are observed.

23

Ideally we would like to know the number of cigarettes and the amount of alcohol consumed during pregnancy
since there is evidence that there is a dose-response in miscarriages to both factors. Unfortunately, the NLSY79 asks
these specific questions only of women whose pregnancies ended in live births. Therefore we rely on information
collected elsewhere in the survey as to whether the women smoked or drank alcohol at all as this information is collected on all women.

24

The means of background characteristics used in the regression analysis are given in Table 2. Again these are used
only to increase the precision of the estimates.

18

school by 11 percentage points, but this effect is not statistically significant. However, once we
condition on background characteristics, we find that teen childbearing lowers the probability of
completing high school by 15 or 16 percentage points, a result that is statistically significant at
the 0.10 level.25 In contrast, teenage childbearing increases the rate of completion of the General
Equivalence Diploma (GED) substantially. Our non-parametric estimate suggests that teen
childbearing raises the probability of completing a GED by 18 percentage points an effect that is
strongly significant and one that suggests that teenagers do not receive less education but instead
substitute the GED for a high school diploma. In fact, taking high school diplomas and GEDs together, we find that there is no significant causal effect of early childbearing on the probability
that teen mothers obtain a high school level education. (Our point estimate is small and positive
but statistically insignificant.) That is, teen mothers do not seem to receive less education; rather,
they appear to substitute one form of high school completion for another.26
The differences in the estimated effects of teenage childbearing on these two alternative
forms of high school completion are somewhat surprising in light of recent findings on the effects of the GED. Cameron and Heckman (1993) find that the value of the GED in the labor
market is minimal, with its recipients earning no more than high school dropouts. But their
analysis is only for men. More recent evidence, for women, find that the labor market returns for
those with a GED are no different than those a high school diploma (see Cao, Stromsdorfer and
Weeks, 1996). What remains to be determined is whether this result also hold for the subset of
women who become teen mothers. While this paper does not address this issue, our findings for
25

As discussed, the rate of high school completion does not change after age 20. The point estimate of the impact of
teenage childbearing on high school completion does not change after age 21 but since nearly all NLSY79 respondents are observed at age 21 the precision of the estimated impacts is greater at this age than at latter ages. Since
other outcomes are likely to vary over the life cycle we estimate other outcomes at age 28.

26

The GED is granted upon the successful completion of an examination which tests competency in a basic high
school curriculum. The GED does not require a fixed class schedule and may offer teenage mothers substantial

19

the effects of early childbearing on the labor market outcomes of teen mothers, to which we turn
below, are not inconsistent with the equivalence of GED and high school graduation effects
found in Cao, Stromsdorfer and Weeks (1996).
Row 4 of Table 4 displays the estimated effects of early childbearing on the number of
hours worked at age 28. We estimate that teenage mothers work 369 more hours at age 28 than
they would have if they delayed childbearing. Row 5 reports that between the birth of the first
child and age 28 teen mothers accumulate more than 2,600 hours more of labor market experience than they would if they delayed childbearing until adulthood. The effect of teenage childbearing on both hours worked at age 28 and the cumulative number of hours-worked by that age
are statistically different than zero at the 0.05 level. Far from causing a life of idleness, teenage
mothers work much more than they otherwise would have if they delayed their childbearing into
adulthood. These estimated effects are not trivial in magnitude. On average, teenage mothers
work approximately 1,000 hours per year at age 28 and 820 hours per year over their 20s. Our
estimates suggest that delaying childbearing would lead to more than a 35% decline in hours
worked at age 28 and cumulatively would lead to almost three less typical work years of labor
market experience by age 28.27 This additional work experience appears to have payoffs in terms
of subsequent wage rates. Our non-parametric estimates indicate that teenage childbearing raises
wages (of working women) by $4.32 per hour. This result is essentially unchanged after controlling for a large set of background characteristics. However, the impacts estimated from our regression that models the effects on wages as a polynomial in age suggests a more modest (and

flexibility in study time.
27

The specifications with age polynomials suggest that teenage childbearing raises hours worked at age 28 by 303
hours and cumulatively raises hours worked up to age 28 by 1732 hours. These estimates are somewhat lower than
the non-parametric IV estimates but are still qualitatively large and still indicate that teenage childbearing does not
lower but raises labor supply.

20

statistically insignificant) increase in wages of $1.63 per hour. In any case, there is no evidence
that teenage childbearing harms the long-term employment or earnings potential of women although there is some ambiguity of whether it helps.
Recall that the estimated effects on these labor market outcomes are the result of comparing the behavior of women who have their first births as teens to those who are forced to delay their childbearing because they experienced a miscarriage. Studies of women’s labor supply
patterns typically show that women work less when their children are very young and more when
the children get older. Consequently, the estimated effects of early childbearing on hours worked
at age 28 reflect, in part, differences in the timing of the childbearing between teen mothers and
the comparison group of women who had miscarriages. It is likely that women who began childbearing later in life will rejoin the labor force after completing their delayed childbearing and
narrow the gap in hours worked at older ages. However, it is unlikely that any advantage of teen
mothers in accumulated labor market experience will completely disappear. Many studies have
shown that the presence of young children and wages are paramount to female labor force participation. For most women, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds, do not have
young children present age 30. Given that we find that the wages of teen mothers are higher at
age 28, these wage gains are likely to persist to older ages because of the additional previous labor market experience teen mothers have acquired relative to what would have happened if they
had delayed their childbearing.28
Row 7 of Table 4 provides estimates of the effect of teenage childbearing on the financial
support available to teen mothers at age 28. At that age, teen mothers earned $9,269 a year more
than they would have if they had delayed childbearing. Much of this earnings advantage is due to
28

If the return to a high school degree is substantially higher than a GED then the wages of women who delay
childbearing may be greater than those of teen mothers. This question remains unresolved.

21

the 369 more hours they worked at age 28. But as Row 6 reports there is also a substantial gap in
the average wage paid to teen mothers. This is consistent with a human capital interpretation in
which the 2,605 more cumulative hours worked is more valuable than the amount of human
capital potentially lost by receiving a GED rather than a regular high school diploma. Estimates
of the effect of teenage childbearing on two other major sources of support for poor families,
earnings from a husband (Row 8) and public assistance (Row 9), are not sizeable or statistically
different from zero at age 28. In fact, while not statistically significant, all point estimates indicate that at age 28 teenage mothers use less public aid than if they had delayed childbearing.
Since welfare participation tends to fall with the age of a woman’s children and the children of
teenage mothers are, on average, older than they would be if these mothers delayed childbearing,
it is not surprising that teenage mothers receive no more (or even less) public aid at older ages.
The fact that support from a husband is unaffected by teenage childbearing is in large part due to
the lack of an effect of teenage childbearing on the probability of being married at age 28 (Row
11).29
While we show below that there are important effects of teenage childbearing at early
adult ages, it is unclear whether teenage childbearing has any permanent, or long run, effects on
family size or family structure. Ten years after the first child of a teen is born, our point estimate
suggests that a teen mother is likely to have 0.30 more children than if she delayed childbearing
(Row 13) and this estimate is not statistically significant.30 Our point estimates suggest that having a child as a teenager raises the probability of having any children by age 28 by 13 percentage
29

In general, the regressions using age polynomials show similar results. The one exception is that while all nonparametric models indicate no effect of teenage childbearing on spousal income, the regressions using age polynomials suggest that teenage childbearing raises support from a spouse. This result is difficult to reconcile with the
finding in all specifications that there is no effect of teenage childbearing on marriage at age 28.

30

We investigate below whether this reflects that total family fertility of women who delayed childbearing is incomplete while teenage mothers have completed their families.

22

points (Row 10) relative to avoiding childbearing as a teen, but again this is statistically insignificant. In other words, our point estimate suggests only 13% of women who delayed childbearing would not have had at least one child by age 28 and we can not reject that the fraction of
women with children is unaffected by teenage childbearing. This limits the scope for teenage
childbearing to affect the incidence of single motherhood at age 28. In fact, while our point estimate suggests that teenage childbearing raises the probability of being a single mother by 5 percentage points (Row 12) at age 28, this effect is statistically insignificant. We can not reject that
teenage childbearing does not effect the probability of being a single mother in the long run.
We next examine the effects of teenage childbearing on several indicators of the financial
well-being of teen and their families. We examine three separate measures of financial wellbeing: whether the family’s income falls below the federal poverty threshold (Row 14), whether
they participate in the Federal food stamps program (Row 15), and whether they participate in
the AFDC program (Row 16) when the mother is 28 years old. Based on our non-parametric estimator, not delaying childbearing until adulthood does not significantly affect the incidence of
poverty or of the likelihood of receiving either form of public assistance. Based on the causal effects estimates derived from the age-polynomial interaction specification in (9), we find that
teenage childbearing lowers AFDC participation by 4 percentage points, lowers food stamp participation by 15 percentage points and lowers the poverty rate by 14 percentage points when the
mother is age 28. Since the poverty line is a function of family size and family earnings, that
teenage childbearing lowers poverty is consistent with teenage childbearing increasing family
size little while it raises earnings a great deal.
Tables 5 through 8 explore the effects of teenage childbearing over a woman’s life
course. These tables allow us to compare the effects of teenage childbearing in the short and long

23

runs. In each table, we present our least restrictive model, the non-parametric model conditioning
on no covariates and then the most restrictive model, the model with all covariates that allows
the effect of teenage childbearing to vary as a polynomial function of age. In general, the point
estimates, at most ages, are similar for the two specifications. However, the additional restrictions of the latter specification tend to yield smaller standard errors on the estimated coefficients.
Table 5 examines the effect of teenage childbearing on family structure. Columns 2 and 3
report the effect of teenage motherhood on the number of children in the women’s family and
Columns 4 and 5 contain estimates of the effect of teenage childbearing on the probability of
having any children. Since all teenage mothers have children, Columns 4 and 5 can also be interpreted as the fraction of latent-birth women who, at each age, have had a child. What is clear is
that the delay in fertility is quite short for the majority of latent-birth women. The non-parametric
estimates suggest that at age 18 (by her 19th birthday), typically 1 to 1.5 years after a miscarriage,
only 59% of latent-birth women remain without a child. At age 19, only 47% of latent-birth
women remain without a child. However, a small minority of women—approximately 16 percent—delays childbearing more than 10 years.31 Because of the generally high fertility among
latent-birth women, the effect of teenage childbearing on the number of children in a woman’s
family is never more then 0.70 and declines to 0.30 in her late 20’s. Teenage childbearing does
seem to increase family size in the short-run, but, to a large degree, having births early in life is
offset by having fewer births later in life.
In Table 4, we found little evidence of a long-run effect of teenage childbearing on single
motherhood. Columns 8 and 9 of Table 5 provide estimates of the effect of teenage childbearing
on single motherhood at all ages between 18 and 28. Our non-parametric results suggest that at

31

This implies a lower bound of 4.4 years for the average delay in childbearing.

24

ages 18 and 19 being a teenage mother increases the chances of being a single mother by 32 percentage points and 30 percentage points respectively. However, there is no evidence that teenage
motherhood effects the rate of marriage at any age (Columns 6 and 7). The higher rate of single
motherhood among teen mothers is caused simply by their higher rate of motherhood. As latentbirth women who delayed childbearing begin having their children, they are as likely to have
children outside of marriage as teen mothers are to be raising their children outside of marriage.
The effect on single motherhood is strong in the late teen years but quickly dissipates. Further, it
is entirely driven by the effect of teenage childbearing on the timing of fertility and not at all by
the timing of marriage.
Table 6 presents estimates of the effect of teenage childbearing on hours worked. We argued earlier that, by age 28, teenage mothers are working substantially more hours than if they
had delayed childbearing. In fact this pattern is detected much earlier in the life course. By their
mid 20s, teenage mothers are working substantially more hours than their counterparts who delayed childbearing and the additional number of hours they work grows over their twenties and
into their thirties. Our non-parametric (parametric) estimates suggest that at age 22 teenage
mothers work 284 (175) more hours than women who delay childbearing. In their thirties, teenage mothers work closer to 400 (300) hours more per year than women who delay childbearing.
By age 30 teenage mothers have accumulated nearly 3,000 (1,900) more hours of work experience. This is the result of teen mothers consistently working several hundred more hours per year
than they would have if they had delayed their childbearing. There is little evidence that teenage
childbearing ever lowers a teen mother’s wages. In the short run, there is no significant effect of
teenage childbearing on wages and in the long run there is some weak evidence that teenage
childbearing raises wages. The non-parametric estimates (Column 6) suggest that by her late 20’s

25

teenage childbearing raises a teenage mother’s wages by $3 to $5 per hour while the parametric
estimates (Column 7) suggest a more modest rise of $1 to $2 per hour. The non-parametric estimates are usually statistically significant for ages between 26 and 30.
Teenage childbearing appears to lead to an increase in labor supply and labor market experience, which leads to a modest increase in wages. Together these factors raise the earnings of
a teenage mother a great deal. Table 7 presents estimates of how teenage childbearing changes
the sources of support for these mothers at different ages. At ages older than 19, both our nonparametric (Column 2) and parametric (Column 3) point estimates suggest that teen mothers earn
substantially more than they would have if they had delayed childbearing. After age 24, our nonparametric (parametric) estimates suggest that teen mothers typically earn $6,000 to $9,000
($5,000 to $7,000) more annually than if they had delayed childbearing. Usually these estimated
effects are statistically significant.
There is no evidence that teenage mothers draw substantially less support from spouses.
As discussed earlier, the chance of being married at any age is unaffected by teenage childbearing. Hence the husbands of teenage mothers would have to earn less than the husbands of women
who delay childbearing if teenage childbearing is to lower the financial support from a husband.
In fact, at older ages there is some evidence that teenage mothers derive substantially more support from their husbands than if they had delayed childbearing. We have no ready explanation
for this finding, but it is consistent with teenage mothers being more attractive mates because of
their apparently higher levels of human capital acquired through work experience.
Finally, it is worth noting that there is little support, at any age, that teenage childbearing
increases the amount of financial support received in the form of public assistance. Our point estimates suggest that in their late teens and early twenties teenage mothers receive somewhat

26

more public assistance than they would have if they delayed childbearing. However, in their late
twenties and early thirties they receive substantially less public support than they otherwise
would have if they had delayed childbearing.32 In particular, the parametric estimates recorded in
Column 7 indicate that, on average, teen mothers receive $800 to $1,000 more per year when
they are ages 18 to 21 but then years later, at ages 28 to 30, receive $1,000 to $2,000 less per
year than comparable women who delay childbearing to adulthood.
Finally, in Table 8, we present estimates of the effects of teenage childbearing on three
measures of the poverty status of teen mothers, namely, the incidence of family earnings below
the federal poverty threshold (Columns 2 and 3), participation in AFDC (Columns 4 and 5) and
participation in Food Stamps (Columns 6 and 7). Given very small changes in family structure
and positive changes in earnings it is not surprising that teenage childbearing does not seem to be
associated with increases in poverty in either the short-run or long-run. In fact, in general our
point estimates suggest that teenage childbearing somewhat reduces poverty and the use of public assistance at older ages. In interpreting these findings it is important to realize that at age 18,
45 percent of women who are not teenage mothers (latent-birth women) live in poverty and by
age 20 over sixty percent of these women live in poverty. The poverty rate among these women
are astoundingly high even in the absence of a teenage birth. Since many women who delay
childbearing do so for only a few years, it is very likely that when these women have children
they will be in circumstances very similar to those of the teenage mothers.
Our results for the effects of early childbearing on the use of public aid are similar to
those on the incidence of family poverty. The parametric estimates on Food Stamp use (Column
32

When we restrict the age-polynomial teen-birth interaction in (9) to be cubic in age when estimating the effects of
teenage childbearing on AFDC and food stamp payments, each term in the age polynomial is statistically significant.
This suggests that public assistance payments to teenage mothers are larger than women who delay when teenage
mothers are in their early 20’s but become smaller than women who delay when teenage mothers are in their late

27

7) suggest that while teenage childbearing may raise the use of Food Stamps at age 18 by 8 percentage points, the increased use of Food Stamps dissipates quickly. Ten years after the birth of
her first child a teen mother’s rate of Food Stamp use is actually 15 percentage points lower than
comparable women who delay childbearing until adulthood. Interestingly, there does not seem to
be an effect on AFDC participation (Column 5) at any age. This suggests that lower reliance on
public aid for teen mothers later in life is largely a result of less Food Stamp use not more use of
AFDC, the program targeted to single mothers. An Examination of Estimated Effects from IV
Estimation and OLS Estimation
In this section we explore the differences between the empirical strategy we have employed to generate the above results with those used in previous analyses. One way of characterizing the differences across the methods is in how each forms a comparison group with which to
compare the outcomes of teen mothers. The natural experiment we have exploited above makes
use of data on women who became pregnant as a teen and uses those who had a miscarriage to
compare with women who had a teen birth. The most prevalent strategy used in previous studies
is to “regression adjust” for differences between teen and non-teen mothers so that the adjusted
latter group is more comparable to the former, net of teenage childbearing for teen mothers. In
this section, we analyze how these two groups differ and the consequences of these differences
for estimates of the impact of teenage childbearing on the adult outcomes of mothers.33
Using data on women who experienced a miscarriage as a teen to estimate the causal effects of teenage childbearing differs from previous studies that employ the “control for observable differences” strategy differ in two important ways: the samples used and the instrumenting

20’s.
33

In analyses not reported here, we have also compared our natural experiment results using sister-pairs data in
which sisters who did not have a teen birth are used as a comparison group for the outcomes of sisters that did have
a teen birth. Such results are available from the authors upon request.

28

of teen births. With respect to samples, our natural experiment restricts the analysis to data on
women who become pregnant as teens; studies that rely on the regression-adjustment approach
typically use for all women, including both those who do and do not become pregnant as teens.
Note that it is possible that a comparison group consisting of women who became pregnant as
teens but did not have a teen birth is more comparable to teen mothers than all women, even
without using miscarriages to instrument for births.34 In Table 9, we present estimates of the effects of teenage childbearing for the same set of outcomes and the same age (28) as was presented in Table 4. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 give estimates of the teen birth effect based on ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation of the specification in (8). Recall that this specification includes a set of pre-pregnancy characteristics to control for pre-existing differences across the
samples used in the estimation. The estimates in Column 1 are for the All Women Sample, i.e.,
they include teen mothers and women who did not have a birth (and possibly a pregnancy) as a
teen. Column 2 displays the corresponding OLS estimates based on using the Teen Pregnancy
Sample, i.e., women who did become pregnant as teens. Finally, Column 3 of Table 9 reproduces
the IV estimates that controlled for the same set of covariates as the OLS regressions. (This third
column is reproduced from Column 3 of Table 4.)
Comparing Columns 1 and 3, we see that restricting the sample to women who became
pregnant prior to age 18, even without using an instrument for teen births, does result in estimates of the effects of teenage childbearing that are closer to the corresponding IV estimates.
34

While not discussed in the text, we also examined whether the estimates and inferences about the effects of teenage childbearing were sensitive to the particular age criteria for inclusion in our sample of women who became
pregnant as a teen. Recall that women were included in our analysis sample if they became pregnant prior to her 18th
birthday. However, some women who first became pregnant prior to their eighteenth birthday gave birth just after
their eighteenth birthday (within nine months). One small difference between our sample of teenage mothers and
that in other studies is that we include these women as teenage mothers while other studies include only women
whose birth occurred prior to their 18th birthday. We experimented with using different ages for this criteria, such as
including women whose first pregnancy occurred before they reached their 19th birthday. With the exception of our
estimates for receipt of a high school diploma, varying this age criteria had a negligible effect on our IV estimates or

29

That is, eliminating women who were never pregnant as teens appears to yield a comparison
group that is more comparable to teenage mothers than can be obtained by using all women and
trying to use regression adjustments to eliminate all of the pre-existing differences between the
latter group of women and teen mothers. However, this sample restriction alone is not enough to
make the OLS and IV estimates comparable.35 For example, the OLS estimates (on a sample restricted to women who became pregnant prior to age 18) still imply that teenage childbearing
lowers hours worked by 102 hours, lowers accumulated hours worked by 2,379 hours, lowers
earnings by $6,441 dollars, lowers wages by $2.28 per hour and raises the poverty rate by 13
percent. For these particular outcomes, our IV estimates in Column 3 imply conclusions about
the effects of teenage childbearing that are dramatically different. The IV estimates imply that, at
age 28, teenage childbearing raises hours worked by 333 hours, raises accumulated hours
worked by 2,029 hours, raises earnings by $8,488 dollars and lowers the poverty rate by 12 percent.36 For many of the other outcomes, the IV estimates imply that that teenage childbearing has
either a much smaller negative impact or even a positive impact of teenage childbearing relative
to the OLS estimates when the samples used are the same (i.e., consist of women who became
pregnant prior to age 18).
To illustrate the differences between the IV and OLS estimates over the life cycle, we
present, in Figures 1 through 5, predicted values for various outcomes of teen mothers implied
by these two alternative estimation strategies. The predicted values denoted by diamonds trace

the inferences derived form them.
35

One exception is that the effect of teenage childbearing on the rate of high school completion is similar for the
OLS and IV models on the sample of women who become pregnant prior to age 18 (-0.16) but the effect in the sample of all women is far more negative (-0.41). This occurs largely because the high school completion rate among
teen mothers in the sample of women who were pregnant prior to their eighteenth birthday is higher than the rate
among teen mothers in the all women sample.

36

Regressions in which age is restricted to enter the model as a polynomial (columns 5 and 6) suggest the same difference between the OLS and IV estimates

30

out the actual outcomes for teenage mothers. The predicted counterfactual outcomes, based on
OLS estimates derived from the All Women sample, are denoted triangles and the counterfactual
predicted outcomes, based on IV estimates, are depicted with squares in the various figures.37
Looking across these figures, one sees the dramatic differences in the inferences one would draw
about the consequences of teenage childbearing, depending on the method used. While these differences, by themselves, do not definitely prove that using miscarriages to instrument for teen
births is preferred to the methodology most commonly used in previous studies, such differences
do prove two things: the method one uses matters greatly and that selection bias is a real issue
when estimating the causal effects of teenage childbearing. Based on what we consider to be the
compelling rationale for our miscarriages-as-a-natural-experiment provided in Section 3 above,
we think there is a strong case for concluding that much of the previous literature has drawn seriously flawed inferences about the consequences of teenage childbearing in the U.S.
5.

The Cost to Government of Teenage Childbearing
One of the concerns that has been expressed about the teenage childbearing “problem” in

the U.S. is the cost it imposes on society through the heightened use of public assistance by teen
mothers. Given the estimates of the effects of teen childbearing, and the fact that they are qualitatively different than those found in most previous studies, we re-examine, in this Section, these
costs. Regardless of what method is used for estimating the effects of teenage childbearing, it is
important to distinguish between what society spends on teen mothers in the form of public assistance, and the portion of these expenditures that can be attributed to the failure of these
women to delay their childbearing. To make this distinction clear, we use our estimates of causal
effects to estimate what the government spends each year on public assistance for women who
37

The counterfactual outcomes are constructed by adding the treatment effect at each age implied by the OLS and

31

became mothers as teens and what they would save if these women delayed childbearing. We
estimate both the direct costs that government incurs for teen mothers on public assistance programs as well as these costs net of the taxes that women who were teen mothers will pay at various stages of their lifetimes. Obviously, the taxes paid by teen mothers must finance more than
just what they incur in expenditures on public assistance programs. But given our finding that the
effect of early childbearing is to raise the labor market earnings of teen mothers at older ages, it
is worthwhile to determine the extent to which the taxes these women pay “cover” the cost to
government in public assistance over their lifetimes.
We attempt to calculate as comprehensive an estimate of the public assistance costs that
are incurred by teen mothers as possible. From the NLSY79, we have data on annual benefits received from AFDC and Food Stamps, as well as the benefits from other social programs, including the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and General Assistance (GA) programs. Another important form of public assistance for teen mothers is the medical care they and their children often receive under the Medicaid program.38 While information is not available in the
NLSY79, we also attempted to estimate the dollar value of the public assistance teen mothers receive in the form of medical care through this program.39 We added these derived estimates for

IV models in which age is entered as a polynomial.
38

While the NLSY79 contains information on whether its respondents receive rental subsidies or subsidized housing, it does not contain information on the dollar value of these forms of assistance. Because we were unable to obtain reliable data with which to estimate the costs of housing subsidies, they are not included in our cost calculations.

39

Using state aggregate data on the maximum monthly AFDC and food stamp benefits for a family of four (consisting of one adult and three children) and average monthly Medicaid expenditures for a family of this size in the
years between 1984 and 1989, we regressed the Medicaid benefits against the sum of food stamp and AFDC benefits, controlling for a linear time trend to account for the rising level of expenditures on Medicaid relative to those
for the other programs over this period. The results produce an estimate that in each month a typical family on public assistance receives $250 plus 0.193 times the benefits received (in 1993 dollars) from the AFDC and food stamp
programs combined. Based on this formula, the average monthly Medicaid expenditure on a family of four, receiving the maximum allowable AFDC and food stamp benefits, would be $404. In 1993, the median state’s maximum
monthly AFDC benefit for a family of four was $435 and the maximum monthly food stamp allotment for such a
family was $375 (see U.S. House of Representatives, 1994). Since the average monthly expenditure in 1993 for a
family of four receiving assistance under the Medicaid program was $386 (U.S. House of Representatives, 1994),

32

Medicaid received to those for the other benefits teen mothers received at various ages and used
this measure to estimate the causal effects of early childbearing for this measure of public assistance, using the instrumental variables regression methods described earlier.40
While not directly measured from NLSY79 data, we used the following strategy to estimate what teen mothers pay in federal, state and local sales and income taxes at each age of their
early adulthood. We assumed that the average teenage mother faces a federal marginal tax rate of
15 percent and that she would pay an additional 8 percent of her income in state and local income and sales taxes. Using the resulting tax rate of 23 percent, we multiplied the annual earnings of teen mothers, as well as our estimates of the causal effects of early childbearing on annual earnings, to produce annual estimates of taxes paid by teen mothers and the additional taxes
they would pay if they had delayed their childbearing.
To obtain estimates of the total annual costs and savings to government associated with
teen motherhood, we also must estimate the total number of women in the U.S. population in
1996 who first became mothers as teens (i.e., had their first birth prior to age 18). We assumed
that the number of early childbearers at each age, from 17 through 34, was equal to the number
of women who became teen mothers for the first time in 1993. Based on the Current Population
Survey, there were 175,259 new teen mothers in 1993.
Using these estimates, we simulated the total amount that all levels of government would
have spent in 1996 on public assistance for women who became mothers as teens, what these
costs would be net of the taxes government collects from these women, and what the gross and
net savings would be in these costs if all of these women had delayed their childbearing. Our estimates are presented in Figure 6. We estimate that each year government spends $11.3 billion

the above estimation procedure appears to yield reasonable estimates.

33

(in 1996 dollars) on AFDC, Food Stamps, Medicaid and other forms of public assistance for
women, ages 17 through 34, who began motherhood as teens. To put this in perspective, this expenditure represents 6 percent of total expenditures on the AFDC, Food Stamps and Medicaid
programs in the U.S. in 199341 and amounts to an annual expenditure of $3,596 per woman.
While these costs to government are substantial, we find that they are offset, in part, by the taxes
that women who bore their first child as a teenager would be expected to pay. In fact, the total
annual public assistance costs of early childbearers, net of the taxes they pay, is $2.1 billion,
which amounts to a net cost, per woman, of $665. Nonetheless, this is a substantial net governmental outlay to women who chose not to delay their childbearing.
While substantial, most of these costs that U.S. taxpayers incur for women who began
motherhood at early ages is not attributable to the failure to delay their childbearing. Taxpayers
would save virtually nothing if these women had delayed their first births by 4 years on average.
In fact, we estimate that the total annual expenditures on public assistance would increase
slightly, rising by $1.3 billion, if all of these women had delayed their childbearing. Moreover,
the net (of taxes) annual outlays by government for cash-assistance and in-kind transfers to these
women would actually increase by 35 percent, or $3.9 billion. This increase in annual net expenditures associated with delaying childbearing would amount to over $1,250 per teen mother (a
$400 annual increase in public aid and the remainder from forgone tax revenue). The fact that
getting teen mothers to delay their childbearing results in additional costs to government, rather
than savings, is a direct consequence of the finding that teenage childbearing raises rather than
lowers labor market earnings in the long-run. We found that teen mothers would earn less over

40

The estimates for this regression are available from the authors.

41

In 1993, the total expenditures, in terms of 1996 dollars, for the AFDC, Food Stamp and Medicaid programs were
$27.3 billion, $28.4 billion and $197.1 billion, respectively (U.S. House of Representatives, 1994).

34

their lifetimes if they were forced to delay their first births. This loss in earnings translates to a
reduction in taxes paid by these women and an increase, rather than decrease, in the net costs to
government associated with the postponement of motherhood.42
6.

Conclusion
In this study, we have used an alternative strategy to estimate the causal effects associ-

ated with teenage childbearing in the U.S. In particular, we have employed a natural experiment
to obtain a more comparable, and plausible, comparison group with which to derive estimates of
counterfactual outcomes for teen mothers, i.e., what would have happened to these women if
they had postponed their childbearing. Our results suggest that much of the “concern” that has
been registered concerning teenage childbearing, at least based on its consequences for the subsequent attainment of teen mothers, is misplaced. In particular, our estimates imply that the
“poor” outcomes attained by such women cannot be attributed, in a causal sense, primarily to
their decision to begin their childbearing at an early age. Rather, it appears that these outcomes
are more the result of the poor circumstances than the early childbearing of these women. Furthermore, our estimates suggest that simply delaying their childbearing would not greatly enhance their educational attainment, subsequent earnings, or family structure.
Our estimates suggest that teenage mothers are much more adaptable over their life cycle
than previous discussions of the consequences of teenage childbearing have suggested. For example, teen mothers do appear to be less likely to receive a high school diploma than if they had

42

To assess the robustness of our findings concerning the various cost estimates displayed in Figure 6, we recalculated all of our cost estimates, varying both the ranges of ages of teen mothers used to calculate these costs (estimates also were derived using women, aged 17 through 40 and aged 17 through 30) and the tax rate used to derive
tax revenue estimates (we also used a rate of 15 percent). While the magnitudes of the various costs vary across
these alternative assumptions, the general conclusions did not. Government spending on public assistance would not
have declined and net spending would have increased, even if society had been able to get all the women who had
teen births to postpone their childbearing until they were adults.

35

delayed their childbearing. But, they appear to offset this shortcoming by being more likely to
obtain a GED and, more importantly, by working much more over their early adulthood than if
they had delayed childbearing. Moreover, we find that teen mothers may actually achieve higher
levels of earnings over their adult lives than if they had postponed motherhood. Finally, we find
evidence that while teenage childbearing does seem to increase public aid expenditures immediately after the birth of their first child, this “negative” consequence of teenage childbearing is not
a permanent one, in that teen mothers use less public aid in their late 20’s as their earnings rise
and their children age.
Taken together, the results presented in this paper call into question the view that teenage
childbearing is one of the nation’s most serious social problems, at least when one measures its
severity in terms of the potential financial gains to these women and to taxpayers of having all
teen mothers delay their childbearing until they are older. At the same time, we caution the
reader not to generalize from the findings. We have considered only a limited range of potential
consequences, and costs, of teenage childbearing. Furthermore, the findings from one study cannot be considered as conclusive. However, we note that our findings, at least for many of the socioeconomic outcomes considered in this paper, are consistent with the estimated effects of teenage childbearing found in the work of Geronimus and Korenman (1992) and Grogger and Bronars (1933). Taken together with our work, this evidence raises serious doubts about the extent
and nature of teenage childbearing as a “social problem” in the U.S. and, more importantly, on
the view that getting these women to postpone their childbearing will improve the socioeconomic attainment of teen mothers in any substantial way.

36

References
Alan Guttmacher Institute (1994), “Abortion Fact Book.” Alan Guttmacher Institute, New York.
Angrist, J. and G. Imbens (1991), “Sources of Identifying Information in Evaluation Models,”
Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University, August 1991.
Bachrach, C. and K. Carver (1992), “Outcomes of early childbearing: An appraisal of recent evidence.” Summary of a conference. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, May 1992.
Bound, J. and G. Johnson (1992), “Changes in the structure of wages in the 1980s: An evaluation
of alternative explanation.” American Economic Review 82 (June): 371–92.
Bronars, S. and J. Grogger (1995), “The Economic Consequences of Unwed Motherhood: Using
Twin Births as a Natural Experiment,” American Economic Review, 84(5):1141-1156.
Cameron, S. and J. Heckman (1993), “The nonequivalence of high school equivalents.” Journal
of Labor Economics, 11, Part 1 (January): 1–47.
Cao, J., E. Stromsdofer and Gregory Weeks (1996), “The Human Capital Effects of the GED on
Low Income Women,” Journal of Human Resources 31(1): 206-228.
Card, J.J. (1981), “The Long-Term Consequences for Children of Teenage Parents,” Demography,
18(2), 137-156.
Card, J.J. and L. Wise (1978), “Teenage Mothers and Teenage Fathers: The Impact of Early Childbearing on Parents’ Personal and Professional Lives,” Family Planning Perspectives, 10:
100-205.
Geronimus, A. and S. Korenman (1992), “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen Childbearing
Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 1187-1214.
Geronimus, A. and S. Korenman (1993), “The Costs of Teenage Childbearing: Evidence and Interpretation,” Demography, 30, 281-290.
Grogger, J. and S. Bronars (1993), “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teenage Childbearing:
Results from a Natural Experiment,” Unpublished manuscript, University of CaliforniaSanta Barbara.
Hao, L., V. J. Hotz, and G. Z. Jin (1999), “Games Daughters and Parents Play: Teenage Childbearing, Parental Reputation, and Strategic Transfers,” Unpublished manuscript, UCLA,
July 1999.
Hayes, C. (1987), Risking the Future: Adolescent Sexuality, Pregnancy, and Childbearing, Vol.
I, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

37

Heckman, J. (1992), “Randomization and social policy evaluation.” In Evaluating welfare and
training programs, ed. Charles F. Manski and Irwin Garfinkel. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hofferth, S. and K. Moore (1979), “Early Childbearing and Later Economic Well-Being.”
American Sociological Review, 44, 784-815.
Hoffman, S., M. Foster, and F. Furstenberg (1993), “Reevaluating the Costs of Teenage Childbearing,” Demography, 30:1-13.
Hotz, V. J., S. Mullin, and S. Sanders (1997), “Bounding Causal Effects Using Data from a
Contaminated Natural Experiment: Analyzing the Effects of Teenage Childbearing,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 575-603.
Huber, P. J. (1967), “The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates under Non-Standard
Conditions,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium in Mathematical Statistics
and Probability, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 221-233.
Juhn, C., K. M. Murphy, and B. Pierce (1993), “Inequality and the rise in returns to skill.” Journal of Political Economy, 101(3), June 1993, 410–442.
Klein, J., Z. Stein, and M. Susser (1989), Conception to birth: Epidemiology of prenatal development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lundberg, S. and R. Plotnick. (1990), “The Effects of State Welfare, Abortion and Family Planning Policies on Premarital Childbearing Among White Adolescents,” Family Planning
Perspectives. Vol 22, December 246-52.
Marini, M. (1984), “Women’s Educational Attainment and the Timing of Entry into Parenthood,” American Sociological Review, 49, 491-511.
McElroy, S. W. (1996), “The Effects of Teenage Childbearing on Young Black and White
Women’s Educational Attainment, Labor Force Participation, and Earnings.” Ph.D. diss.,
Stanford University.
Ribar, D. (1992), “Teenage Fertility and Early Adult Labor Force Participation,” Unpublished
Manuscript, Penn State University.
Ribar, D. (1994), “Teen Births and High School Graduation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August, 1994.
Rosenzweig, M. and K. Wolpin (1995), “Sisters, Siblings, and Mothers: The Effect of Teen-age
Childbearing on Birth Outcomes in a Dynamic Family Context,” Econometrica, 63(2),
303-326.
Trussell, J. (1976), “The Economic Consequences of Teenage Childbearing,” Family Planning
Perspectives, 8(4), 184-190.

38

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1993), “Fertility of American women 1992.” Current Population
Reports. Series P-20-470. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (1994), Green book: Background material and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways
and Means. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Upchurch, D. and J. McCarthy (1990), “The Timing of a First Birth and High School Completion,” American Sociological Review, 55, 224-234.
Waite, L. and K. Moore (1978), “The Impact of an Early First Birth on Young Women’s Educational Attainment,” Social Forces, 56, 845-865.

39

Figure 1: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on Annual Hours of Work
1,400

Number of Hours Worked in a Year

1,200

1,000

800

600

400
Average Outcome for W omen who Gave
Birth Prior to Age 18
Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing (IV)

200

Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing Until After Age 18 (OLS)

0
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Age of W oman

Figure 2: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on Annual Earnings
$30,000

$25,000

Annual Earnings (1992 dollars)

Average Outcome for W omen who Gave
Birth Prior to Age 18
Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing (IV)

$20,000

Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing Until After Age 18 (OLS)

$15,000

$10,000

$5,000

$0
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

-$5,000

Age of W oman

40

27

28

29

30

31

32

Figure 3: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on the Probability of Being Married at a
Given Age
1.0

0.9

0.8

Probability of Being Married

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

Average Outcome for W omen who Gave
Birth Prior to Age 18
Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing (IV)

0.2

Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing Until After Age 18 (OLS)

0.1

0.0
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

-0.1

Age of Woman

Figure 4: Estimates of the Effects of Teenage Childbearing on the Probability of Being a Single
Mother at a Given Age
1.0

0.9

Probability of Being a Single Mother

0.8

Average Outcome for Women who Gave
Birth Prior to Age 18
Estimated Outcome for Women who Delay
Childbearing (IV)

0.7

Estimated Outcome for Women who Delay
Childbearing Until After Age 18 (OLS)

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Age of W oman

41

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Figure 5: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on the Annual Benefits Received from
AFDC and Food Stamps

Income Received from AFDC and Food Stamps (1992 dollars)

$7,000

$6,000

$5,000

$4,000

$3,000

$2,000
Average Outcome for W omen who Gave
Birth Prior to Age 18
Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing (IV)
Estimated Outcome for W omen who Delay
Childbearing Until After Age 18 (OLS)

$1,000

$0
18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Age of W oman

Figure 6: Total Annual Government Expenditures on Teen Mothers for AFDC, Food Stamps and Medicaid and
Savings to U.S. Taxpayers if Teen Mothers Delayed Their Childbearing
(Data Source: NLSY79 and U.S. Vital Statistics)
$12.0

$11.3

$10.0
$8.0

Billions of 1996$

$6.0
$4.0
$2.1
$2.0
$0.0
-$1.3

-$2.0
-$4.0

-$3.9

-$6.0
Expenditures on
Public Assistance

Public Assistance,
Net of Taxes Paid

42

Savings in Public
Assistance If Delay

Pub. Ass. Savings,
Net of Gain in Tax
Rev.

Table 1: Background Characteristics of Teenage Mothers and
Women Who Delayed Childbearing until after Age 18
(Data Source: NLSY79, All Women Sample)

Characteristic
Black
White
Hispanic
Family on welfare in 1978
Family income in 1978
In female-head household at age
14
In intact household at age 14
Mother’s education
Father’s education
AFQT scorea
Number of Observations
a

Teenage Mothers
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.553
0.497
0.223
0.417
0.223
0.417
0.268
0.443
$12,146
$18,621
0.275
0.447
0.593
8.335
6.592
20.262

0.491
4.103
5.212
18.718
564

Armed Forces Qualifying Test Score.

43

Not Teenage Mothers
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.279
0.448
0.517
0.500
0.204
0.403
0.153
0.360
$29,200
$32,115
0.160
0.366
0.782
0.413
10.391
3.958
9. 596
5.290
41.187
27.615
4,164

2

Data from All Women Sample.
Data from Teen Pregnancy Sample.
a
Armed Forces Qualifying Test Score.

1

Black
White
Hispanic
Family on welfare in 1978
Family income in 1978
In female-headed family at age 14
In intact household at age 14
Mother’s education
Father’s education
AFQT scorea
Number of Observations
% of those Pregnant before Age 18

Characteristic
Standard
Deviation
0.267
0.442
0.530
0.499
0.203
0.402
0.150
0.357
$30,060 $32,396
0.153
0.360
0.791
0.407
10.464
3.956
9.745
5.273
42.343
27.849
3,748

Mean

Not Pregnant Before
181

44

Standard
Deviation
0.483
0.500
0.298
0.457
0.219
0.414
0.229
0.420
$16,098 $23,681
0.251
0.433
0.637
0.481
8.930
4.083
7.294
5.290
24.786
21.307
980

Mean

Pregnant Before 182

First Pregnancy
Before 18 ended in
Birth2
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.527
0.499
0.246
0.431
0.227
0.419
0.261
0.439
$13,472 $20,319
0.259
0.438
0.622
0.485
8.450
4.082
6.766
5.136
21.374
19.404
727
74.2%

First Pregnancy
Before 18 ended in
Abortion2
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.324
0.468
0.503
0.500
0.173
0.378
0.103
0.304
$27,134 $32,742
0.195
0.396
0.714
0.452
10.676
3.862
9.735
5.021
37.489
23.627
185
18.9%

Table 2: Background Characteristics of Teenage Women by Pregnancy Outcomes Prior to Age 18
(Data Sources: NLSY79, All Women and Teen Pregnancy Sample)
First Pregnancy
Before 18 ended in
Miscarriage2
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.441
0.497
0.294
0.456
0.265
0.441
0.221
0.415
$14,149 $18,537
0.309
0.462
0.588
0.492
9.309
3.261
6.294
5.711
26.385
20.658
68
6.9%

Table 3: Background Characteristics of Women Pregnant Prior to Age 18 and Women Whose
Pregnancy Ended in a Miscarriage
(Data Source: NLSY79, Teen Pregnancy Sample)
Characteristic

Black
White
Family on Welfare in 1978
Family Income in 1978
In Female Headed Family at age 14
In Intact Family at Age 14
Mothers Education
Fathers Education
AFQT Score

Pregnant Before 18
Mean
(Uweighted)
0.48
0.29
0.22
$30,165
0.25
0.63
9.78
9.69
24.7

45

Standard
Error
0.015
0.012
0.013
$1,095
0.013
0.015
0.105
0.137
0.69

Pregnant Before 18 ended in
Miscarriage
Mean
Standard
(Uweighted)
Error
0.44
0.060
0.29
0.055
0.22
0.050
$26,003
$2,994
0.30
0.055
0.59
0.059
10.04
0.255
9.72
0.628
26.3
2.57

Table 4: Change in Outcomes Due to Not Delaying Childbearing Measured at Age 28
(T-Statistics in Parentheses)

Outcomes

Human Capital
1. High School Diploma
(HSD) (Age 21)
2. General Equivalence Degree (GED)
3. HSD or GED
4. Hours Worked
5. Cumulative Hours Worked
6. Wages
Sources of Support
7. Dollars from Earnings
8. Dollars from Spouse
9. Dollars from AFDC and
Food Stamps
Family Structure
10. Proportion with Children
11. Proportion Married
12. Proportion Unmarried with
Children
13. Number of Children
Measures of Poverty
14. Proportion in Poverty
15. Proportion on Food
Stamps
16. Proportion on AFDC

No Covariates

Estimates Conditioning on:
All Covariates2
Correlates of
1
Miscarriage

All Covariates
with Polynomials
in Age

-0.11
(1.03)
0.18
(3.34)
0.08
(0.77)
368.90
(1.94)
2605.41
(2.26)
4.34
(2.15)

-0.11
(1.10)
0.19
(3.46)
0.08
(0.76)
390.85
(2.02)
2774.30
(2.40)
4.34
(2.11)

-0.16
(1.73)
0.18
(3.42)
0.03
(0.38)
330.67
(1.78)
2029.62
(1.72)
4.22
(2.16)

-0.15
(1.67)
0.19
(4.02)
0.05
(0.48)
303.64
(1.71)
1732.10
(1.36)
1.63
(1.30)

9269.65
(3.08)
1269.85
(0.19)
-372.27
(0.44)

9667.12
(3.10)
1314.03
(0.20)
-444.64
(0.54)

8488.79
(2.92)
2505.17
(0.38)
-515.60
(0.62)

6660.43
(2.47)
7511.76
(1.71)
-1017.61
(1.27)

0.13
(1.53)
-0.08
(0.90)
0.05
(0.56)
0.30
(1.20)

0.13
(1.46)
-0.07
(0.83)
0.04
(0.44)
0.28
(1.11)

0.13
(1.51)
-0.07
(0.85)
0.03
(0.38)
0.27
(1.03)

0.12
(1.27)
-0.03
(0.38)
0.02
(0.30)
0.35
(1.34)

-0.11
(1.00)
-0.10
(1.01)
-0.04
(0.49)

-0.11
(1.01)
-0.11
(1.12)
-0.05
(0.62)

-0.12
(1.22)
-0.09
(0.89)
-0.06
(0.63)

-0.14
(2.06)
-0.15
(1.95)
-0.04
(0.55)

1. These include dummy variables for smoked prior to pregnancy, drank prior to pregnancy and pregnancy prior to
age 16.
2. These include dummy variables for ethnicity (black and Hispanic), living in a female headed family at age 14, living in an intact family at age 14, and controls for missing values. The woman’s family income in 1978, her
mother’s education and her fathers education were entered linearly.

46

Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on Family Structure
(Dollar figures in 1994 Dollars, T-Statistics in Parentheses)
Number of Children Probability of Having
a Child

Probability of being
Unmarried with a
Child
Age of
No
All
No
All
No
All
No
All
Mother Covariates Covariates Covariates Covariates Covariates Covariates Covariates Covariates
with Polywith Polywith Polywith Polynomials in
nomials in
nomials in
nomials in
Age
Age
Age
Age
18
0.66
0.83
0.59
0.56
0.02
0.02
0.32
0.24
(5.07)
(5.63)
(6.31)
(6.20)
(0.14)
(0.23)
(4.16)
(3.87)
19
0.70
0.71
0.47
0.47
-0.08
0.01
0.30
0.19
(5.09)
(5.42)
(4.73)
(5.67)
(0.71)
(0.15)
(5.26)
(3.33)
20
0.53
0.61
0.33
0.40
0.02
0.00
0.12
0.15
(3.04)
(4.58)
(3.29)
(4.97)
(0.19)
(0.04)
(1.43)
(2.54)
21
0.50
0.53
0.23
0.33
0.02
0.00
0.06
0.11
(2.76)
(3.58)
(2.29)
(4.18)
(0.18)
(0.06)
(0.68)
(1.76)
22
0.56
0.46
0.25
0.27
-0.02
-0.01
0.04
0.08
(2.86)
(2.77)
(2.54)
(3.42)
(0.23)
(0.15)
(0.48)
(1.15)
23
0.46
0.40
0.18
0.22
0.01
-0.02
-0.03
0.05
(2.25)
(2.19)
(1.94)
(2.75)
(0.10)
(0.21)
(0.27)
(0.69)
24
0.42
0.36
0.20
0.18
-0.01
-0.02
0.02
0.03
(1.87)
(1.81)
(2.14)
(2.22)
(0.05)
(0.26)
(0.19)
(0.35)
25
0.48
0.34
0.19
0.15
-0.08
-0.03
0.08
0.01
(2.09)
(1.56)
(2.01)
(1.81)
(0.82)
(0.30)
(0.95)
(0.10)
26
0.38
0.33
0.16
0.13
0.00
-0.03
0.02
-0.01
(1.60)
(1.42)
(1.82)
(1.52)
(0.03)
(0.33)
(0.24)
(0.09)
27
0.29
0.33
0.16
0.12
-0.10
-0.03
0.10
-0.02
(1.13)
(1.35)
(1.82)
(1.35)
(1.09)
(0.35)
(1.23)
(0.22)
28
0.30
0.35
0.13
0.12
-0.08
-0.03
0.05
-0.02
(1.20)
(1.34)
(1.53)
(1.27)
(0.90)
(0.38)
(0.56)
(0.30)
29
0.32
0.38
0.12
0.12
-0.07
-0.03
0.01
-0.03
(1.16)
(1.37)
(1.37)
(1.29)
(0.74)
(0.39)
(0.09)
(0.33)
30
0.34
0.43
0.12
0.14
-0.01
-0.03
-0.05
-0.02
(1.13)
(1.43)
(1.30)
(1.37)
(0.08)
(0.40)
(0.44)
(0.30)
31
0.42
0.49
0.13
0.16
-0.02
-0.03
-0.03
-0.02
(1.34)
(1.49)
(1.26)
(1.49)
(0.19)
(0.40)
(0.24)
(0.21)
32
0.67
0.57
0.15
0.20
-0.02
-0.03
-0.02
0.00
(2.00)
(1.54)
(1.32)
(1.64)
(0.15)
(0.36)
(0.15)
(0.05)

47

Probability of being
Married

Table 6: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on Hours Worked and Wages
(Dollar figures in 1994 Dollars, T-Statistics in Parentheses)
Number of Hours Worked
Age of
Mother

No
Covariates

18

-36.75
(0.24)
47.42
(0.30)
236.13
(1.56)
223.60
(1.34)
284.19
(1.86)
130.58
(0.72)
363.68
(2.06)
411.94
(2.30)
338.83
(1.90)
396.88
(2.12)
368.90
(1.94)
52.39
(0.21)
146.21
(0.58)
407.72
(1.75)
469.40
(1.89)

19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

All
Covariates
with
Polynomials
in Age
-15.17
(0.10)
40.54
(0.32)
90.95
(0.81)
136.07
(1.22)
175.89
(1.48)
210.42
(1.63)
239.66
(1.70)
263.59
(1.74)
282.24
(1.75)
295.59
(1.74)
303.64
(1.71)
306.40
(1.65)
303.86
(1.55)
296.03
(1.42)
282.90
(1.25)

Cumulative Number of
Hours Worked
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with
Polynomials
in Age
-229.46
-909.16
(0.70)
(1.19)
-149.68
-516.62
(0.44)
(0.84)
105.25
-152.61
(0.28)
(0.28)
386.06
182.87
(1.01)
(0.33)
670.25
489.80
(1.46)
(0.81)
834.93
768.20
(1.48)
(1.13)
1204.18
1018.05
(1.76)
(1.33)
1559.21
1239.37
(1.93)
(1.44)
1900.05
1432.15
(2.00)
(1.47)
2287.49
1596.40
(2.16)
(1.44)
2605.41
1732.10
(2.26)
(1.36)
2263.10
1839.27
(1.63)
(1.25)
3046.87
1917.89
(1.86)
(1.12)
2584.32
1967.98
(1.27)
(0.98)
2210.81
1989.54
(0.96)
(0.85)

48

Hourly Wage Rate
(1994 Dollars)
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with
Polynomials
in Age
-0.36
-1.66
(0.20)
(1.11)
2.43
-1.07
(2.39)
(0.88)
0.47
-0.53
(0.31)
(0.52)
1.15
-0.06
(0.48)
(0.06)
-0.60
0.36
(0.28)
(0.39)
-0.91
0.72
(0.33)
(0.76)
2.34
1.02
(1.36)
(1.03)
1.73
1.26
(0.60)
(1.21)
2.68
1.45
(1.61)
(1.32)
4.78
1.57
(2.15)
(1.35)
4.34
1.64
(2.15)
(1.30)
3.57
1.64
(1.21)
(1.18)
4.89
1.59
(1.95)
(1.00)
-8.08
1.48
(1.29)
(0.79)
3.96
1.31
(1.13)
(0.59)

Table 7: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on Sources of Support
(Dollar figures in 1994 Dollars, T-Statistics in Parentheses)
Earned Income
Age of
Mother

No
Covariates

18

-110.17
(0.07)
-90.39
(0.05)
2561.08
(1.76)
4170.56
(2.77)
3172.03
(1.86)
3769.43
(1.69)
6530.27
(2.73)
6896.04
(2.61)
7600.31
(2.65)
9297.22
(2.92)
9269.65
(3.08)
6861.12
(1.87)
6941.48
(1.75)
838.23
(0.19)
6948.71
(1.25)

19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

All
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
-2132.60
(0.93)
-413.37
(0.22)
1119.21
(0.68)
2465.14
(1.47)
3624.42
(1.99)
4597.05
(2.28)
5383.03
(2.46)
5982.36
(2.56)
6395.03
(2.60)
6621.06
(2.58)
6660.43
(2.47)
6513.16
(2.27)
6179.23
(1.97)
5658.66
(1.60)
4951.43
(1.22)

Income from Husband
No
Covariates

5062.27
(2.59)
3044.89
(1.18)
5572.48
(2.58)
690.36
(0.16)
2568.54
(0.63)
1320.92
(0.29)
7218.38
(1.44)
6417.08
(1.14)
2839.67
(0.46)
1774.07
(0.26)
1269.85
(0.19)
14168.80
(2.73)
9333.75
(1.54)
11459.36
(1.36)
8973.83
(0.98)

49

All
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
1937.36
(0.48)
1641.26
(0.53)
1534.83
(0.56)
1618.08
(0.56)
1891.00
(0.57)
2353.61
(0.63)
3005.88
(0.73)
3847.84
(0.88)
4879.47
(1.08)
6100.78
(1.35)
7511.77
(1.71)
9112.43
(2.16)
10902.77
(2.71)
12882.79
(3.28)
15052.48
(3.68)

Income From AFDC and
Food Stamps
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
995.23
965.42
(1.30)
(1.26)
1300.56
1006.23
(2.19)
(1.84)
1139.49
965.22
(1.87)
(1.91)
889.13
853.13
(1.38)
(1.57)
160.29
680.74
(0.20)
(1.15)
90.88
458.79
(0.12)
(0.73)
-565.27
198.05
(0.47)
(0.30)
229.96
-90.72
(0.26)
(0.13)
408.60
-396.76
(0.47)
(0.55)
-199.68
-709.31
(0.23)
(0.93)
-372.27
-1017.61
(0.44)
(1.27)
-727.29
-1310.91
(0.72)
(1.57)
-565.23
-1578.44
(0.48)
(1.82)
-2755.89
-1809.44
(1.76)
(1.99)
-3596.84
-1993.15
(1.61)
(1.96)

Table 8: Estimates of the Effect of Teenage Childbearing on the Probability of Living in Poverty
(Dollar figures in 1994 Dollars, T-Statistics in Parentheses)

Age of
Mother

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Probability of Living in
Poverty
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
0.01
0.05
(0.05)
(0.57)
0.14
0.02
(1.36)
(0.29)
-0.13
-0.01
(1.35)
(0.10)
-0.05
-0.03
(0.46)
(0.53)
0.02
-0.05
(0.20)
(0.91)
-0.08
-0.07
(0.75)
(1.19)
-0.11
-0.09
(1.05)
(1.41)
-0.05
-0.11
(0.45)
(1.59)
-0.10
-0.12
(0.91)
(1.76)
-0.23
-0.13
(2.18)
(1.92)
-0.11
-0.14
(1.00)
(2.06)
-0.05
-0.15
(0.49)
(2.15)
-0.01
-0.15
(0.10)
(2.13)
-0.07
-0.15
(0.56)
(1.98)
-0.16
-0.15
(1.14)
(1.72)

Probability of Receiving
AFDC
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
-0.01
-0.01
(0.14)
(0.07)
0.02
0.00
(0.20)
(0.06)
0.07
0.00
(0.92)
(0.06)
-0.04
0.00
(0.44)
(0.08)
-0.03
-0.01
(0.34)
(0.11)
-0.11
-0.01
(1.18)
(0.15)
-0.02
-0.01
(0.26)
(0.20)
-0.04
-0.02
(0.39)
(0.26)
0.05
-0.03
(0.63)
(0.34)
0.06
-0.04
(0.81)
(0.43)
-0.04
-0.04
(0.49)
(0.55)
-0.06
-0.06
(0.65)
(0.70)
-0.03
-0.07
(0.33)
(0.87)
-0.15
-0.08
(1.38)
(1.08)
-0.12
-0.10
(1.05)
(1.28)

50

Probability of Receiving
Food Stamps
No
All
Covariates
Covariates
with Polynomials in Age
0.03
0.08
(0.31)
(1.01)
0.06
0.04
(0.57)
(0.65)
0.02
0.01
(0.21)
(0.10)
-0.01
-0.03
(0.07)
(0.56)
0.02
-0.06
(0.27)
(1.11)
-0.14
-0.08
(1.33)
(1.47)
-0.13
-0.10
(1.30)
(1.68)
-0.19
-0.12
(1.80)
(1.81)
-0.19
-0.14
(1.77)
(1.89)
-0.14
-0.15
(1.38)
(1.94)
-0.10
-0.15
(1.01)
(1.95)
-0.11
-0.15
(1.04)
(1.91)
-0.05
-0.15
(0.43)
(1.80)
-0.18
-0.15
(1.48)
(1.62)
-0.17
-0.13
(1.30)
(1.38)

Table 9: Comparison of Estimates of Effects of Not Delaying Childbearing Measured at Age 28
Using Alternative Estimators and Samples1
(T-Statistics in Parentheses.)

Outcomes

Human Capital
1. High School Diploma
(HSD) (Age 21)
2. General Equivalence Degree (GED)
3. HSD or GED
4. Hours Worked
5. Cumulative Hours
Worked
6. Wages
Sources of Support
7. Dollars from Earnings
8. Dollars from Spouse
9. Dollars from AFDC and
Food Stamps
Family Structure
10. Proportion with Children
11. Proportion Married
12. Proportion Unmarried
with Children
13. Number of Children
Measures of Poverty
14. Proportion in Poverty
15. Proportion on Food
Stamps
16. Proportion on AFDC

OLS
Estimate on
Full Sample

OLS
Estimates on
Women
Pregnant
Prior to Age
18

IV Estimates
on Women
Pregnant
Prior to Age
18

-0.41
(15.79)
0.20
(7.74)
-0.19
(7.54)
-222.81
(3.99)
-3411.11
(8.39)
-2.98
(3.97)

-0.16
(3.63)
0.12
(3.05)
-0.03
(0.91)
-102.52
(1.15)
-2379.90
(4.20)
-2.28
(2.05)

-0.16
(1.73)
0.18
(3.42)
0.03
(0.38)
330.67
(1.78)
2029.62
(1.72)
4.22
(2.16)

-9779.98
(5.51)
-4148.29
(3.00)
2136.10
(5.91)

-6441.65
(3.41)
39.24
(0.01)
45.64
(0.13)

8488.79
(2.92)
2505.17
(0.38)
-515.60
(0.62)

0.31
(26.70)
-0.01
(0.32)
0.16
(6.44)
1.26
(21.16)

0.26
(7.43)
0.09
(2.21)
0.16
(0.42)
0.84
(8.04)

0.13
(1.51)
-0.07
(0.85)
0.03
(0.38)
0.27
(1.03)

0.19
(7.24)
0.14
(5.87)
0.11
(5.37)

0.13
(3.06)
0.01
(0.40)
0.01
(0.20)

-0.12
(1.22)
-0.09
(0.89)
-0.06
(0.63)

1. All estimates control for covariates. For the OLS estimates these include dummy
variables for ethnicity (black and Hispanic), living in a female headed family at
age 14, living in an intact family at age 14, and controls for missing values. The
woman’s family income in 1978, her mother’s education and her fathers education
were entered linearly. In addition dummy variables for smoked prior to pregnancy,
drank prior to pregnancy and pregnancy prior to age 16 are included for the IV estimates.

51

