                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TAX COMPETITION AND TRADE PROTECTION


                                             Eckhard Janeba
                                             John D. Wilson


                                          Working Paper 7402
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7402


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




We like to thank the participants of the Norwegian-German Seminar on Public Economics, and in
particular our discussant Guttorm Schjelderup, for their comments. Errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Eckhard Janeba and John D. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Tax Competition and Trade Protection
Eckhard Janeba and John D. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 7402
October 1999
JEL No. F13, F21, H73

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper reconsiders the question of whether tax competition for mobile capital leads to tax
rates on capital that are too low or too high from the combined viewpoint of the competing regions
(or countries in an economic union). In contrast to standard models of tax competition, both
commodity trade and capital mobility is allowed to occur between the competing regions and the rest
of the world. A key result of the analysis is that whether the capital taxes are too low or high depends
on the degree of external trade protection. When the country’s central government is free to set the
tariff, tax competition leads to inefficiently low tax rates. But in the absence of a tariff, tax rates can
be too high. In particular, regions may choose to subsidize capital in equilibrium as a means of
inducing favorable terms-of-trade effects, but the subsidy (i.e., a negative tax) will then be too low
because an increase in a single region’s subsidy benefits other regions by reducing their relative
quantities of subsidized capital. These results are discussed in the context of the European Union’s
Single Market, where non-EU firms have responded to the ‘Fortress of Europe’ by increasing foreign
direct investment.


Eckhard Janeba                                                   John D. Wilson
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder                                Michigan State University
Campus Box 256                                                   East Lansing, MI 48824
Boulder, CO 80309-0256                                           wilsonjd@msu.edu
and NBER
eckhard.janeba@colorado.edu
                      t
                                                           T’   T
                                                                        t




                      tc




                                                 Td   Tc            T

    t



             T


                 T’

                      Figure 1




                                            t               T           t
                                      T’




                                            tc




t                     Td         Tc                                         T




    T


        T’


                                      Figure 2
