                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           QUANTIFYING ARTISTIC SUCCESS:
                      RANKING FRENCH PAINTERS - AND PAINTINGS -
                           FROM IMPRESSIONISM TO CUBISM


                                           David W. Galenson


                                          Working Paper 7407
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7407


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters -
and Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 7407
October 1999


                                           ABSTRACT

       For 35 leading painters who lived in France during the first century of modern art, this paper
uses textbook illustrations as the basis for measuring the importance of both painters and individual
paintings. The rankings pose an interesting puzzle: why do some of the greatest artists not produce
famous paintings, and why do some relatively minor artists produce some of the most famous
individual paintings?   The answer may lie in an important difference in approach between
experimental and conceptual painters. Experimental artists work incrementally, their innovations
appear gradually, and they generally do their best work late in their careers; conceptual artists
innovate more suddenly, produce individual breakthrough works, and usually do their best work early
in their careers. This paper demonstrates that artistic success can usefully be quantified, and that
doing so increases our understanding of the working methods of modern painters.


David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
sogrodow@midway.uchicago.edu
                                                   3

If ever there was a study which, needing as it does the co-operation of so many sciences, would
benefit by sharing the life of the University, it is surely that of Art-history... [W]e have such a
crying need for systematic study in which scientific methods will be followed wherever possible,
where at all events the scientific attitude may be fostered and the sentimental attitude discouraged.
                                                 Roger Fry1

       Robert Storr, a curator at New York’s Museum of Modern Art, recently declared that an

artist’s success “is completely unquantifiable.”2 By studying a key group of painters - those who

invented and first developed modern art - this paper shows that quantitative measures not only

can produce informative rankings of the relative importance of both painters and paintings, but

furthermore can be used to highlight an important difference in approach among major modern

artists that has significant implications for our understanding of their careers and their

accomplishments. The analysis of this paper consequently demonstrates that artistic success can

be quantified, and that doing so enriches our understanding of the evolution of modern art.



The Artists

       The goal in choosing the artists to be studied here was to select the most important

painters who lived and worked in France, the birthplace of modern art, during roughly the first

century of that art’s history. This was done by using five leading texts on the history of modern

art.3 The first step was to list all artists who had at least one painting reproduced in three or more

of these five books. The 27 artists included in this list who had been born in France between 1819

(the birth year of Gustave Courbet) and 1900 were placed in the sample. Another 8 artists on the

list who were born elsewhere during the same period but who spent substantial portions of their

careers in France were also placed in the sample.

       The resulting sample of 35 painters is shown in Table 1. In addition to Courbet and
                                                  4

Manet, who are generally considered key figures in the transition to modern painting, the sample

contains the central members of a series of important groups of French artists - the Impressionists,

the Post-Impressionists, the Fauves, the Cubists, and the Surrealists. The sample members

therefore include the artists who dominated modern painting in France in the nineteenth century

and well into the twentieth. They also include a number of less prominent artists, and this will

serve to test whether the method used here can clearly identify the leading artists.



The Data

[Q]uality in art is not just a matter of private experience. There is a consensus of taste. The best
taste is that of the people who, in each generation, spend the most time and trouble on art, and
this best taste has always turned out to be unanimous, within certain limits.
                                                 Clement Greenberg4

        Texts about art history are also the source of the evidence analyzed in this study. This

evidence was drawn from all available books, published in English in the past 30 years, that

provide illustrated surveys of modern painting.5 A total of 33 such books were found. The data

set for this study was created by listing every reproduction of every painting shown in these books

by all of the 35 artists in the sample.

        Texts on art history were chosen as the source of the data in order to draw on the

judgments of art scholars as to the most important painters and paintings. The dozens of authors

and co-authors represented include many of the most distinguished art historians, critics, and

curators of the recent past and present. Although the eminence of the authors varies, the number

of books consulted is sufficiently large that no important result depends on the opinions of any

one author, or the emphasis of any one book.
                                                  5

       This investigation is obviously done in the spirit of a citation study. Yet using illustrations

of paintings as the unit of measurement, instead of such alternatives as the number of times a

painter or painting is mentioned, has the advantage that illustrations are substantially more costly

than written references. In addition to the greater space taken up by the illustration and the

greater cost of printing, the author must obtain permission to reproduce each painting, and of

course a suitable photograph. This cost in time and money implies that authors may be more

selective in their use of illustrations, and that illustrations may consequently provide a more

accurate indication than written references of what an author believes to be genuinely important.

       The objection might be raised that the paintings reproduced in textbooks are not the most

important, but rather the most easily accessible to the author, or those that require the lowest

royalty payments. Authors would deny this - Marilyn Stokstad, for example, declares that her

book covers “the world’s most significant paintings” - but such claims might be suspected of

disingenuousness.6 Yet for major artists, whose work has had decades to make its way into

museums by purchase and bequest, the constraint posed by ease of access is not likely to bind

tightly. Scores of public museums own the work of the artists considered by this study, in

quantities generally far greater than the requirements of the textbooks. Even if we restrict our

view to a small number of the greatest museums, the numbers of works by these artists are

substantial. So for example 35 different works by Picasso just from the collection of New York’s

Museum of Modern Art are illustrated in the 33 textbooks; 19 different illustrated Monets are

drawn just from the collections of the Louvre and the Musée d’Orsay, as are 19 works of Degas,

and 11 of Manet.7 And these museums often hold many more works than are displayed, or

reproduced: so for example, Chicago’s Art Institute alone owns a total of 49 paintings by Monet,
                                                  6

31 by Manet, 27 by Picasso, and 18 by Matisse.8 The works owned by museums also tend to be

important ones, because curators - particularly at major museums - have little interest in acquiring

unimportant works. Thus it seems clear that authors can readily choose among large numbers of

important works in selecting the paintings to illustrate their textbooks.



The Rankings and the Puzzles

       The two most basic rankings from these data can be presented immediately: Table 2 ranks

the artists by total illustrations, while Table 3 ranks individual paintings by the same measure. For

those acquainted with the history of modern art, neither list appears surprising in itself. The

artists at the top of Table 2 are the greatest masters of modern French painting: Picasso, Matisse,

and Braque are clearly the major figures of the twentieth century, as were Cézanne, Manet, and

Monet those of the nineteenth. And the paintings in Table 3 are all classic works, their images

immediately familiar to students of modern art.

       Yet puzzles appear when Tables 2 and 3 are compared. Two of the five highest-ranked

artists in total illustrations - Cézanne and Monet - have no paintings among the 10 highest-

ranked works in Table 3. Cézanne’s only painting in Table 3, ranked just twelfth, appears in less

than half of all the books surveyed, and Monet’s only entry, ranked in a tie for nineteenth place,

appears in only one-third of the books. Furthermore, two artists among the leading ten in Table

2, Braque and Degas, fail to have even a single painting among the 21 listed in Table 3.

       Conversely, some artists ranked below the top group in Table 2 have paintings very

prominently placed in Table 3. Seurat ranks only fourteenth in total illustrations, but his painting

of a Sunday afternoon in a park near Paris ranks third in Table 3, reproduced in over 70% of the
                                                   7

books surveyed, more than any other painting executed in the nineteenth century. Duchamp,

ranked only eleventh in Table 2, remarkably has two paintings among the first seven in Table 3 -

both of them above any work by such masters as Cézanne, Matisse, and Monet. And not only do

Picasso and Manet each have three paintings listed in Table 3, but so does Courbet, who ranks

only twelfth overall among artists in Table 2.

       Why did some of the most important artists not produce the most important individual

works? Why were some of the most important individual paintings produced by painters who do

not rank among the most important artists? Answering these questions obviously requires

consideration of what makes modern painters, and paintings, important.



Importance in Modern Art

       For modern artists, importance is primarily a function of innovation. The central place of

innovation in modern art has been generally recognized by critics and scholars. Thus in 1968 the

critic Clement Greenberg remarked that “Until the middle of the last century innovation in

Western art had not had to be startling or upsetting; since then ... it has had to be that.”9

Greenberg’s archrival, Harold Rosenberg, stated simply that “the only thing that counts for

Modern Art is that a work shall be NEW.”10 Historian Meyer Schapiro remarked in 1952 on the

“unique intensity of the growth of styles in painting since the 1830s,” and observed: “Every great

painter in that period (and many a lesser one) is an innovator in the structure of painting.”11

Historian Alan Bowness agreed in 1972 that the recent stress on innovation is not new: “we are

always persuaded that there has never been a more revolutionary period, never an age when art

was more experimental. This remark, however, has been made about contemporary art for a great
                                                 8

many years now - certainly since Manet exhibited at the Salon des Refusés [in 1863].”12

Sociologist Raymonde Moulin observed that “Artists since the impressionists have been in the

business of challenging established values and perpetually renovating the house of art. The

history of modern art has been one of new tendencies establishing themselves in opposition to the

old, only to be quickly challenged by still newer ones.”13 The critic Michael Fried described the

history of modern art as one of “perpetual revolution,” arguing that “the best model for the

evolution of modernist painting is that of the dialectic understood as an unceasing process of

perpetual radical self-criticism.”14 More simply, critic Arthur Danto declared that “the Paris art

world of the 1880s was like the New York art world of the 1980s - competitive, aggressive,

swept by the demand that artists come up with something new or perish.”15 And historian Leo

Steinberg remarked that “Modern art always projects itself into a twilight zone where no values

are fixed.”16

        Since the birth of modern painting in the mid-nineteenth century, artists have made

innovations in many areas, including subject matter, composition, scale, materials, and techniques.

But whatever the nature of an artist’s innovation, its importance has been determined primarily by

its influence on other artists. The more widespread the adoption of an innovation by other artists,

the more important its creator. The importance of individual works similarly depends on the

extent of their influence. The most important individual paintings are those that announce the first

appearance of innovations that become widely adopted.

        Recognition of the key role of innovation in determining the importance of modern

painters and paintings allows a restatement of the puzzles raised earlier, derived from the

differences in rankings between Tables 2 and 3. Specifically, why did some of the most important
                                                    9

innovators not produce individual works that announced important innovations, and why were

many of the most important individual embodiments of innovations not executed by the most

important innovators?

        Answering these questions requires recognition of the fact that there have been two very

different types of innovation in the history of modern art. What distinguishes them is not their

relative importance, for instances of both rank among the major innovations in modern art. What

distinguishes them is rather the method by which they are produced. One of these methods can be

called esthetically motivated experimentation, the other conceptual execution.

        Modern artists who have produced experimental innovations have generally been

prompted by esthetic considerations; their art has usually sought to express visual perceptions or

sensations. They typically describe their goals as elusive, and difficult to describe precisely. Their

usual procedure has consequently been incremental. These artists repeat themselves, painting the

same subjects many times - sometimes painting over a single work many times - in an

experimental process of trial and error. As a result, their innovations often appear gradually over

long periods: they are not declared in any single work, but rather emerge piecemeal in a large

body of work. These artists are often uncertain of their progress, and commonly believe that their

experiments produce no conclusive results, so that even the greatest of these innovators often

express frustration at their inability to achieve their desired goals.

        In contrast, modern artists who have produced conceptual innovations have generally been

motivated by criteria that are other than visual; their art has typically been intended to express

emotions or ideas. The goals of their work, and the methods of its execution, can often be stated

precisely, in advance of its production. Their work is consequently often systematic, with all
                                                  10

major decisions made before they begin to paint, and they often describe the execution of a

painting as perfunctory. Conceptually-driven innovations often appear suddenly: a new idea

produces a result significantly different not only from other artists’ work, but also from the artist’s

own previous work. One consequence of the suddenness of these innovations is that they can be

embodied in individual breakthrough works.

       The long periods often required for experimental innovations mean that they frequently

occur late in an artist’s career, but conceptual innovations can occur at any age. Extreme

conceptual innovations are in fact most often made by young artists, who are not yet committed

to existing conventions and accustomed to traditional methods, and who might consequently

perceive and appreciate more radical approaches.



Experimental and Conceptual Innovators

       Certain artists clearly illustrate each of these types. In just two letters written in

September, 1906, the month before his death, the 67-year-old Paul Cézanne expresses nearly all

the characteristics of the experimental innovator: the visual criteria, the view of his enterprise as

research, with the need for accumulation of evidence, the incremental nature of his procedure, its

slowness, the repeated study of a single motif, the total absorption in the pursuit of an elusive

goal, and the artist’s dissatisfaction with his perceived lack of success in achieving the desired

results. Thus he wrote to his son:

               I must tell you that as a painter I am becoming more clear-
               sighted before nature, but that with me the realization of my
               sensations is always painful. I cannot attain the intensity that is
               unfolded before my senses. I have not the magnificent richness
               of coloring that animates nature. Here on the bank of the river
                                                    11

               the motifs multiply, the same subject seen from a different angle
               offers subject for study of the most powerful interest and so
               varied that I think I could occupy myself for months without
               changing place, by turning now more to the right, now more to
               the left.

Two weeks later he wrote to the painter Emile Bernard:

               ...now it seems to me that I see better and that I think more
               correctly about the direction of my studies. Will I ever attain
               the end for which I have striven so much and so long? I hope
               so, but as long as it is not attained a vague state of uneasiness
               persists which will not disappear until I have reached port, that
               is until I have realized something which develops better than in
               the past, and thereby can prove the theories - which in
               themselves are always easy; it is only giving proof of what one
               thinks that raises serious obstacles. So I continue to study.
                        But I have just re-read your letter and I see that I always
               answer off the mark. Be good enough to forgive me; it is, as I
               told you, this constant preoccupation with the aim I want to
               reach, which is the cause of it.
                        I am always studying after nature and it seems to me
               that I make slow progress. I should have liked you near me, for
               solitude always weighs me down a bit. But I am old, ill, and I
               have sworn to myself to die painting ...17


The irony of these expressions of frustration stems from the fact that in time not only would

Cézanne come to be generally recognized as the most important painter of his generation, but that

it would be the work he did late in his life that would be considered his greatest contribution.18

The only two of his paintings that appear in ten or more of the texts considered here were both

completed within the final two years of his life.

       The incremental nature of Cézanne’s approach was eloquently discussed by his

biographer, Roger Fry:

               For him, as I understand his work, the ultimate synthesis of a design
               was never revealed in a flash; rather he approached it with infinite
                                                  12

               precautions, stalking it, as it were, now from one point of view,
               now from another, and always in fear lest a premature definition
               might deprive it of something of its total complexity. For him the
               synthesis was an asymptote toward which he was for ever
               approaching without ever quite reaching it; it was a reality,
               incapable of complete realization ... But when one speaks thus of
               Cézanne it is necessary to explain that all this refers to Cézanne in
               the plenitude of his development, after many years of research, after
               the failure of many attempts in different directions - to Cézanne
               when he had discovered his own personality. 19

Meyer Schapiro pointed to the same characteristic when he wrote that “Cézanne’s method was

not a foreseen goal which, once reached, permitted him to create masterpieces easily. His art is a

model of steadfast searching and growth.”20

       Late in his life, in his letters Cézanne repeatedly stressed the visual character of his goal. In

his opinion, his progress was slow because of the complexity of nature, the difficulty of training

his eye to see it more clearly, and the problems involved in developing a technique that would

express his perceptions; thus he wrote to a friend in 1904 that the knowledge of how to express

his feeling for nature “is only to be acquired through very long experience.”21 His procedures in

painting were painstaking in the extreme. His dealer and friend Vollard reported that “For one

who has not seen him paint, it is difficult to imagine how slow and painful his progress was on

certain days.” Vollard had occasion to know, for when Cézanne agreed to paint his portrait,

during Cézanne’s visits to Paris the dealer would sit in the artist’s studio each morning for three

and a half hours. After 115 of these sittings over a period of three years, Cézanne left the painting

to return to his home in Aix. Even then, however, he considered the portrait unfinished, insisting

that Vollard leave in the studio the clothes in which he had posed, in anticipation of additional

sessions at some later date. Vollard understood that Cézanne almost invariably considered his
                                                   13

work provisional: “When Cézanne laid a canvas aside, it was almost always with the intention of

taking it up again, in the hope of bringing it to perfection.”22

        Cézanne’s experimental approach may also explain the casual disregard he often showed

for his completed works, an aspect of his behavior that has often been remarked on as a curious

and unfortunate idiosyncracy. Vollard recounted a number of examples: how Cézanne allowed the

dealer Tanguy to cut pieces from his canvases for collectors who could not afford to buy larger

paintings; Cézanne’s amusement when his young son poked holes in his father’s paintings;

Cézanne’s random destruction of paintings in his studio when he wished to vent his anger; and the

understanding of Cézanne’s servants that they were to destroy canvases that they found discarded

in the garden of his house.23 Recently, historian Richard Shiff disapprovingly described what he

called “the unprofessional character of Cézanne’s enterprise - as a rule, he neither signed nor

dated his paintings, left parts of them in varying states of finish, and often returned to repaint

canvases with the result of placing one image over another incompatible one.”24 Rather than

simply demonstrating his eccentricity or his lack of respect for his craft, these accounts of

apparent negligence may be evidence of Cézanne’s view of his paintings as a series of

experiments: once he had learned their lessons in the process of painting them, he no longer

needed them. Thus the critic Clive Bell wrote that “For him every picture was a means ...

something he was ready to discard as soon as it had served his purpose. He had no use for his

own pictures. To him they were experiments. He tossed them into bushes, or left them in the

open fields...”25 Cézanne’s own language reflects this attitude, as for example in his admonition

to Bernard: “painters must devote themselves entirely to the study of nature and try to produce

pictures which will be an education.”26 Because it was education that mattered, individual works
                                                  14

were not crucial: “When a picture isn’t realized, you pitch it in the fire and start another one!”27

       Among the artists in this study, the most important example of the conceptually driven

innovator is Picasso. A statement of his, first published in 1923, clearly presents his view that art

should communicate conceptual discoveries, and expresses his contempt for the experimental

approach:

                        I can hardly understand the importance given to the
               word research in connection with modern painting. In my
               opinion to search means nothing in painting. To find, is the
               thing ...
                        Among several sins that I have been accused of
               committing, none is more false than the one that I have, as the
               principal objective in my work, the spirit of research. When I
               paint my object is to show what I have found and not what I am
               looking for ...
                        They speak of naturalism in opposition to modern
               painting. I would like to know if anyone has ever seen a natural
               work of art. Nature and art, being two different things, cannot
               be the same thing. Through art we express our conception of
               what nature is not ...
                        I also often hear the word evolution. Repeatedly I am
               asked to explain how my painting evolved. To me there is no
               past or future in art ... Art does not evolve by itself, the ideas of
               people change and with them their mode of expression ...
                        The several manners I have used in my art must not be
               considered as an evolution, or as steps toward an unknown
               ideal of painting ... I have never made trials or experiments.
               Whenever I have had something to say, I have said it in the
               manner in which I have felt it ought to be said.28


       Picasso’s attitude toward his own completed works contrasted sharply with Cézanne’s

casual disregard. He became furious if he saw that any of his paintings had been varnished or

cleaned.29 He always signed his works, and he often dated them not only with the customary year

but also with the month and day of their execution.30 Unlike Cézanne, who would often destroy
                                                  15

works he considered unsuccessful, Picasso wanted to leave all his works to posterity: “I paint the

way some people write their autobiography. The paintings, finished or not, are the pages of my

journal, and as such they are valid. The future will choose the pages it prefers. It’s not up to me

to make the choice.”31 Far from considering his work as merely the residue of past experiments,

Picasso’s words and actions indicate that he regarded every piece as a potentially significant work

that would someday be of historical interest.

       John Golding, a historian of Cubism, underscored the conceptual rather than visual basis

of Picasso’s great early innovation:

               ...the Cubism of Picasso and Braque was to be essentially
               conceptual. Even in the initial stages of the movement, when the
               painters still relied to a large extent on visual models, their paintings
               are not so much records of the sensory appearance of their subjects,
               as expressions in pictorial terms of their idea or knowledge of them.
               “I paint objects as I think them, not as I see them,” Picasso said....32

       Picasso painted the Demoiselles d’Avignon, generally regarded as the forerunner of

Cubism, in 1907, at the age of 26. He and Georges Braque went on to develop Cubism between

that date and the outbreak of World War I. Picasso would make other important contributions

later in his long career, but this was the most significant. Of the Demoiselles in particular, critic

John Russell wrote “there is no doubt that the Demoiselles is the white whale of modern art: the

legendary giant with which we have to come to terms sooner or later,” while historian George

Heard Hamilton declared that “it has been recognized as a watershed between the old pictorial

world and the new.”33 Similarly, Golding characterized Cubism as “perhaps the most important

and certainly the most complete and radical artistic revolution since the Renaissance,” and

historian Douglas Cooper described it as “the most potent generative force in twentieth-century
                                                   16

art.”34 The Demoiselles is a classic example of a single work that declares a conceptual

innovation. Remarkably, agreement among historians on the importance of the painting is so

great that it fails to appear in only three of the 33 books examined by this study.



Resolving the Puzzles: A Hypothesis

        This distinction between the two methods by which major modern artists have produced

innovations suggests a resolution of the puzzles raised earlier. First, why do some of the most

important artists not produce the most important individual works? The answer may be that

experimental innovators produce bodies of work that lead incrementally to their innovations,

rather than individual breakthrough works. Cézanne’s work provides an obvious example. His

attempt to create depth without sacrificing the colors of the Impressionists, through the

development of his distinctive composition and brushstroke, is witnessed dramatically in his late

views of Mont Sainte-Victoire. Had he produced just one of these, it would likely rival the

Demoiselles d’Avignon in importance. But instead he made dozens; 13 different paintings of the

mountain done in just his last two decades are illustrated in the books surveyed here, and together

they appear 30 times.35

        Besides Cézanne, the most prominent experimental innovator considered in this study is

probably Monet. Monet’s own descriptions of his method parallel those of Cézanne in defining

the experimental approach, with the emphasis on the painstaking effort to capture visual

sensations, the disbelief in the possibility of rapid progress, and the resulting frustration with his

own work. While working in Brittany in 1886, he wrote that “I do know that to paint the sea

really well, you need to look at it every hour of every day in the same place so that you can
                                                    17

understand its ways in that particular spot; and this is why I am working on the same motifs over

and over again, four or six times even.”36 In 1890 the 50-year-old artist described painting as a

“continual torture,” and reported to a friend: “I am working at a desperately slow pace, but the

further I go, the more I see that I have a lot of work in order to manage to convey what I am

seeking: ‘instantaneity’, above all, the envelopment, the same light spread over everywhere; and

more than ever, easy things achieved at one stroke disgust me. Finally I am more and more

maddened by the need to convey what I experience ...”37 Three years later he declared “I tell

myself that anyone who claims he’s finished a painting is terribly arrogant. To finish something

means complete, perfect and I’m forcing myself to work, but can’t make any progress; looking for

something, groping my way forward, but coming up with nothing very special.”38 In one respect,

Monet’s use of the experimental approach is even more celebrated than Cézanne’s, for although

Cézanne did repeated studies of several motifs, one of Monet’s most noted innovations is the

serial approach he adopted during the 1890s. His views of grainstacks, poplars, the facade of

Rouen cathedral, the cliffs of Normandy, the Seine, and the Thames were the most intensive

studies of particular subjects that had been done to date, with each series considered as a set of

related observations.39 Monet had in fact had worked less formally in series throughout his

career, and the scores of paintings of water lilies he later did at Giverny between 1899 and his

death in 1926 constitute perhaps the most monumental single example of serial painting in the

history of modern art.40 Their collective importance is clear: 17 different paintings of the water

lilies appear in the texts surveyed, illustrated a total of 22 times.41

        The second puzzle raised above was why some of the most important individual paintings

were produced by painters who themselves do not rank among the most important artists. In light
                                                  18

of the distinction made earlier, these cases should be those of conceptual innovations. In the most

extreme cases, an artist might produce a conceptual innovation, clearly embodied in an individual

breakthrough work; this breakthrough work would then be of much greater importance than any

later works that simply repeated the innovation. Seurat provides an obvious example. A friend

wrote of Seurat’s approach to his work that “Not only did he never begin his paintings without

knowing where he was going, but his concern went even beyond their success as individual

works. They had no great meaning for him if they did not prove some rule, some truth of art, or

some conquest of the unknown.”42 Inspired by the idea of applying scientific theories of visual

perception to painting, at the age of 25 Seurat methodically set out to produce a masterpiece as a

definitive illustration of the use of color theory. 43 After making studies at the site, he produced his

view of the Grande Jatte in his studio, often standing on a ladder before the canvas that was

nearly seven feet high. He “always concentrated on a single section of the canvas, having

previously determined each stroke and color to be applied. Thus he was able to paint steadily

without having to step back from the canvas in order to judge the effect obtained.” He could also

paint at night, despite the poor quality of the artificial light: “the type of lighting was unimportant,

since his purpose was completely formulated before he took his brush and carefully ordered

palette in hand.”44 When visitors to his studio praised his painting, Seurat remarked to a friend:

“They see poetry in what I have done. No, I apply my method and that is all there is to it.”45

Completed when Seurat was just 27 years old, his painting of Parisians relaxing on a Sunday

afternoon is illustrated in 24 of the 33 textbooks surveyed for this study. Although Seurat

subsequently intended to develop a more systematic basis for the use of line in painting, his efforts

were cut short by his early death, at the age of 31.46 Thus one great painting dominates his
                                                 19

accomplishments.

       Marcel Duchamp is perhaps the other most extreme case of a conceptual innovator among

the artists considered here. Although he produced few works, several have become very famous.

The fourth-ranked painting in Table 3, his Nude Descending a Staircase of 1912, painted when

Duchamp was just 25, outraged many artists for its attack on Cubism. It became a focal point for

critics of the legendary 1913 Armory Show, and Theodore Roosevelt observed that it reminded

him of a Navajo rug.47 In seventh place in Table 3 is Duchamp’s Bride Stripped Bare, an even

more enigmatic conceptual work. Duchamp made other radical conceptual contributions to art

that are not listed here because they ceased to involve painting: these included his Fountain - a

urinal he purchased and signed - and other examples of what he would call “readymades” -

objects he purchased and signed.48 Duchamp’s motivation was avowedly conceptual: “I wanted

to get away from the physical aspect of painting. I was much more interested in recreating ideas

in painting ... I was interested in ideas - not merely in visual products. I wanted to put painting

once again at the service of the mind.”49 Duchamp’s attempts to dissolve the aesthetic boundaries

between art and life became enormously influential in the 1960s and beyond, as many

contemporary artists pursued the question of what constitutes art.50



Categorizing Painters: Quantitative Evidence

The modern professional humanist is an academic person who pretends to despise measurement
because of its “scientific” nature. He regards his mandate as the explanation of human
expressions in the language of normal discourse. Yet to explain something and to measure it are
similar operations. Both are translations.
                                               George Kubler51

       The data set constructed for this study can be used to examine the implications of the
                                                  20

distinction suggested above, by producing evidence of systematic differences between

experimental and conceptual innovators in modern painting. Table 4 presents Gini ratios for the

paintings illustrated in the textbooks surveyed, by artist.52 The Gini ratio is the measure of

inequality most often used by economists; it is normally used to measure the degree of inequality

in a country’s income distribution. It varies between zero (perfect equality) and one (maximum

inequality). Here, instead of people, the units over which the ratio is measured are paintings: the

ratio measures how unequally a given artist’s paintings are illustrated. Thus for example Camille

Pissarro’s 38 total illustrations show 34 different paintings, with no single painting illustrated

more than twice, and his Gini ratio is therefore very low, whereas Marcel Duchamp’s 72

illustrations represent 19 different paintings, and just two of these account for more than half of

the illustrations, yielding a very high Gini.

        Duchamp and Seurat have the highest Gini ratios among the artists studied, as would be

expected from the earlier discussions of their work: neither was prolific, and both produced

famous individual breakthrough works that embodied influential conceptual innovations. Near

them at the high end of the list are Manet and Courbet, each of whom similarly produced several

monumental individual works that introduced specific conceptual innovations. Thus for example

in the Déjeuner sur l’herbe and the Olympia, both completed in 1863, and both listed in Table 3,

Manet made dramatic innovations of subject matter and technique: both the placement of modern

figures in settings borrowed from portrayals of classical themes and the abandonment of shadow

in modelling have led many historians to identify these as the first modern paintings.53 Similarly,

in the Bar at the Folies-Bergère, his last major work, also high in Table 3, Manet distorted the

representation of space in a way that has been identified as an inspiration to later artists to use
                                                  21

space arbitrarily, thus initiating a process that eventually led to abstraction in painting.54 While

Manet’s total of 130 illustrations represent 48 different paintings, 56 of the illustrations - more

than two-fifths - are of just these three famous works. Unlike his friends Cézanne and Monet,

whose experimental approach led them to return repeatedly to study the same subjects, Manet’s

conceptual approach led to variety. A friend of Manet’s, the critic Théodore Duret, wrote that

the painter “had no circumscribed circle. He painted indifferently all that the eye can see - men

and women under every aspect and all sorts of groupings, landscape, seascape, still life, flowers,

animals, in the open air, and in the studio. His method was to have a constant change of subject,

and never to stale a success by repetition.”55

        Experimental innovators should have low Gini ratios, as their incremental method reduces

the importance of individual paintings. Monet has a very low Gini, as does his contemporary

Degas, another artist who shared his commitment to repetition: “one must redo ten times, one

hundred times the same subject.”56 The dealer Vollard noted that “Because of the many tracings

that Degas did of his drawings, the public accused him of repeating himself. But his passion for

perfection was responsible for his continual research.” 57 Thus although Degas ranks ninth among

artists in Table 2, he has no individual work listed in Table 3. Degas was famous for his studies of

ballet dancers, but as a friend observed, “He has done so many dancers and so often repeated

himself that it is difficult to specify any particular one.”58 Although 20 different individual

paintings of dancers appear in the books considered by this study, and together these account for

a total of 29 illustrations, no one of them appears in more than four different books.

        Another Impressionist, Pissarro, has by far the lowest Gini ratio among the artists

considered here. Both his paintings and his eloquent letters attest to his conception of art as a
                                                   22

visual and experimental enterprise. His advice to his son Lucien, who had gone to London to

advance his career as an artist, always returned to the need for practice: “It is only by drawing

often, drawing everything, drawing incessantly, that one fine day you discover to your surprise

that you have rendered something in its true character.”59 Progress would come only with effort:

“So much the better if it is painful for you to take even the first step, the more toilsome the work

the stronger you will emerge from it.”60 Although deeply committed to his art, Pissarro suffered

from persistent doubt over the quality of his work. In 1883, past the age of 50, he confessed that

“I am much disturbed by my unpolished and rough execution,” but he vowed to persevere in spite

of his uncertainty: “I will calmly tread the path I have taken, and try to do my best. At bottom, I

have only a vague sense of its rightness or wrongness.”61 It is not only art historians who do not

find individual paintings that stand out among Pissarro’s oeuvre, for later the same year the artist

wrote to his son: “You tell me that if I have a show in London I should send my best works. That

sounds simple enough, but when I reflect and ask myself: which are my best things? I am in all

honesty greatly perplexed.”62

        The Gini ratio for Miró is among the lowest in Table 4. Miró’s statements about his art

consistently revealed his experimental approach. So for example he told an interviewer that

“when I’ve finished something I discover it’s just a basis for what I’ve got to do next. It’s never

anything more than a point of departure... I’d paint over it again, right on top of it. Far from

being a finished work, to me it’s just a beginning.”63 He emphasized the spontaneity of his

approach to each painting: “I start a canvas without a thought of what it may eventually become

... I begin painting and as I paint the picture begins to assert itself, or suggest itself under my

brush. The form becomes a sign for a woman or a bird as I work.”64 In a letter written early in
                                                   23

his career Miró gave an extended description of the kind of artist he admired, who “sees a

different problem in every tree and in every bit of sky: this is the man who suffers, the man who is

always moving and can never sit still, the man who will never do what people call a ‘definitive’

work. He is the man who always stumbles and gets to his feet again ... [He] is always saying not

yet, it is still not ready, and when he is satisfied with his last canvas and starts another one he

destroys the earlier one. His work is always a new beginning...”65 While still in his twenties he

expressed his belief “that one’s serious work begins only in maturity,” and he retained this attitude

in later years, as in his forties he denounced his “young contemporaries ... who begin their

shameful decline at the age of thirty,” and declared that “The great ones develop and grow as they

get older.”66

        Although Cézanne’s Gini ratio is below that of Picasso, as their contrasting approaches

would imply, the difference between them in Table 4 is not great. Yet in a different dimension

they appear at the opposite ends of a spectrum. Table 5 presents the age of each artist in the

single year of his career represented by the largest number of textbook illustrations. Here

Cézanne’s age of 67 is the oldest among all the artists considered, as 31 of the total of 136

illustrations of his work - just over one-fifth - represent paintings executed in the final year of his

life. Picasso’s entry in Table 5, at age 26, is above only those of Chagall and Duchamp. As

discussed earlier, experimental innovators’ incremental approach often means that their greatest

contributions appear late in their careers, and Cézanne is followed by Monet - whose peak year

for illustrations occurs at age 54 - among the artists whose late work is most heavily represented

in the texts. Degas and Pissarro, other prominent experimental artists, also both have peak years

above age 40. In contrast, conceptual innovations can be made quickly, and dramatic new
                                                   24

approaches are perceived more readily by the young. Thus Picasso is joined by Seurat and

Duchamp as important conceptual innovators whose peak age for illustrations occurred before the

age of 30, and Manet’s peak age occurs at just 31.

        Another quantitative measure points to an additional systematic difference between

experimental and conceptual innovators. Table 6 shows the shortest span of years that contains at

least half of each artist’s total illustrations. So for example 30 of the 60 illustrations of Seurat’s

paintings are of work done during 1885-86, so his entry in Table 6 is two years; the shortest span

that contains half of Cézanne’s total illustrations is 1894-1906, so his entry is 13 years. This

measure gives an indication of the temporal concentration of an artist’s contribution.

        The lowest entries in Table 6 are for conceptual innovators. Thus Duchamp and Seurat

are among the lowest entries, of three years or less. They are joined by van Gogh. Although van

Gogh was not as young as other leading conceptual innovators when he did his greatest work, this

was in part because he decided to become a painter only in his late 20s, after abandoning

unsuccessful careers as an art dealer, teacher, and missionary. 67 Van Gogh’s approach to his

work was clearly conceptual, though unlike Seurat, who based his work on scientific theories, or

Duchamp, who used his work to pose intellectual questions, van Gogh’s goal was to use painting

to express emotions. In a description of his famous painting of the Night Café in Arles - one of

his two paintings listed in Table 3 - he declared that he had “tried to express the terrible passions

of humanity by means of red and green.” This was a instance of his general practice that “instead

of trying to reproduce exactly what I have before my eyes, I use color more arbitrarily, in order to

express myself forcibly.”68

        The measure used in Table 6 does not clearly separate out all the conceptual innovators,
                                                   25

but rather produces low entries for those who made a single major contribution. Those who made

several, separated in time, have higher entries. Obvious examples include Manet and Picasso.

Nonetheless, the table’s two highest entries, pointing to the most prolonged periods of innovation,

are those of the great experimental innovators Monet and Cézanne, and they are followed by their

friend Pissarro, who shared their complete commitment to the belief that real progress could be

made only slowly, and could result only from the visual study of nature.69

        In histories of art, a prominent place is often given not simply to an important artist’s great

individual works, but to a short period in which the artist makes his principal contribution.

Narratives of modern art are often organized around these episodes, for in the modern era these

have often been key periods in which the work of a few individuals gave rise to a new movement,

from Impressionism and Neo-Impressionism through Fauvism, Cubism, and beyond. Table 7 uses

the textbook illustrations to provide an indication of which of these are considered most

important, by identifying the episodes that include the largest number of illustrations of work by

individual artists within any five-year period . This does not precisely correspond to the

historians’ analyses, for artists’ creative episodes vary in length, but five years constitute a period

long enough to capture many of the most important breakthrough phases in modern artists’

careers.

        The analysis presented above would predict that Table 7 should be dominated by

conceptual innovators, because of the greater temporal concentration of their achievements. This

is clearly the case. Interestingly, in spite of Picasso’s preeminent position in total illustrations and

the enormous importance of Cubism, the list is headed by van Gogh, as his years in France emerge

as the most heavily illustrated episode in the portion of modern art studied in this paper. The
                                                 26

invention and development of Cubism does account for the high positions of Picasso (both second

in Table 7 for 1906-10, and fourth for 1911-15) and Braque (fifth for 1908-12). The period in

which Matisse moved from Neo-Impressionism to the leadership of the Fauves places him third in

Table 7, and Gauguin’s leading role in Symbolism, from his time in Pont-Aven to his first trip to

Tahiti, places him fifth. The conceptual innovations of Manet, Seurat, and Duchamp also put

them high on the list, ahead of the experimental innovators Cézanne and Monet, who rank just

eleventh and thirteenth, respectively.

       The difference in the relative importance of short periods in the careers of conceptual and

experimental innovators is again witnessed by the fact that the proportion of the artist’s total

illustrations that represented work done in this primary five-year period was lower for Cézanne

and Monet than for any other artist in Table 7 except Picasso. The careers of van Gogh, Gauguin,

and Seurat - each known primarily for one major achievement - are heavily dominated by these

episodes, with more than two-thirds of all the illustrations of their work done within the relevant

five years. The careers of conceptual innovators like Picasso and Manet, who made several major

contributions, are much less dominated by these episodes, as were the careers of Cézanne and

Monet, whose incremental approach reduced the importance of any single period. Picasso’s

exceptional position in modern painting is impressively demonstrated by his appearance in Table 7

for five separate episodes, while no other artist appears more than once.

       A final table provides evidence of another consequence of the predominantly conceptual

origins of the most important individual works identified by this study. Table 8 presents the ages

of the artists when they executed the paintings listed in Table 3. Seventeen of the total of 21

paintings were produced by artists aged below 40; ten were the work of artists under 35. Because
                                                   27

of multiple entries in the table by several artists (Picasso, Manet, and Courbet each have three

paintings listed, and Duchamp, Matisse, and van Gogh each have two), there are 12 different

artists represented in the table. Of these 12, all but one - Cézanne - have at least one entry in the

table that was executed at age 40 or earlier; 8 of the 12 have at least one work done at age 35 or

earlier; and 5 of the 12 have at least one work done at 30 or earlier. These great paintings were

therefore commonly done by young artists, and when they were not, with only one notable

exception, the works done by older artists were the products of innovators who had earlier

executed other works that also appear on the list. This pattern is consistent with the view that

Table 3 - the most celebrated individual works in this first century of French modern painting - is

dominated by artists who arrived at their innovations through conceptual rather than experimental

means.



Art and Science

         It is valuable to recognize that the analysis proposed in this study of the careers of

experimental and conceptual innovators has a parallel in the findings of psychologists on the life

cycles of practitioners of a variety of scientific, and artistic, disciplines. The psychologists have

established that chemists, mathematicians, theoretical physicists, and poets typically make their

most important contributions at younger ages than do astronomers, biologists, geologists, and

novelists.70 A proposed explanation for these differences argues that they are a consequence of

the rates at which creative ideations can be produced and elaborated: both processes may occur

more rapidly in disciplines that deal with more abstract conceptual entities than in those in which

the central ideas are more complex and concrete.71 The empirical methods followed by
                                                  28

experimental innovators in painting makes their enterprise resemble that of the more concrete

disciplines considered by the psychologists, whereas the theoretical approach of the conceptual

innovators makes theirs resemble that of the more abstract disciplines. Following the

psychologists’ analysis, this would lead to a prediction - which is confirmed by the evidence

analyzed above - that conceptual painters would generally produce their major works at younger

ages than the experimental painters. The correspondence of this result with the regularity of the

relationship between age and achievement across the disciplines studied by the psychologists thus

provides additional support for the significance of the categorization of painters suggested by this

study.



Conclusion

I was very naive... I didn’t realize that only art historians were allowed to write about artists.
                                                 Penelope Fitzgerald 72

         Artistic success can be quantified, in a variety of ways.73 This paper has illustrated one of

these, by using evidence drawn from art history textbooks. The results not only produced

rankings of major painters and paintings that are clearly reasonable, but posed a puzzle - in the

differences between the rankings of major painters and paintings - that led to the identification of

a basic difference in approach among major modern artists that has never received systematic

attention from art historians.74 The characteristics of each of these approaches were not only

described qualitatively, but were also documented quantitatively. Specifically, quantitative

analysis of the textbook illustrations provides systematic support for a distinction between

experimental and conceptual innovators. Quantitative measures show that the innovations of the
                                                 29

conceptual artists have been embodied in a smaller number of key works, typically made at

younger ages, and concentrated in shorter periods than have those of artists who have followed an

experimental approach. So conceptual innovators like Courbet, Duchamp, Manet, Picasso, and

Seurat produced innovations, typically announced in individual masterpieces, early in their

careers, whereas experimental innovators like Cézanne, Degas, Miró, Monet, and Pissarro

followed an incremental procedure in which innovations appeared gradually, in larger bodies of

work, and usually at older ages.

        This quantitative study of artistic success has made a new contribution to our

understanding of the history of modern art. Among the most general lessons of the study of

modern art is that innovations are rarely broadly welcomed, and are indeed initially most

strenuously denounced by practitioners.75 Battles over new approaches consequently appear as a

sign of vitality. The same might equally be true of the study of art history. It is consequently to

be hoped that this demonstration of the value of quantification in a discipline in which it has been

sorely neglected will not only inspire more scholars to bring quantitative methods to bear on art

history, but will also prompt others to devote greater efforts to producing more considered and

insightful criticisms of their results.
                                                30

                                            Footnotes

I thank Allison Gamble, Robert Jensen, and Britt Salvesen for discussions of the issues treated in
this paper, and Rebecca Kalmus and Thomas Walker for research assistance.


1.     Roger Fry, Last Lectures (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962), p. 3.

2.     Quoted in Christina Duff, “In Payscales, Life Sometimes Imitates Art,” Wall Street
       Journal, May 22, 1998, p. B1.

3.     George Heard Hamilton, 19th and 20th Century Art (New York: Abrams, 1970); John
       Russell, The Meanings of Modern Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981);
       Robert Hughes, The Shock of the New (New York: Knopf, 1982); H. H. Arnason, History
       of Modern Art, Third edition (New York: Abrams, 1968); Sam Hunter and John Jacobus,
       History of Modern Art, Third edition (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992).

4.     Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 4 (Chicago, 1993), p. 118.

5.     The textbooks were not restricted to surveys of modern art, but rather to books that
       surveyed at least all of modern art. The books surveyed are the following; they are listed
       chronologically. In each of two cases indicated, two books that were included in a series
       were treated as one book.
       H. H. Arnason, History of Modern Art (New York: Abrams, 1968).
       George Heard Hamilton, 19th and 20th Century Art (New York: Abrams, 1970)
       Two books treated as one:
       Fritz Novotny, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1780 to 1880, Second ed.
       (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970).
       George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940
       (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972)..
       Edward Lucie-Smith, A Concise History of French Painting (New York: Praeger, 1971).
       Alan Bowness, Modern European Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1972).
       Dale G. Cleaver, Art: An Introduction, Second ed. (New York: Harcourt Brace
       Jovanovich, 1972).
       Ariane Ruskin, History in Art (New York: Franklin Watts, 1974).
       Horst de la Croix and Richard G. Tansey, Gardner’s Art Through the Ages, Sixth ed.
       (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975).
       Harold Spencer, The Image Maker: Man and His Art (New York: Charles Scribner’s
       Sons, 1975).
       H. W. Janson, History of Art, Second ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1977).
       Norbert Lynton, The Story of Modern Art (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1980).
       John Canaday, Mainstreams of Modern Art, Second ed. (Ft. Worth: Harcourt Brace
       Jovanovich, 1981).
       John Russell, The Meanings of Modern Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981).
                                              31

     Robert Hughes, The Shock of the New (New York: Knopf, 1982).
     Hugh Honour and John Fleming, A World History of Art (London: Macmillan, 1982).
     Sara Cornell, Art: A History of Changing Style (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1983).
     Ralph A. Britsch and Todd A. Britsch, The Arts in Western Culture (Englewood Cliffs:
     Prentice-Hall, 1984).
     E. H. Gombrich, The Story of Art, 14th ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1985).
     Frederick Hartt, Art, Vol. 2, Third ed.. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1989).
     Michael Wood, Bruce Cole, and Adelheid Gealt, Art of the Western World (New York:
     Simon and Schuster, 1989).
     Daniel Wheeler, Art Since Mid-Century (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1991).
     Sam Hunter and John Jacobus, Modern Art, Third ed. ( Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
     1992).
     Carol Strickland and John Boswell, The Annotated Mona Lisa (Kansas City: Andrews and
     McMeel, 1992).
     Two books treated as one:
     Francis Frascina, Nigel Blake, Briony Fer, Tamar Garb, and Charles Harrison, Modernity
     and Modernism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).
     Charles Harrison, Francis Frascina, and Gill Perry, Primitivism, Cubism, Abstraction
     (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).
     Larry Silver, Art in History (New York: Abbeville Press, 1993).
     Laurie Schneider Adams, A History of Western Art (New York: Abrams, 1995).
     Marilyn Stokstad and Marion Spears Grayson, Art History (New York: Abrams, 1995).
     Liz Dawtrey, Toby Jackson, Mary Masterson, Pam Meecham, and Paul Wood, eds.,
     Investigating Modern Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996).
     Alison Gallup, Gerhard Gruitrooy, and Elizabeth M. Weisberg, Great Paintings of the
     Western World (New York: Hugh Lauter Levin Associates, 1997).
     Charles Harrison, Modernism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
     David Wilkins, Bernard Schultz, and Katheryn Linduff, Art Past, Art Present (New York:
     Abrams, 1997).
     Julian Freeman, Art: A Crash Course (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1998).
     Volker Gebhardt, The History of Art (New York: Barron’s Educational Series, 1998).

6.   Stokstad, Art History, p. 6

7.   If we tabulate the number of different works by the top 10 painters in Table 2, illustrated
     in the 33 texts, that are held by just 10 major museums, the results are: Picasso 67;
     Matisse 33; Cézanne 33; Manet 27; Braque 18; van Gogh 17; Gauguin 14; Degas 36; and
     Renoir 24. The museums are: Metropolitan, and Museum of Modern Art, New York; Art
     Institute, Chicago; Philadelphia Museum; Baltimore Museum; National Gallery,
     Washington; Tate Gallery; National Gallery, London; Louvre; Musée d’Orsay.

8.   I thank Britt Salvesen for this information.
                                              32

9.    Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 4 (Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press, 1993), p. 300.

10.   Harold Rosenberg, The Tradition of the New (New York: Da Capo Press, 1994), p. 37.

11.   Meyer Schapiro, Modern Art: 19th and 20th Centuries (New York: George Braziller,
      1979), p. 153; also see p. 167.

12.   Alan Bowness, Modern European Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1972), p. 172.

13.   Raymonde Moulin, The French Art Market: A Sociological View (New Brunswick:
      Rutgers University Press, 1987), p. 30.

14.   Michael Fried, Art and Objecthood (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 17,
      218.

15.   Arthur C. Danto, Embodied Meanings (New York: Noonday Press, 1995), p. 85.

16.   Leo Steinberg, Other Criteria (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 15.

17.   John Rewald, ed., Paul Cézanne Letters (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), pp. 327, 329-
      30.

18.   E.g. see Theodore Reff, “Painting and Theory in the Final Decade,” in William Rubin, ed.,
      Cézanne: The Late Work (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977), p. 13; Meyer
      Schapiro, Paul Cézanne (New York: Abrams, 1952), p. 27.

19.   Roger Fry, Cézanne (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), p. 3.

20.   Schapiro, Cézanne, p. 10.

21.   Rewald, Paul Cézanne Letters, p. 299.

22.   Ambroise Vollard, Cézanne (New York: Dover, 1984), Chap. 8.

23.   Ibid., pp. 48, 63, 77; Ambroise Vollard, Recollections of a Picture Dealer (Boston: Little,
      Brown, 1936), p. 182.

24.   Richard Shiff, Cézanne and the End of Impressionism (Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, 1984), p. 162.

25.   Clive Bell, “The Debt to Cézanne,” in Francis Frascina and Charles Harrison, eds.,
      Modern Art and Modernism (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1982), p. 77.

26.   Rewald, Paul Cézanne Letters, p. 303.
                                              33

27.   Vollard, Cézanne, p. 105.

28.   Alfred H. Barr, Jr., Picasso: Fifty Years of His Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
      1946), pp. 270-71.

29.   Patrick O’Brian, Pablo Ruiz Picasso (New York: W. W. Norton, 1994), p. 179.

30.   Ibid, p. 208, Picasso told a friend he did this because “it is not sufficient to know an
      artist’s works - it is also necessary to know when he did them, why, how, under what
      circumstances.” In words that would no doubt please Richard Shiff, Picasso explained
      that “I want to leave to posterity a documentation that will be as complete as possible.
      That’s why I put a date on everything I do;” Brassai, Picasso and Company (Garden City,
      NJ: Doubleday, 1966), p. 100.

31.   Francoise Gilot and Carlton Lake, Life with Picasso (New York: Doubleday, 1964), p.
      123.

32.   John Golding, Cubism, Third edition (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988), p. 51.

33.   Russell, Meanings of Modern Art, p. 97; Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p.
      235.

34.   Golding, Cubism, p. xiii; Douglas Cooper, The Cubist Epoch (London: Phaidon Press,
      1971), p. 12.

35.   The dates of these 13 views of Mont Sainte-Victoire range from 1885-1906. If the
      novelty of the motif were the source of these paintings’ importance, it might be supposed
      that the earliest of these would be most often reproduced. This is not the case, as the
      1885 view of Mont Sainte-Victoire from the Barnes Collection is reproduced only once.
      Because of Cézanne’s incremental process of innovation, it is the 1906 view in the
      Philadelphia Museum of Art that is reproduced most often (ten times).

36.   Richard Kendall, Monet by Himself (New York: Knickerbocker Press, 1999), p. 122.

37.   Linda Nochlin, ed., Impressionism and Post-Impressionism, 1874-1904 (Englewood
      Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966), p. 34.

38.   Kendall, Monet by Himself, p. 178.

39.   Paul Hayes Tucker, Monet in the ‘90s: The Series Paintings (Boston: Museum of Fine
      Arts, 1989); Grace Seiberling, Monet’s Series (New York: Garland Publishing, 1980);
      Arthur C. Danto, Embodied Meanings (New York: Noonday Press, 1995), pp. 82-89.

40.   Joel Isaacson, Claude Monet: Observation and Reflection (Oxford: Phaidon Press, 1978);
      John House, Monet: Nature Into Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986).
                                                34

41.   It might be argued that Cézanne and Monet do not have entries high in Table 3 because
      they have few works, or few characteristic works, in collections accessible to scholars.
      This argument can readily be dismissed. 28 of the total of 74 paintings by Cézanne
      illustrated in the texts, and 45 of the 80 by Monet, are owned by just eight museums:
      Chicago’s Art Institute, Boston’s Museum of Fine Arts, Philadelphia’s Museum of Art,
      New York’s Metropolitan Museum, Washington’s National Gallery, London’s National
      Gallery, and Paris’ Louvre and Musée d’Orsay. These 28 Cézannes include five views of
      Mont Sainte-Victoire, and the 45 Monets include five paintings of water lilies. All these
      major museums make their collections readily available for scholarly study and
      reproduction.
      It is equally the case that restricted access does not prevent paintings from appearing
      prominently in Table 3. Matisse’s Joy of Life, reproduced more often than any painting by
      Cézanne or Monet, is owned by the Barnes Foundation, which for many years severely
      limited scholarly use of its collection.

42.   Norma Broude, ed., Seurat in Perspective (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978), p.
      148.

43.   Ibid., p. 31; Paul Signac, “From Eugène Delacroix to Neo-Impressionism,” in Floyd
      Ratliff, Paul Signac and Color in Neo-Impressionism (New York: Rockefeller University
      Press, 1992), p. 247.

44.   John Rewald, Georges Seurat (New York: Wittenborn, 1943), p. 26.

45.   John Rewald, Post-Impressionism (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1956), p. 86.
      That Seurat sincerely believed his work was the product of method rather than inspiration
      is witnessed by his conflict with Signac in 1888. Signac was delighted at the growing
      number of artists who were adopting Neo-Impressionist methods, but Seurat was worried
      by this increase. Seurat explained to Signac that “the more numerous we are, the less
      originality we shall have, and the day when everybody uses this technique, it will no longer
      have any value.” Trying to calm Signac, Pissarro dismissed Seurat’s concern as “absurd”:
      “After all, all art is not in the scientific theory ... Thus apply the science which belongs to
      everybody, but keep for yourself the gift you have;” ibid., p. 114. But it was Seurat’s
      belief that the value of the work lay in the scientific theory, which could readily be
      appropriated by others, that led him to resist showing his work in public; John Rewald,
      ed., Camille Pissarro: Letters to his Son Lucien (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), pp.
      99-100.

46.   William Innes Homer, Seurat and the Science of Painting (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1964),
      p. 181.

47.   Harold Rosenberg, The De-Definition of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      1972), p. 57.
                                               35

48.   Calvin Tomkins, Duchamp (New York: Henry Holt, 1996), p. 157.

49.   Michael Sanouillet and Elmer Petersen, eds., The Writings of Marcel Duchamp (New
      York: Da Capo Press, 1989), p. 125.

50.   Irving Sandler, American Art of the 1960s (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), pp. 50-
      58.

51.   George Kubler, The Shape of Time (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962), p. 83.

52.   Table 4 and subsequent tables will be restricted to the most important artists in the sample,
      defined as those with more than 33 total illustrations. This selection level was chosen
      because these are the artists with an average of more than one illustration per book.

53.   Briony Fer, “Introduction,” in Francis Frascina, et. al., Modernity and Modernism (New
      Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), p. 25.

54.   James D. Herbert, “Privilege and the Illusion of the Real,” in Bradford R. Collins, ed., 12
      Views of Manet’s Bar (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), p. 215.

55.   Théodore Duret, Manet and the Impressionists (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1910), p.
      57.

56.   Marcel Guérin, ed., Lettres de Degas (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1931), p. 107.

57.   Ambroise Vollard, Degas (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1928), p. 102.

58.   George Moore, Impressions and Opinions (New York: Brentano, 1913), p. 229.

59.   Rewald, Camille Pissarro, p. 32.

60.   Ibid., p. 53.

61.   Ibid., p. 30.

62.   Ibid., p. 46.

63.   Joan Miró, Selected Writings and Interviews (New York: Da Capo Press, 1992), p. 98.

64.   Ibid., pp. 209-11.

65.   Ibid., p. 51.

66.   Ibid., pp. 79, 150.
                                                36

67.   The case of van Gogh (as well as that of Gauguin, who became a full-time painter only
      after resigning his job in the stock exchange, at age 35) raises an interesting qualification
      to the proposition that extreme conceptual innovations are typically made by the young.
      Chronological age and career experience tend to be highly correlated. But individuals
      who begin a career late will have the stages of their career delayed accordingly; see Dean
      Keith Simonton, Greatness: Who Makes History and Why (New York: Guilford Press,
      1994), pp. 187-89. What matters for conceptual innovation is apparently less youth than
      recency of exposure to a discipline. A more precise statement is consequently that
      extreme conceptual innovations are typically made early in an artist’s career.

68.   Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, vol. 3 (London: Thames
      and Hudson, 1958), pp. 6, 28.

69.   E.g. Rewald, ed., Camille Pissarro, pp. 30, 53.

70.   Harvey C. Lehman, Age and Achievement (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953),
      pp. 324-25; Dean Keith Simonton, Scientific Genius (Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press, 1988), p. 67; Simonton, Greatness, pp. 68-75.

71.   Simonton, Scientific Genius, pp. 68-75.

72.   Arthur Lubow, “An Author of a Certain Age,” New York Times Magazine, (August 15,
      1999), p. 33.

73.   In a different quantitative approach, I have used auction prices to measure the value of
      painters’ works over the course of their careers. This approach produces similar
      conclusions about the value of the distinction between experimental and conceptual
      innovators, for it shows that whereas experimental innovators usually executed their most
      valuable work late in their careers, conceptual innovators typically produced their most
      valuable work at young ages. See David W. Galenson, “The Careers of Modern Artists:
      Evidence from Auctions of Contemporary Paintings,” Journal of Cultural Economics,
      forthcoming; Galenson, “The Lives of the Painters of Modern Life: The Careers of Artists
      in France from Impressionism to Cubism,” NBER Working Paper 6888 (January 1999);
      Galenson and Bruce A. Weinberg, “Age and the Quality of Work: The Case of Modern
      American Painters,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

74.   Distinctions similar to the one made here have sometimes been made by art historians. For
      example, Alan Bowness observed of the course of modern art that “By a kind of
      dialectical necessity, the realists always seem to be accompanied by idealist (or symbolist)
      painters,” then remarked: “The manifold complexities of this general tendency for art to
      divide may depend on certain basic temperamental differences among artists - on, for
      example, the degree to which the painter or sculptor can envisage the finished work of art
      before he starts to make it. Does creation reside in the idea or in the action?” Bowness,
      Modern European Art, p. 73. Yet Bowness does not pursue this distinction, and his
                                                  37

      failure to understand its implications is witnessed by his later comment that “Innovations
      in art usually come from young men;” ibid., p. 122..

75.   E.g. see Steinberg, Other Criteria, p. 4.
Table 1: Artists Included in this Study

 Artist                              Country of birth   Year of birth   Year of death
 Arp, Jean                           France                1886             1966
 Bonnard, Pierre                     France                1867             1947
 Braque, Georges                     France                1882             1963
 Cézanne, Paul                       France                1839             1906
 Chagall, Marc                       Russia                1887             1985
 Courbet, Gustave                    France                1819             1877
 Degas, Edgar                        France                1834             1917
 Delaunay, Robert                    France                1885             1941
 Derain, André                       France                1880             1954
 Duchamp, Marcel                     France                1887             1968
 Dufy, Raoul                         France                1877             1953
 Gauguin, Paul                       France                1848             1903
 Gogh, Vincent van                   Holland               1853             1890
 Gris, Juan                          Spain                 1887             1927
 Léger, Fernand                      France                1881             1955
 Manet, Edouard                      France                1832             1883
 Masson, André                       France                1896             1987
 Matisse, Henri                      France                1869             1954
 Miró, Joan                          Spain                 1893             1983
 Modigliani, Amedeo                  Italy                 1884             1920
 Monet, Claude                       France                1840             1926
 Picabia, Francis                    France                1879             1953
 Picasso, Pablo                      Spain                 1881             1973
 Pissarro, Camille                   France                1830             1903
 Redon, Odilon                       France                1840             1916
 Artist                       Country of birth   Year of birth   Year of death
 Renoir, Pierre-Auguste       France                1841             1919
 Rouault, Georges             France                1871             1958
 Rousseau, Henri              France                1844             1910
 Seurat, Georges              France                1859             1891
 Soutine, Chaim               Lithuania             1893             1943
 Tanguy, Yves                 France                1900             1955
 Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri de   France                1864             1901
 Vlaminck, Maurice de         France                1876             1958
 Vuillard, Edouard            France                1868             1940
 Whistler, James              United States         1834             1903

Source: See text.
Table 2: Ranking of Artists by Total Illustrations

 Artist                     Total illustrations      Artist                  Total illustrations
 1   Picasso                       335               19 Rouault                      31
 2   Matisse                       169               20 Bonnard                      29
 3   Cézanne                       136               20 Delaunay                     29
 4   Manet                         130               20 Whistler                     29
 5   Monet                         125               23 Rousseau                     29
 6   Braque                        116               24 Derain                       27
 6   Van Gogh                      116               25 Arp                          26
 8   Gauguin                        97               26 Redon                        23
 9   Degas                          81               27 Picabia                      20
 10 Renoir                          74               28 Gris                         19
 11 Duchamp                         72               29 Vuillard                     18
 12 Courbet                         68               30 Vlaminck                     15
 13 Miró                            64               31 Soutine                      14
 14 Seurat                          60               32 Tanguy                       13
 15 Léger                           51               33 Masson                       12
 16 Toulouse Lautrec                40               34 Modigliani                   10
 17 Pissarro                        38               35 Dufy                         7
 18 Chagall                         35

Source: This and subsequent tables are based on the data set constructed for this study. See text
         for description.
Table 3: Ranking of Paintings by Total Illustrations

 Rank    Illustrations   Artist, Title                            Date   Location
 1             30        Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon       1907   New York
 2             25        Picasso, Guernica                        1937   Madrid
 3                       Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island   1886   Chicago
               24
                         of the Grande Jatte
 4(t)                    Duchamp, Nude Descending a               1912   Philadelphia
               21
                         Staircase, No. 2
 4(t)          21        Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’Herbe           1863   Paris
 6             20        Manet, Bar at the Folies-Bergère         1882   London
 7                       Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by      1923   Philadelphia
               16
                         Her Bachelors, Even
 8(t)          15        Courbet, L’Atelier                       1855   Paris
 8(t)          15        Gauguin, The Vision After the Sermon     1888   Edinburgh
 8(t)          15        Manet, Olympia                           1863   Paris
 8(t)          15        Matisse, The Joy of Life                 1906   Merion, PA
 12            14        Cézanne, Large Bathers                   1906   Philadelphia
 13                      Matisse, Green Stripe (Madame            1905   Copenhagen
               13
                         Matisse)
 14(t)         12        Courbet, Burial at Ornans                1850   Paris
 14(t)         12        Courbet, The Stone Breakers              1849   Formerly Dresden
 14(t)         12        Renoir, Moulin de la Galette             1876   Paris
 14(t)         12        van Gogh, The Night Café                 1888   New Haven
 14(t)         12        van Gogh, The Starry Night               1889   New York
 19(t)         11        Monet, Impression: Sunrise               1873   Paris
 19(t)         11        Picasso, Still Life with Chair Caning    1912   Paris
 19(t)                   Toulouse-Lautrec, At the Moulin          1892   Chicago
               11
                         Rouge
Table 4: Gini Ratios for Paintings by Artists with More than 33 Total Illustrations

 Artist                                                                       Ratio
 Duchamp                                                                       .59
 Seurat                                                                        .57
 Manet                                                                         .54
 Courbet                                                                       .53
 Gauguin                                                                       .47
 Matisse                                                                       .45
 Léger                                                                         .43
 Renoir                                                                        .43
 Picasso                                                                       .42
 van Gogh                                                                      .39
 Toulouse-Lautrec                                                              .39
 Cézanne                                                                       .38
 Braque                                                                        .35
 Chagall                                                                       .34
 Miró                                                                          .32
 Monet                                                                         .31
 Degas                                                                         .28
 Pissarro                                                                      .09
Table 5: Artist’s Age in Year of Most Illustrations, for Artists with More than 33 Total
          Illustrations

 Artist                             (1) Year                 (2) n                 (3) Age
 Cézanne                              1906                    31                      67
 Monet                                1894                    16                      54
 Pissarro                             1873                     7                      43
 Degas                                1876                    11                      42
 Gauguin                              1889                    19                      41
 Léger                                1919                     9                      38
 Courbet                              1855                    19                      36
 Matisse                              1905                    32                      36
 Renoir                               1876                    17                      35
 van Gogh                             1888                    39                      35
 Miró                                 1925                    11                      32
 Manet                                1863                    38                      31
 Braque                               1911                    21                      29
 Toulouse-Lautrec                     1892                    18                      28
 Seurat                               1886                    28                      27
 Picasso                              1907                    39                      26
 Duchamp                              1912                    30                      25
 Chagall                              1911                    10                      24

Notes: Column 1 shows the year from which the largest number of each artist’s illustrations date.
       Column 2 shows the number of illustrations of paintings done in that year.
       Column 3 shows the artist’s age in that year.
Table 6: Shortest Periods that Include at Least Half an Artist’s Total Illustrations, for Artists with
         More than 33 Illustrations



 Artist                                             Dates                    Number of Years
 Cézanne                                          1894-1906                          13
 Monet                                             1866-77                           12
 Pissarro                                          1867-77                           11
 Miró                                              1924-33                           10
 Picasso                                           1904-13                           10
 Léger                                             1913-21                            9
 Renoir                                            1874-81                            8
 Degas                                             1873-79                            7
 Manet                                             1862-68                            7
 Courbet                                           1850-55                            6
 Matisse                                           1905-10                            6
 Braque                                            1908-11                            4
 Gauguin                                           1888-91                            4
 Chagall                                           1911-13                            3
 Duchamp                                           1911-13                            3
 van Gogh                                          1888-89                            2
 Seurat                                            1885-86                            2
 Toulouse-Lautrec                                  1891-92                            2
Table 7: Ranking of Five-Year Periods in Artists’ Careers, by total Illustrations



 Artist                            Dates         Illustrations   % of Artist’s Total Illustrations
  1.      van Gogh             1886-90               101                            87
  2.      Picasso              1906-10                92                            27
  3.      Matisse              1905-09                78                            46
  4.      Picasso              1911-15                74                            22
  5.      Gauguin              1888-92                66                            68
  6.      Braque               1908-12                65                            56
  7.      Manet                1859-63                55                            42
  8.      Picasso              1921-25                48                            14
  9.      Seurat               1884-99                47                            78
 10.      Duchamp              1910-14                40                            56
 11.      Cézanne              1902-06                38                            28
 12.      Picasso              1901-05                37                            11
 13. (t) Monet                 1869-73                35                            28
 13. (t) Picasso               1933-37                35                            10
 15.      Toulouse-Lautrec     1891-95                32                            80

Note: The final column shows the percentage of each artist’s total illustrations (from Table 2)
      made up by illustrations of paintings done in the periods identified here.
Table 8: Ages at which Artists Executed Paintings Listed in Table 3

 Number               Artist                                          Age
 1                    Picasso                                         26
 2                    Picasso                                         56
 3                    Seurat                                          27
 4(t)                 Duchamp                                         25
 4(t)                 Manet                                           31
 6                    Manet                                           50
 7                    Duchamp                                         36
 8(t)                 Courbet                                         36
 8(t)                 Gauguin                                         40
 8(t)                 Manet                                           31
 8(t)                 Matisse                                         37
 12                   Cézanne                                         67
 13                   Matisse                                         36
 14(t)                Courbet                                         31
 14(t)                Courbet                                         30
 14(t)                Renoir                                          35
 14(t)                van Gogh                                        35
 14(t)                van Gogh                                        36
 19(t)                Monet                                           33
 19(t)                Picasso                                         31
 19(t)                Toulouse-Lautrec                                28
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                           Title                                               Date

7356            Alec Ian Gershberg                  Competition and the Cost of Capital Revisited: Special   9/99
                Michael Grossman                    Authorities and Underwriters in the Market for Tax-
                Fred Goldman                        exempt Hospital Bonds

7357            Robert E. Lipsey                    Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm         9/99
                                                    Employment

7358            Vernon Henderson                    Marshall’s Economies                                     9/99

7359            Iain Cockburn                       The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:          9/99
                Rebecca Henderson                   Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research
                Scott Stern

7360            Douglas Holtz-Eakin                 Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business         9/99
                John W. Phillips
                Harvey S. Rosen

7361            Bong-Chan Kho                       Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis                       9/99
                René M. Stulz

7362            Jagadeesh Gokhale                   Social Security’s Treatment of Postwar Americans:        9/99
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff               How Bad Can It Get?

7363            Bruce D. Meyer                      Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the           9/99
                Dan T. Rosenbaum                    Labor Supply of Single Mothers

7364            Dani Rodrik                         Short-Term Capital Flows                                 9/99
                Andrés Velasco

7365            Michael D. Bordo                    The Future of EMU: What Does the History of              9/99
                Lars Jonung                         Monetary Unions Tell Us?

7366            Emmanuel Saez                       Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?                       9/99

7367            Emmanuel Saez                       The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel      9/99
                                                    Study of 'Bracket Creep'

7368            Alan L. Gustman                     What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions              9/99
                Thomas L. Steinmeier                and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
                                                    From The Health and Retirement Study

7369            Wolfgang Keller                     Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct        9/99
                Arik Levinson                       Investment Inflows to U.S. States



                     You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                           Title                                               Date

7370            Michael Baker                       Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian        9/99
                Gary Solon                          Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
                                                    Tax Records

7371            Michael Baker                       Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
                Nicole M. Fortin                    1987-1988

7372            B. Douglas Bernheim                 The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the      10/99
                Lorenzo Forni                       Health and Retirement Survey
                Jagadeesh Gokhale
                Laurence J. Kotlikoff

7373            Paul A. David                       Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
                Bronwyn H. Hall                     R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence
                Andrew A. Toole

7374            Peter Cappelli                      Do “High Performance” Work Practices Improve          10/99
                David Neumark                       Established-Level Outcomes?

7375            Charles I. Jones                    Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?              10/99
                                                    Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

7376            Harrison Hong                       Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage            10/99
                Jeremy C. Stein                     and Market Crashes

7377            George Chacko                       Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with         10/99
                Luis M. Viceira                     Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets

7378            Bruce A. Blonigen                   Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of     10/99
                Stephen E. Haynes                   Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

7379            Victor R. Fuchs                     The Future of Health Economics                        10/99

7380            Michael D. Hurd                     Anticipated and Actual Bequests                       10/99
                James P. Smith

7381            Olivia S. Mitchell                  New Trends in Pension Benefit and                     10/99
                                                    Retirement Provisions

7382            Michael B. Devereux                 Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Welfare            10/99
                Charles Engel                       Effects of the Euro
                Cedric Tille




                     You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number          Author(s)                           Title                                                 Date

7383            Stephen L. Mehay                    The Effectiveness of Workplace Drug Prevention          10/99
                Rosalie Liccardo Pacula             Policies: Does ‘Zero Tolerance’ Work?

7384            Michael Klein                       Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and     10/99
                Giovanni Olivei                     Economic Growth

7385            Jean Abraham                        Enter at Your Own Risk: HMO Participation and           10/99
                Ashish Arora                        Enrollment in the Medicare Risk Market
                Martin Gaynor
                Douglas Wholey

7386            Gerardo della Paolera               Internal Versus External Convertibility and Developing- 10/99
                Alan M. Taylor                      Country Financial Crises: Lessons from the Argentine
                                                    Bank Bailout of the 1930's

7387            Alberto Alesina                     Redistribution Through Public Employment: The Case 10/99
                Stephan Danninger                   of Italy
                Massimo V. Rostagno

7388            Oliver Hart                         On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination Versus       10/99
                John Moore                          Specialization

7389            Joshua Aizenman                     Uncertainty and the Disappearance of International      10/99
                Nancy Marion                        Credit

7390            David M. Cutler                     The Technology of Birth: Is it Worth It?                10/99
                Ellen Meara

7391            Joel Waldfogel                      Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who     10/99
                                                    Benefits Whom in Differentiated Product Markets

7392            James M. Poterba                    Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition: U.S.      10/99
                Andrew A. Samwick                   Evidence from the 1980's and 1990's

7393            Bennett T. McCallum                 Theoretical Issues Pertaining to Monetary Unions        10/99

7394            Alan M. Taylor                      Latin America and Foreign Capital in the Twentieth     10/99
                                                    Century: Economics, Politics, and Institutional Change

7395            Bennett T. McCallum                 Analysis of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism:        10/99
                                                    Methodological Issus

7396            Owen A. Lamont                      The Diversification Discount: Cash Flows vs. Returns    10/99
                Christopher Polk


                     You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                              www.nber.org
                            Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.

Number            Author(s)                           Title                                                 Date

7397              V. Joseph Hotz                      Teenage Childbearing and its Life Cycle Consequences: 10/99
                  Susan Williams McElroy              Exploiting a Natural Experiment
                  Seth G. Sanders

7398              Joshua Aizenman                     Capital Controls and Financial Crises                     10/99

7399              Anne Case                           Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and 10/99
                  Motohiro Yogo                       the Characteristics of Schools in South America

7400              Assaf Razin                         Excessive FDI Flows Under Asymmetric Information          10/99
                  Efraim Sadka
                  Chi-Wa Yuen

7401              Anne Case                           How Hungry is the Selfish Gene?                           10/99
                  I-Fen Lin
                  Sara McLanahan

7402              Eckhard Janeba                      Tax Competition and Trade Protection                      10/99
                  John D. Wilson

7403              Rafael La Porta                     Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation               10/99
                  Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                  Andrei Shleifer
                  Robert Vishny

7404              Thomas J. Prusa                     On the Spread and Impact of Antidumping                   10/99

7405              H. Naci Mocan                       Economic Conditions, Deterrence and Juvenile Crime: 10/99
                  Daniel I. Rees                      Evidence from Micro Data

7406              Alon Brav                           Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers and            10/99
                  George M. Constantinides            Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence
                  Christorpher C. Geczy

7407              David W.Galenson                    Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters - 10/99
                                                      and Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02138-5398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders@nber.org).


                       You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:
                                                www.nber.org
                              Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.
