NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO SCIENTISTS PAY TO BE SCIENTISTS?
Scott Stern

Working Paper 7410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7410

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1999

I would like to thank those biologists and postdoctoral administrators who participated in the survey for their
time and thoughtfulness. By prior consent, names of specific institutions are withheld from the final analysis.
John Abowd, Joshua Gans, Rebecca Henderson, Richard Nelson, Lynne Zucker, Eric von Hippel, as well
as seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, the MIT IO Lunch, and the Sloan/Harvard
Management of Technology seminar provided useful suggestions. Kwanghui Lim, in conjunction with
undergraduate research assistants Amalia Miller, Vanessa Bhark, Allison Neizmik, and Sarah Huber, provided
extraordinary research assistance. This research was completed while a Health and Aging Fellow at the
National Bureau of Economic Research, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. All errors and
omissions are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?
Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 7410
October 1999
JEL No. J32, J44, L76, O31, O32
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the relationship between wages and the scientific orientation of R&D
organizations. Science-oriented firms allow researchers to publish in the scientific literature and pursue
individual research agendas. Adoption of a Science-oriented research approach (i.e., Science) is driven
by two distinct forces: a “taste” for Science on the part of researchers (a Preference effect) and R&D
productivity gains arising from earlier access to discoveries (a Productivity effect). The equilibrium
relationship between wages and Science reflects the relative salience of these effects: the Preference effect
contributes to a negative compensating differential while the Productivity effect raises the possibility of rentsharing between firms and researchers. In addition, because the value of participating in Science is
increasing in the prestige of researchers, Science tends to be adopted by those firms who employ higherquality researchers. This structural relationship between the adoption of Science and unobserved
heterogeneity in researcher ability leads to bias in the context of hedonic wage and productivity regressions
which do not account for such effects. This paper exploits a novel field-based empirical approach to
substantially overcome this bias. Specifically, prior to accepting a specific job offer, many scientists receive
multiple job offers, making it possible to calculate the wage-Science curve for individual scientists,
controlling for ability level. The methodology is applied to a sample of postdoctoral biologists. The results
suggest a strong negative relationship between wages and Science. For example, firms who allow their
employees to publish extract, on average, a 25% wage discount. The results are robust to restricting the
sample to non-academic job offers, but the findings depend critically on the inclusion of the researcher fixed
effects. The paper’s conclusion, then, is that, conditional on scientific ability, scientists do indeed pay to
be scientists.
Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sstern@mit.edu

I.

Introduction
Since the seminal work of Nelson (1959) and Arrow (1962), economists have attempted

to understand the economics of abstract knowledge production. To the extent that abstract
knowledge serves as a non-rivalrous input into technological innovation, its production plays a
critical (and much-studied) role in the process of economic growth (Romer, 1990). A critical
insight from that literature is that, because knowledge production is costly to monitor and subject
to expropriation, the level of production is inefficiently low in the absence of alternative
institutions. Of course, several important institutions supporting the appropriability of knowledge
(from trade secrecy to prizes to patents) have been identified and investigated, both theoretically
and empirically (Wright, 1983; Levin et al, 1987). However, as persuasively argued by Dasgupta
and David (1994), the institution perhaps most closely associated with the historical production of
abstract knowledge – Science – remains largely unexplored by economists.
This paper is motivated by this relative neglect and the possibility that the adoption of a
science-oriented research approach by private firms has important consequences for economic
quantities such as wages, R&D productivity and profits. Consider some of the ways in which a
science-oriented research approach differs from purely commercially-motivated knowledge
production: (a) scientific research involves the formulation and testing of theories (which may but
need not have commercial application) (b) the predominant incentives to produce such knowledge
depends on establishing intellectual priority (i.e., being first to make a discovery), but (c) since the
outputs of scientific research are disclosed publicly in academic journals (and with few formal
intellectual property claims) the rewards associated with intellectual priority are primarily nonpecuniary in nature, such as in the receipt of credit by future researchers.1 These distinctive
characteristics of the science-oriented research approach (i.e., of Science) raise an important
question: to the extent that Science specifically shuns non-disclosure, tight control over
intellectual property, and monopolization in the use of novel scientific knowledge, why do
researchers (particularly in private firms) participate in Science at all?

1

Science is defined more precisely, and the nature of the reward system discussed much more carefully, in Section II.
Overall, the perspective here draws on central insights from both the history and sociology of science (Kuhn, 1962;
Merton, 1973) as well as the “new” economics of science (Rosenberg, 1990; Dasgupta and David, 1994).

1

This paper considers two alternative, but not mutually exclusive, explanations for this
phenomena. First, researchers may have intrinsic preferences for interacting with disciplinespecific scientific communities and for receiving recognition from their peers for discoveries.
While the precise mechanism by which such profession-specific values are internalized is open to
debate (e.g., a hallmark of graduate-level scientific training is the emphasis placed on the
contributions to scientific research by senior academics), researcher sensitivity to the scientific
reward system may be important for understanding the economic behavior of scientists. Simply
put, scientists may have a “taste” for Science (Merton, 1973; David and Dasgupta, 1994).2
Second, participation in Science may be motivated by the benefits, in terms of technological
innovation, to private firms themselves. Firms who adopt Science may gain earlier and more
detailed access to new scientific discoveries and so may be purchasing a “ticket of admission”
which pays itself off in terms of higher R&D productivity and a higher rate of technological
innovation (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Rosenberg, 1990).
At one level, there is no inherent conflict between these two hypotheses. It is possible that
scientists possess a taste for Science (referred to as the Preference effect), and, at the same time,
some firms participate in Science in order to capture spillovers (referred to as the Productivity
effect). However, these two perspectives do offer competing economic implications, most notably
for the employment relationship: whereas the Preference effect contributes to a negative
compensating differential between Science and wages, the Productivity effect raises the possibility
of rent-sharing between firms and researchers (and so a positive association between wages and
Science). In addition, the relationship between wages and Science may reflect a skill bias: under
the “winner-take-all” nature of the scientific reward system, the expected benefits to Science
(both from the perspective of individual researchers as well as the firms which employ them) will
be higher for higher-ability researchers and so firms who employ scientists of higher ability will
tend to adopt Science as well. In other words, the relationship between scientist wages and
Science will be determined according to a set of economic forces (compensating differentials,

2

In contrast to most studies of on-the-job amenities (which examine the value placed on characteristics such as safety,
pension benefits, etc… (see Hamermesh (1984) or Viscusi (1993) for reviews), a “taste” for Science is most likely
concentrated among individuals in research-oriented careers, perhaps reflecting their educational training or more
fundamental sources of heterogeneity across different types of professional workers.

2

rent-sharing, and returns to talent) which govern equilibrium labor market outcomes more
generally (Rosen, 1986; Stephan, 1996).
After a brief review of the “new” economics of science in Section II, Section III develops
this logic more precisely by presenting a simple economic model incorporating (a) the Preference
effect, (b) the Productivity effect, and (c) a distribution of talent among scientists. In line with the
previous discussion, the model incorporates both the potential for skill bias in Science and the
potential for rent-sharing among firms and scientists (dividing up the quasi-rent associated with
participation in Science). This model is used to derive the equilibrium relationship between
Science and wages, scientist quality, and firm performance. Two key results stand out: (a) the
relationship between wages and Science depends on the relative salience of the Preference and
Productivity effects (as determined by the degree of rent-sharing) and (b) the adoption of Science
will be more likely as firms expect to have access to higher-ability researchers. An important
consequence of these findings is that prior empirical investigations of the relationship between
R&D productivity and Science may be subject to biases resulting from the compensating
differentials effect and the selectivity associated with the heterogeneous distribution of scientific
ability.
These theoretical insights motivate the heart of the paper, the development and
implementation of an empirical methodology which allows for the consistent evaluation of the
relationship between wages and Science. In particular, a principal contribution of this paper is the
introduction of a novel field-based method to control for the presence of unobserved
heterogeneity in the context of equalizing differences wage studies and so reduce the likelihood of
bias in such research. Specifically, I exploit the fact that, prior to accepting a specific offer, many
professionals receive multiple job offers. Each offer is composed of a wage offer and (observed
to the employee) job characteristics. Since a formal job offers confers a legal responsibility on
the firm, such offers will not be made unless the firm is willing to employ the worker under the
proposed package. As well, in equilibrium, firms will not make offers which have a zero
probability of acceptance. In other words, using samples drawn mainly from individuals who are
seeking their first full-time employment, we are able to calculate different wage-Science curves
for randomly selected workers at a point in time. By surveying candidates about detailed
3

characteristics of their multiple job offers (e.g., “Does this job give you permission to publish in
the scientific literature?”), it is therefore possible to estimate the relationship between wages and
Science, even after fully taking into account any heterogeneity across individuals in the sample
(through the inclusion of person-specific fixed effects). As such, the estimates reported here
likely overcome the biases associated with earlier work in labor economics which either examines
cross-sections of employees or focuses attention exclusively on job-switching behavior.3
This survey-based methodology is applied to a sample of life sciences researchers (i.e.,
biologists) who are (just) completing a job search.4 PhD biologists (e.g., those completing their
first postdoctoral fellowship at a top-tier medical center or university) participate in a (moderately
formal) job market in which they attempt to garner long-term employment. While we can control
for several differences among job which do not relate to its scientific orientation (such as the
impact on their career, or whether the job is in a start-up firm), the analysis is conditioned on a set
of research-oriented job offers, all of which use the candidate’s specialized biology background.
However, the jobs differ in terms of the degree to which the candidate can participate in Science,
either through the publication process or through the ability to choose (or continue to work on)
an individual research agenda. Critically, the job market for biologists is fluid enough so that,
prior to accepting particular job offers, some candidates do receive multiple job offers.
While the sample size is relatively small, the data point to several important findings. Most
importantly, there seem to be a broad tradeoff between offered wages and the scientific
orientation of firms. Offers which contain science-oriented provisions, ranging from permission
(or incentives) to publish in the scientific literature, to flexibility to choose or continue research
projects, are associated with lower monetary compensation and starting wages. For example,
firms who do not allow their employees to publish offer, on average, a 25% wage premium.

3

Rather than reviewing the voluminous literature in labor economics on the correct specification and sources of possible
bias in hedonic wage estimation here, I defer this discussion until Section IV wherein there is a discussion of the
relationship between the methodology proposed here and prior treatments, including work by, among others, Rosen
(1974), Brown (1980), Duncan and Holmlund (1983), Rosen (1986), Hwang et al (1992), Gibbons and Katz (1992),
Abowd and Lemieux (1993), van Reenen (1996), and Hwang, et al (1998).
4
We gather several distinct types of information about each scientist and each offer. In addition to standard
demographic information, we collect information about the candidate’s job market experience and their information
about each of their job offers. We collect both ordinal data, which involves comparisons for given characteristics across
job offers as well as cardinal data, which involves concrete quantitative information about each job.

4

These results are robust to several different types of controls (including job type), as well as
restricting our sample only to those job offers from the non-academic sector. However, the
findings do depend critically on controlling for individual heterogeneity; simple cross-sectional
comparisons result in a significant upward bias to the measured relationship between wages and
Science and so underestimate the size of the compensating differential paid by individual
researchers to participate in Science.
Overall, the contribution of this paper arises from (a) incorporating the two central
hypotheses from the “new” economics of Science into an economic model of wages and
participation in Science, (b) estimating the relationship between wages and the scientific
orientation of R&D organizations using a novel empirical methodology which controls for
unobserved heterogeneity in scientist ability, and (c) therefore providing an assessment of the
relative impact of researcher preferences, firm incentives and the distribution of scientific talent on
scientific labor markets. Perhaps the most surprising finding of this study is that a job
characteristic which is closely tied to a profession-specific value system (i.e., a communityimposed norm) has a significant quantitative impact. In other words, this paper provides new
empirical evidence, grounded in an equilibrium theory of utility and profit maximization, about the
economic impact of Science: specifically, scientists do indeed pay to be scientists.

II.

The “New” Economics of Science
Science is a distinctive institution in at least three ways: as a knowledge production

system, as an input into technological innovation, and as a reward system. The first distinguishing
aspect of Science is that it produces two extremely specialized types of knowledge: potentially
testable theories and empirical tests of these theories (Kuhn, 1963). While the contribution to the
theory-testing dynamic is the primary criteria by which scientists evaluate the value of new
knowledge, Science serves a second function as a knowledge stock upon which firms draw for
technological innovation. The knowledge and techniques produced by Science often have
commercial applications which are unrelated to the initial theory-testing motivation which spurred
their development (Rosenberg, 1974). In other words, Science is an important source of
knowledge spillovers. This uneasy relationship between Science as a knowledge production
5

process and as an input into technological innovation is mediated by the third characteristic
feature of Science: the priority-based reward system. To receive credit for the intellectual priority
of their scientific discoveries, scientists publicize their findings as quickly as possible and retain no
formal intellectual property over their ideas (Merton, 1957; Dasgupta and David, 1994). The
priority-based system allocates rewards primarily according to the discovery’s contribution to
Science (i.e., to the theory-testing dynamic); the benefits to identifying the commercial value of a
scientific theory are (mostly) limited to the financial gains from its exploitation. To the extent that
scientists value the rewards associated with scientific priority, this reward system provides
incentives for scientists to expend effort on the formulation and testing of discipline-specific
theories.
While sociologists and historians of science debate the relative importance of these three
aspects of Science, each helps to identify Science as an economic institution which is distinct from
a commercially-motivated knowledge production system. 5 For example, while most economic
analysis of knowledge production emphasizes the importance of institutions such as intellectual
property, trade secrecy or entry barriers in ensuring the incentives for innovation (Nelson, 1959;
Arrow, 1962; Levin et al, 1987; Kremer, 1998), the scientific incentive system specifically rejects
non-disclosure, tight control over intellectual property, or monopolization in the use of novel
scientific knowledge (Dasgupta and David, 1994).6 With this contrast in mind, I define
participation in Science to (a) be distinguishable from commercially motivated knowledge
production, (b) involve the formulation and testing of theories (which may but need not result in
commercial spillovers), and (c) result in public disclosure of findings in academic journals and
forums.7
As first noted by the sociologist Merton (1973), the effectiveness of the priority-based
5

One might also distinguish Science by several other key aspects (e.g., that its primary locus is in universities which
serve as a key contributor to more general human capital investments and training, its long-term responsiveness to
overall societal needs, etc…). However, for present purposes, I focus on the small number of most salient elements
which will distinguish scientist behavior from more traditional economic models of the research process.
6
Perhaps surprisingly, then, Science turns out to be an extremely influential source of commercially relevant knowledge,
at least in the long term (Rosenberg, 1982).
7
Obviously, this is an extremely “stylized,” conceptualization of the structure of Science as a knowledge production
system. While acknowledging that the structure of scientific communities is more subtle and dynamic than
conceptualized here, the simple approach pursued here does allow for the development of key testable hypotheses which

6

system depends critically on the sensitivity of scientists to its unique rewards: credit by future
researchers who build on their discoveries, establishment of a reputation for ability among
colleagues, employment by and membership in prestigious institutions, and access to resources to
do further scientific research. Even if one accounts for career concerns, the priority-based system
seems to rely on intrinsic valuation of its reputational rewards: not only is the income profile for
scientists relatively flat but many of the most important rewards (e.g., the Nobel Prize or
membership in elite scientific societies) are granted only at extremely late stages in the career. Of
course, if scientists do value these rewards, they will logically also place implicit value on
activities which help ensure intellectual credit for discoveries. In particular, scientists will attempt
to construct an individual research agenda, including the freedom to (a) prioritize their research
activities and (b) pursue a given research topic over a long period of time. Simply put, for the
priority-based system to be effective, scientists must display a “taste” for Science.8
The priority-based reward system (and the associated “taste” for Science) generate several
implications which can resolve key empirical puzzles about Science both as a knowledge
production system and as an input into technological innovation. For example, the history of
Science is marked by near-simultaneous discovery of the same finding by multiple sets of
researchers;9 as pointed out first by Merton (1973), the priority-based reward system results quite
naturally in “racing” between teams of researchers, each attempting to establish a claim of priority
over the others.10, 11

relate directly to central features of the underlying phenomena.
8
As a profession-specific value, a “taste” for Science is likely concentrated among individuals in research-oriented
careers. However, Science is not the only profession which may place intrinsic value on profession-specific goals.
Physicians claim to value the Hippocratic Oath, and private law firms often espouse “justice” as a goal of their practice.
Scott Morton and Poldony (1999) suggest that intrinsic preferences for “quality” in the California wine industry may
impact the structure of product market competition.
9
An almost endless number of cases of multiples exist (Lamb and Easton, 1985), ranging from the dispute between
Newton and Leibniz over calculus (Merton, 1973) to the “race” to discover the DNA structure (Watson, 1968) to the
simultaneous development in 1973 of option theory by Black and Scholes and Merton’s son Robert J. Merton.
10
To the extent that Science provides no rewards for “second-place” and key questions are articulated in advance of
their resolution, “science” races may be empirically more salient than patent races (Stern, 1995).
11
Other more subtle implications of the priority-based system can also be derived, including (a) the existence of
“invisible colleges” whereby scientists value the opinion of researchers who work on similar problems outside of their
home institution (Price and Beaver, 1966), and (b) professional investments to “adjudicate” priority claims, even by
individuals with no direct stake in who receives credit (Zuckerman and Merton, 1971). Stephan (1996) and Dasgupta
and David (1994) discuss some of the potential economic impact of these effects.

7

From the perspective of this paper, a more central implication of the priority-based reward
system is that its expected rewards are increasing in researcher ability. Since intellectual priority
is determined as the result of time-dependent “winner-take-all” contests, a relatively small number
of the most able scientists are able to receive credit for the lion’s share of important discoveries
(Cole and Cole, 1973). Over time, scientists with prior successes are able to attract greater
resources (money, students, etc…) and be more fully informed about novel opportunities for
progress on particular topics or phenomena (e.g., through coauthorships or participation at
scientific meetings). This dynamic feedback between past success and the probability of future
success (referred to as the Matthew Effect in the sociology of science (Merton, 1973)) suggests
that the value of participation in Science is increasing in ability.
Perhaps surprisingly, little formal economic analysis (and even less empirical work) exists
concerning the priority-based reward system. 12 However, two recent streams of mostly informal
research have begun to address the distinct economic implications of the sociological evidence. In
the first stream, David and Dasgupta (1987; 1994) explore the Mertonian insight directly and
evaluate how the assumption that scientists (as a group) are attempting to maximize the flow of
new knowledge influences the economic efficiency of the priority-based reward system. 13
Dasgupta and David argue that, relative to a system in which knowledge production is rewarded
purely by monetary rents, the priority-based reward system is relatively efficient. On the one
hand, the priority-based system discourages shirking, since lower effort is directly associated with
lower probability of reward. On the other hand, the system encourages maximal knowledge
diffusion, since scientists will spend effort publicizing their results in order to achieve as much
credit as possible for their ideas. Given that scientists are attempting to maximize the rate of
production and diffusion of scientific knowledge, the priority-based reward system is an extremely
effective mechanism for achieving their goals.14

12

On the other hand, there are a host of studies which examine scientists’ behavior in order to evaluate some other
aspect of economic theory unrelated to knowledge production per se (e.g., Freeman’s seminal studies of scientific labor
markets (1976) or Levin and Stephan’s careful test of Becker’s life-cycle human capital model (1991)). See Stephan
(1996) for an extremely informative synthesis of this work.
13
In other words, they examine the reward system’s social efficiency, conditional on a taste for scientific progress.
14
David and Dasgupta acknowledge several important inefficiencies associated with Science, most notably the
possibility of overinvestment and overnarrowness in research due to racing effects. As well, it is useful to emphasize

8

While Dasgupta and David evaluate the efficiency properties of Science from the
scientist’s perspective, Rosenberg (1990), Cohen and Levinthal (1989, 1990) and Arora and
Gambardella (1994) examine how profit-maximizing firms might exploit Science for their own
purposes. Specifically, given that one of the distinctive features of Science is its tendency to
produce knowledge spillovers, then it may be worthwhile for a private firm to adopt a Scienceoriented research approach in order to gain earlier and more detailed access to new discoveries.
While scientific results are public in the sense that they are available in scientific journals, being
able to evaluate the importance of novel scientific discoveries and being aware of results prior to
their formal publication depends on participation in Science. In other words, private firms who
would like to exploit novel scientific knowledge must purchase a “ticket of admission” which pays
itself off in terms of higher R&D productivity and a higher rate of technological innovation
(Rosenberg, 1990).15
At one level, there is no inherent conflict between these two propositions in the “new”
economics of science. It is possible that scientists possess a taste for participating in Science
(referred to as the Preference hypothesis), and, some firms may find it worthwhile to have their
researchers participate in Science in order to capture the expected benefits associated with
spillovers (referred to as the Productivity hypothesis).16 However, the economic impact of these
two effects do differ, most notably for their impact on the employment relationship. While the
Preference effect will contribute to a negative association between Science and wages (i.e., there
will be a compensating differential), the Productivity effect will contribute to a positive
association between Science and wages (to the extent that firms and researchers engage in “rentsharing”).
However, prior empirical work, which has focused almost exclusively on the relationship
between Science and performance, has mostly (a) confounded these effects with each other and

that their analysis is primarily normative and does not focus on the empirical manifestations of the taste for Science.
15
More precisely, if a commercial “prize” is available to the first firm who translates a scientific advance into a novel
technology, then firms have incentives to gain early access to results and to be able to assess the importance of novel
discoveries; according to many observers, participation in Science by at least some members of the firm’s research staff
seems to be an efficient way to achieve these goals (Hicks, 1995).
16
A fully specified model might place limits on the share of activity attributable to the profit-maximizers, insofar as this
group may tend to exhibit free-riding in the absence of intrinsic preferences. Conditions for the existence of a priority-

9

(b) confounded both effects with the possibility that Science-oriented firms simply employ better
researchers. Consider the evidence from the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries cited in
favor of the Productivity hypothesis. Pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms differ quite
markedly in terms of their scientific orientation (Gamberdella, 1995; Cockburn, Henderson, and
Stern, 1999),17 and these differences are correlated with differences in performance (Henderson
and Cockburn, 1994; Gambardella, 1995; Zucker and Darby, 1996; 1998). While it is true that
such evidence is consistent with the Productivity hypothesis (as emphasized by the literature),
these findings are equally consistent with the Preference hypothesis. Specifically, to the extent
that a “taste” for Science is reflected in the labor market for scientists, then those firms who offer
a scientifically oriented research environment will be able to offer lower wages, conditional on
scientist quality. The presence of a compensating differential implies that those (inframarginal)
firms who adopt Science will earn a quasi-rent which may be reflected in profits.18
In addition, estimates of the empirical impact of Science are confounded with the
possibility that science-oriented firms employ more able scientists. This correlation between
Science and researcher ability arises from the internal logic of the priority-based reward system.
On the one hand, higher-quality researchers may be willing to trade off more income to earn the
higher expected “prestige” rewards associated with their ability. On the other hand, firms who
employ higher-quality scientists may find participating in Science more attractive; with their better
reputations, these researchers will gain better access to the external scientific community, be
invited to more prestigious and cutting-edge conferences, coauthor with higher-quality university
researchers, and be asked to review or referee more important discoveries (Zucker and Darby,
1996).19 Consequently, without detailed controls for scientist ability, empirical assessments of the

based equilibrium is an interesting area for future work but beyond the scope of the current paper.
17
For example, some firms, such as Genentech, closely resemble a university biology department (i.e., firm scientists
collaborate with university researchers, publish in the public scientific hierarchy, and are promoted according to their
external scientific reputation); other firms specifically eschew Science (i.e., according to one executive, “why should I let
my people publish? It’s just a waste of time that could be spent in the search for new drugs.” (Cockburn, Henderson,
and Stern, 1999).
18
Henderson and Cockburn (1994) acknowledge this possibility. Given that science-oriented firms are indeed taking
advantage of a costly-to-imitate resource advantage, both the Preference and Productivity hypotheses are consistent with
their more general interpretation that such effects provide evidence for firm-specific “competence.”
19
Zucker and Darby (1996) and Zucker, Darby and Brewer (1998) present evidence that biotechnology firms are more
successful if they employ or interact (through copublication) with “star” researchers. While this evidence highlights the

10

impact of Science on performance may be biased upwards since Science may be associated with
the higher performance associated with higher-ability researcher distributions.
To sum up, the “new” economics of science is centered around explaining the economic
consequences of the priority-based reward system, and, in particular, the motivation for
participation in Science by profit-maximizing firms. Two alternative theories have emerged: (a)
the Preference hypothesis, or a “taste” for Science, and (b) the Productivity hypothesis, resulting
from the close linkage between Science and technological innovation. To the extent that both are
consistent with participation by at least some firms in Science, prior research has not cleanly
distinguished between these alternatives. However, the two theories do offer separable
implications, specifically for the employment relationship. Scientifically oriented firms should be
able to recruit researchers at a discount under the Preference hypothesis; under the Productivity
hypothesis, Science-oriented firms will likely share some of the positive rents associated with their
superior knowledge production. Disentangling the relative salience of these competing effects
will depend, however, on controlling for differences in researcher quality. The remainder of this
paper explores the wedge between these two theories more closely.

III.

A Simple Economic Model of Science and Wages
This section builds on the qualitative discussion and develops a simple economic model

incorporating (a) a taste for Science, (b) the Productivity effect, (c) a distribution of talent among
scientists, and (d) rent-sharing between firms and scientists. This model is used to derive the
equilibrium relationship between Science and wages, scientist quality, and firm performance. In
the next section, these results are used to demonstrate the expected bias in empirical work which
does not account for differences in talent and motivates the development of the multiple job offers
methodology.
The model is composed of two stages. In the first stage, firm j chooses whether to adopt
a scientific orientation for its R&D department (SCI = 1, else SCI = 0).20 In the second stage,

potential importance of the human capital distribution, they do not explicitly distinguish the underlying economic forces
leading to such a bias or the impact of these structural characteristics on economic observables.
20
As discussed in Section II, participation in Science involves doing research which involves the formulation and

11

firms hire a single researcher with observable ability γi. As noted earlier, the population of
researchers is subject to an extremely skewed distribution of talent and so this variance is directly
incorporated into the model. For firm j, the quality of worker i (the most attractive scientist who
applies for a job at firm j) is drawn from a firm-specific distribution, g j (γ ) , bounded below at
zero and with mean γ j .21 Each scientist’s utility from a job offer is a function of the offered wage
and the preference for a science-oriented research environment:22
U i = α 0 + α S γ i SCI j + w j

(1)

Scientists of higher ability place higher value on a science-oriented research environment; as
discussed earlier, this interaction is strongly implied by the internal logic of the priority-based
reward system and the ever-increasing rewards from “prestige.”23 Firms, on the other hand, earn
profits according to the ability of hired scientists, the wages paid to these employees ( w j ), and
their scientific orientation:
π i , j = γ i ( β 0 + β S SCI j ) − wi , j − δ SCI j

(2)

While firms pay a fixed fee to adopt a scientific orientation,24 the benefits that the firm
receives from adopting a scientific orientation depends on the quality of the scientist. Like our
assumption about the interaction in (1), the interaction in (2) is motivated by the nature of the
priority-based reward system: higher-quality scientists will have better access to the external

testing of theories and results in public disclosure of findings through the academic publication process; however,
science-oriented firms, in achieving the goals of Science, will also tend to (a) allow researchers discretion in choosing
new research projects or continuing old ones and (b) tend to base promotion decisions on a researcher’s external
scientific reputation. The model does not distinguish between the elements of this bundle of characteristics.
21
Alternatively, one could assume that the firm employs N researchers of known quality with mean ability γ j .
22

To highlight the relationship between the wages from research jobs and scientific orientation, I adopt Rosen’s hedonic
characteristics approach (1974; 1986) and further assume that (a) each scientist supplies one unit of labor inelastically,
(b) there is a competitive (no search cost) labor market for jobs where SCI=0, (c) all firms observe the same information
about each scientist, (d) firms cannot verify the characteristics of competing job offers (until they are accepted), and (e)
except for differences in talent, all scientists share the same utility function. As such, the model abstracts away from
some of the more subtle issues which arise in the context of hedonic wage determination when (a) workers’ preferences
for nonpecuniary characteristics are heterogeneous (Hwang, et al, 1992) or (b) the nonpecuniary characteristic has
continuous support, all jobs require substantial search, and firms differ in the cost of providing the nonpecuniary benefit
(Hwang, et al (1998)).
23
As well, this interaction could represent a “reduced-form” income effect (Weiss, 1976; Sattinger, 1977).
24
One could imagine δ as the per-scientist cost of sending scientists to conferences, financing a staff to approve
scientific articles, or the budget for discretionary research activities (e.g., specialized materials or equipment).

12

scientific community and will be able to monitor external developments more skillfully than lesstalented colleagues. In other words, the benefits from Science are skill-biased.
Firms who adopt Science earn a quasi-rent, which is increasing in γi. However, if (a) the
firm faces a search cost for new scientists and (b) scientists can (credibly) threaten to receive
additional job offers from other science-oriented firms, then scientists may extract some of this
quasi-rent in wage bargaining.25 To account for this possibility, I follow recent work on rentsharing and incorporate a “rent-splitting” parameter, φ ∈(0,1) , which determines the allocation of
the quasi-rent between scientist and firm (Abowd and Lemieux, 1993; van Reenen, 1996).

As a

result, the second stage wage equilibrium is given by:

wi*, j = γ i β0 + γ i (φ β S − αS ) SCI j

(3)

Equation (3) describes the empirical relationship between wages and scientific orientation,
conditional on the quality of scientists. As long as the compensating differential parameter, αS, is
larger (smaller) than that part of the quasi-rent extracted by the scientist, then wages will be
decreasing (increasing) in the scientific orientation of the firm. As well, (3) implies the solution to
firm j’s first stage problem of whether to adopt Science in the first place:
SCI j = 1 iff γ j >

δ
(1 − φ ) β S − α S

(4)

This latter condition suggests that a key characteristic of Science – that better scientists
earn proportionally higher benefits from engagement in Science – implies a structural positive
relationship between the firm’s expected ability to recruit high-quality scientists and its adoption
of a science-oriented research strategy. Finally, equations (3) and (4) can be used to characterize
the relationship between Science and performance. Specifically, plugging (3) and (4) into (2) and
examining the expected “boost” to performance associated with those firms who are observed to
adopt Science in equilibrium:
E (π SCI =1 − π SCI = 0 ) = E (γ | SCI = 1)( (1 − φ ) β S + α S ) − δ
25

(5)

More precisely, each scientist’s bargaining position depends on (a) her outside option associated with the competitive
market in non-science-oriented jobs, (b) the average expected cost of searching out another science-oriented offer and
(c) the expected cost to the firm of finding another job candidate of similar expected value. The presence of these
competing sources of bargaining power can yield a rent-sharing equilibrium (Mortensen, 1990; Abowd and Lemieux,

13

Firms who expect to face a more favorable human capital pool will adopt Science and
both earn some portion of the quasi-rent and pay lower quality-adjusted wages. In other words,
the performance effects of an advantage in access to talent are “magnified” through its impact on
both the Preference and Productivity effects.26

IV.

An Empirical Model of Science and Wages
Both the wage and performance equations are functions of the Productivity and the

Preference parameters, αS and βS; consistent estimation of either (3) or (5) can therefore provide
insight into the precise motivation for and welfare implications of the adoption of Science.
Whereas π is increasing in both parameters, αS and βS exert competing effects on w* . As such,
examining the labor market for scientists seems like a fruitful place to begin distinguishing the
relative importance of these two effects.27 However, a central issue for empirical work is that the
potential for bias from heterogeneity in worker ability is likely to be important in the current
context. Not only is the adoption of Science predicted to covary with researcher ability according
to the underlying theory (see (4)), but the distribution of scientific ability is well-known to be
extremely skewed (Stephan, 1996). This paper addresses this problem by introducing a novel
empirical methodology which exploits the fact that in job markets for “novice” professionals (i.e.,
no prior career-oriented job experience), many candidates receive multiple job offers prior to
accepting a single employment offer. By observing more than one combination of wages and job
characteristics for each of these “novice” job candidates, this sample construction allows us
(ideally) to construct different points on the wage-characteristics curve for a randomly selected
worker at a point in time. By exploiting the specific institutions of professional labor markets,
this methodology likely leads to a substantial reduction in the bias associated with unobserved
heterogeneity.
Consider an empirical wage equation which does not account for ability heterogeneity:

1993; Hwang, et al, 1998).
26
This magnification effect may help explain why firms who locate near universities are consistently found to (a)
organize in a different fashion and (b) experience higher rates of R&D productivity.
27
I am not aware of any earlier empirical studies in the economics of science which have attempted to disentangle these
parameters, or the relative importance of the talent effect in biasing cross-sectional results.

14

wi , j = θ 0 + θ S SCI j + ε i , j

(6)

If ability, γi, is uncorrelated with the adoption of SCI, then E (θˆS ) = γ (φ β S −α S ) , or the relative
salience of the preference versus productivity effect, evaluated at the mean ability level.
However, according to (4), SCI will only be adopted by those firms who expect a sufficiently high
E (γ | SCI = 1) − γ
draw on ability and so E (θˆS − γ (φ β S − α S )) =
> 0 .28
1 − Pr( SCI = 1)

This bias combines two

sources of bias identified in earlier applications. On the one hand, higher-ability individuals will
tend to “consume” higher levels of positively valued hedonic characteristics. While earlier work
has attributed such covariation to wealth effects (Weiss, 1976; Sattinger, 1977; Rosen, 1986) or
the impact of heterogeneous preferences (Hwang et al, 1992), the current application motivates
this bias from the nature of a prestige-based reward system. On the other hand, the potential for
“skill bias” from new technologies and the associated bias for productivity studies is wellestablished (Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994; Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1998; Entorf and
Kramarz, 1998). In the current application, of course, Science is not a technology per se but an
organizational practice whose benefits to the firm are likely to be higher for higher-quality
workers.
Prior research has pursued two distinct approaches for overcoming the bias arising from
unobserved heterogeneity: (a) ability-associated control and (b) the exploitation of panel data.
While the use of control variables is often effective for settings where workers are relatively
homogenous or easily distinguished by observable characteristics such as educational attainment
or experience variates (see, e.g., Hamermash, 1984; Rosen, 1986; Kostiuk, 1990; Viscusi, 1993),
this approach will be of limited value for studying scientific labor markets since most
demographics are unlikely to distinguish between different scientists (e.g., there will be no
variation in educational attainment in a pool of PhD recipients).
The most popular alternative to the use of control variables is to exploit the use of the

28

Similarly, the model predicts a positive bias associated with not controlling for the higher level of human capital in
Science-oriented firms in a performance equation. In the model, π j = ϕ 0 + ϕ S SCI j + ε j ,

E (ϕˆ S ) = E (γ | SCI = 1) ((1 − φ ) β S + α S ) − δ > γ ((1 − φ ) β S + α S ) − δ , where the latter term is the
performance benefits from Science, accounting for researcher ability.

15

panel data at the individual level. By including a fixed effect for each individual, empirical
identification within a panel relies only on within-person variance in job characteristics and so
controls for the main source of bias described above. The principal way to observe within-person
variance in job characteristics is to restrict empirical analysis to “job switchers” (i.e., individuals
who switched their employment from one type of firm to another over the span of the observed
panel (Brown, 1980; Duncan and Holmlund, 1983)).29 However, as discussed by Gibbons and
Katz (1992), studies of job switchers are subject to their own biases. Job switching is (generally)
endogenous and reflects (a) a population of individuals who are badly “matched” in their current
positions and (b) may have gained a particularly high level of unobserved skills which are valued
on the labor market. Consequently, empirical work which focuses exclusively on job switchers
may tend to overstate the benefits from job moving for the average worker. More generally,
while panel data substantially overcomes the initial source of derived bias, current methods for
gathering panel samples are subject to important selectivity biases themselves.
Recognizing the centrality of ability in scientific labor markets (and the consequent
potential for a large amount of bias), this paper introduces a novel field-based methodology, based
on the process by which professional labor markets operate, which likely reduces the abovementioned biases. For most graduate or postdoctoral scientific researchers, a job search involves
sending out resumes to a large number of universities and firms, receiving a smaller number of
interviews with those firms, and then receiving one or more job offers before accepting a final
offer of employment. 30 I exploit two facts about this process. First, since all graduates must
engage in some job search, graduating professionals are a particularly attractive sample from the
perspective of selectivity. Second, and more importantly, prior to accepting a specific offer, many
professionals receive multiple job offers. Each offer is composed of a wage offer and job
characteristics (including scientific orientation) which are observed to the employee.31 By

29

Indeed, several important studies on the structure of wages exploit job-switching behavior in order to highlight the
importance of controlling for individual effects and to contribute a less biased estimate of parameters of direct economic
interest (Murphy and Topel, 1987; Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999; Entorf and Kramarz, 1998).
30
While I will describe the institutions of the scientific labor market, the analysis of the process by which professional
labor markets operate also largely applies for law students, post-residency physicians, MBAs , and other graduate
professional school candidates.
31
Since a formal job offers confers a legal responsibility on the firm, such offers will not be made unless the firm is

16

surveying candidates about their multiple job offers, it is therefore possible to estimate the
relationship between wages and scientific orientation, even after fully taking into account ability
heterogeneity across individuals through the inclusion of person-specific fixed effects. In other
words, the multiple job offers methodology allows us to observe different points on the wageScience curve for a randomly selected worker at a point in time ( wi , j = θ i + θ S SCI j + ε i , j ), likely
reducing the ability bias endemic to many prior studies.32
The multiple job offers methodology of course rests on several important assumptions.
First, the methodology assumes that differences in information among offering firms about the
quality and preference of candidates is uncorrelated with scientific orientation. If science-oriented
firms can judge researcher’s abilities more accurately than others, then science-oriented firms may
tend to make fewer but more attractive job offers, thus leading to a positive bias for the hedonic
coefficient. Second, the method assumes that scientific orientation is uncorrelated with alternative
unobserved sources of variation in productivity. If firms’ scientific orientation is correlated with
unobserved practices which are the structural sources of productivity gains, then the hedonic
equation will obviously be subject to omitted variable bias. Third, the method assumes that
observed job offers are comparable in terms of the “seriousness” of the offer. As much as
possible, the data were gathered just prior to the time the candidate accepted an offer; according
to survey respondents, these “final-round” offers reflected their beliefs about the job
characteristics they would be accepting if they chose an offer. Finally, the method assumes that
candidates who receive multiple job offers are drawn independently from the distribution of
candidates. While there is no structural reason to believe that ability should be associated with the
number of received offers, it is likely that individuals with more offers are drawn from a more
attractive portion of the distribution.33 While discussions with survey respondents (and
examination of the offers of single-offer candidates) suggests that the receipt of multiple job offers

willing to employ the worker under the proposed package. As well, in equilibrium, firms will not make offers which
have a zero probability of acceptance.
32
In a somewhat similar vein, Royalty (1999) exploits the observation of multiple health insurance options by individual
workers in a given firm to directly estimate the preference parameters through the direct application of the discrete
choice model.
33
The resulting selectivity bias is analogous to the phenomena identified by Gibbons and Katz (1992); the observed
sample will have higher average ability than the population.

17

is not obviously correlated with ability in this particular market, we will be careful to discuss this
source of selectivity when reviewing our results in the next several sections.

V.

Data
The data used to evaluate the hedonic wage equation for life scientists was collected using

an author-developed survey administered to life science researchers.34 The survey records
information about the experience, preferences, and decisions of individual candidates on the job
market. This section describes the sample selection procedure, and then reviews the survey and
the summary statistics for the dataset.
Sample Selection
The sample population was drawn from individuals who, with some probability, were in a
position to receive multiple private sector life sciences research job offers. To ensure
compatibility across responses, the sample is restricted to PhD biologists (though several
candidates also hold an MD). The target population was therefore current researchers who (a)
held a PhD in biology, (b) were currently searching for a permanent research position, and (c)
expressed interest in receiving offers from non-academic employers. To access this target
population, surveys were distributed to the following populations:
•

current postdoctoral researchers whose funding was expiring at four American
research institutions

•

participants in two AAAS-sponsored Biology Job Fairs (held in Cambridge, MA,
and Palo Alto, CA), the majority of whom were postdoctoral researchers

•

post-PhD biologists with resumes posted to BIOMEDNET (www.biomednet.com)

For each data source, several candidates were interviewed more extensively in order to
ensure that each group was comparable with the others (conditional on researcher quality).
Overall, data was collected from 107 biologists who received a total of 223 job offers. Non-

34

Data was gathered between June, 1998, and June, 1999 by mail and telephone interviews (and a small number of email responses). Except for a small number of individual cases, the surveys were administered prior to the time the
individual commenced working for the accepted employment offer.

18

research-oriented job offers (e.g., management consulting, software start-up management, lab
management) were excluded as were observations composed of candidates who only received one
job offer. Once these jobs are excluded, the sample includes 66 job candidates who received a
total of 166 offers; on average, each scientist with multiple job offers received 2.5 offers.
The Survey Instrument
The data are drawn from the information collected on the surveys administered to the
populations described above (see Appendix A for a copy of the survey). The goal in developing
the survey was to collect information about the relationship between the job market environment
and different element of the job offers received by life science researchers.35 The survey is
composed of five sections. The first elicits resume information about the respondent’s background
and demographics. Part II gather data about the length and outcome of the job search. In Part
III, respondents compare job offers according a number of distinct dimensions and provide an
ordinal ranking of their offers. In other words, if an individual received three offers, she would
rank these three offers in terms of an individual dimension, such as “Quality of Internal Research
Environment,” with the highest quality offer receiving a “1,” the next preferred offer a “2” and the
lowest-quality research environment rated a “3.”36 Part IV asks more concrete data about each
individual offer, denoted hereafter as cardinal data (i.e., generally comparable in magnitude and
intensity). In addition to questions about measurable characteristics (such as salary or permission
to publish in the public scientific literature), a number of questions are asked according to fivepoint Likert scales (with higher levels on the scale corresponding to higher objective rankings).
The final section of the survey gathers information about the characteristics which respondents
rank as most important in choosing to accept a research-oriented employment offer.

35

The final form of the survey resulted from an iterative process. In response to a pre-test of the survey (the results of
which are not included in the final sample), the survey was amended using feedback from both researchers with prior
experience in field-based survey work and focus group discussions with biologists who served as pre-test subjects. My
special thanks to Eric von Hippel for his detailed comments on an early draft of the survey. From the perspective of this
paper, the main change in the survey over time were to refine the descriptive wording of the scientific environment and
to divide out individual elements of the salary package (SALARY vs. BONUS, etc…).
36
With a larger sample of job offers, such ordinal data could be used in the context of a multivariate semiparametric
rank estimator (Abrevaya and Hausman, 1999), thus substantially weakening the statistical assumptions underlying the
procedure.

19

It is useful to distinguish between the use of the ordinal and cardinal data. Whereas
ordinal information provides comparative information about monetary and non-monetary
qualities of each job, the cardinal data is composed of data from each candidate where the
information about one offer is independent of the information from other offers. Both types of
information are subject to limitations. Ordinal data, by its very nature, cannot be used to provide
a measure of the intensity of different rankings either within a given job characteristic or across
characteristics. On the other hand, cardinal data is subject to various types of measurement error;
for example, the use of Likert scales in regression analysis imposes strong assumptions about how
different responses differ from each other. However, the empirical approach overcomes these
issues in two distinct ways. First, throughout the analysis, fixed individual effects are employed to
derive the principal results; by construction, this limits the measurement bias to differences across
responses within individuals. Second, the analysis evaluates both the ordinal and cardinal data,
identifying those conclusions which are robust across data types.
Variables and Summary Statistics
As mentioned earlier, the dataset is composed of 166 job offers from 66 individuals who
received multiple job offers. (see Table 1 for all variable names and definitions, Table 2 for means
and standard deviations).37 The first set of variables are ordinal in nature– each individual ranked
their jobs in order of their preference according to each dimension. Not surprisingly, the mean of
each of these variables slightly less than 2 (recall that while the average number of job offers per
respondent is 2.5, the data count each job offer as a separate observation and so individuals with a
larger number of offers appear more frequently than those with only two or three offers). The
principal dependent regressor that we will use in this context is MONETARY, or the ranking of
offers in terms of “overall monetary compensation.” The analysis focuses on evaluating the
relationship between the MONETARY rank and two elements of the scientific orientation of each
organization: first, the overall research quality (RESEARCH QUALITY) and whether

37

As mentioned earlier, we gathered demographic information but do use it in the current analysis. Briefly, most of the
sample is married (71%) male (63%), and the average age is just above 34. The average respondent applied for 15.7
jobs and received their first job offer after 4.3 months.

20

researchers have discretion in choosing their own projects (FLEXIBILTY).38 Based on the focus
group discussions and interviews, the survey also asked respondents to rank jobs according to
several control factors, such as the availability of Research Funding (FUNDING), the impact of
the job on career (CAREER), and the degree of fit between specific training (JOBFIT). While
this study takes each of these latter factors as a control variable, one could imagine separate
investigations of each. For example, the JOBFIT variable might provide information about the
degree of idiosyncratic bargaining power that a worker possesses with each employee, allowing
more nuanced evaluation of the degree of bargaining power held by the employee. As well, by
including CAREER in all regressions, the analysis explicitly distinguishes between participation in
Science as a career-advancement strategy and intrinsic preferences for a Science-oriented research
environment.
The second set of variables are based on the cardinal data drawn from the Job Offer
Record (Part IV of the Survey). The dependent variable is the baseline salary associated with
each offer, SALARY. The average SALARY offer is a little more than $60,000 though the
standard deviation is quite large. Of course, SALARY only captures one dimension of the
monetary compensation package, so we are careful to show that each of our findings is robust to
the inclusion of controls which may be associated with other dimensions of earnings in the firm
(BONUS and STOCK_DUMMY) and long-term career opportunities (PROMOTION). The
STOCK_DUMMY variable (whether the employee received stock options), in particular, may be
an important indicator that the current salary is only a small portion of the expected (but risky)
lifetime compensation associated with a job offer; while this control is imperfect, robustness to
this eliminates a principal alternative explanation for the results.
Several different cardinal variables are used to evaluate the scientific orientation of each
organization: (a) whether researchers are allowed to continue to publish discoveries
(PERMIT_PUB), (b) how strong the incentives for publication are (INCENT_PUB (rated on a 15 scale), and (c) whether researchers are allowed to continue postdoctoral research projects
(CONTINUE RESEARCH). Interestingly, while most research positions do permit researchers

38

The survey includes another element of the scientific orientation (Publication Incentives) but the wording of this
question led to a relatively low response rate of usable responses.

21

to publish (the mean is over .9), there is substantial variance among offers in terms of the
incentives to publish and just under 50% of positions allow researchers to continue their prior
research agenda. Finally, though not a central feature of Science per se, the analysis includes the
availability of access to cutting-edge equipment (EQUIPMENT), a Likert scale variable, which
serves as a control variable describing an alternative (and potentially important) aspect of the
research environment.39
In addition to the control variables for career opportunities, and other aspects of monetary
compensation and the research environment, each job offer is coded with a JOBTYPE. Six
different jobtypes are included in the analysis: Established Firm, Start-up Firm, Government Lab,
Medical Center/Hospital, University Faculty, University Postdoc (see Table 3 for the distribution).
Though the plurality of job offers are received from established firms and start-up firms, our main
analysis does include jobs from the public and university sectors. The focus groups and
interviews suggested that, while public sector and medical center employment is perceived to be
quite similar to employment by private firms (the only difference being the formal status of the
organization), academic university jobs and postdoctoral positions are only imperfect substitutes
and may offer a number of job characteristics which are not captured in a parsimonious statistical
design (e.g., collegiality, the option value of moving to the private sector, etc…). As a result, the
analysis carefully establishes the degree to which the results are robust to the inclusion of these
control variables for the type of employer and also to restricting the sample only to non-academic
positions (i.e., excluding university and postdoctoral positions).
Before turning to the empirical results, two final issues arise in terms of the sample. While
there are 166 job offers for which an alternative job offer for that candidate is observed (i.e., it is a
multiple), many surveys were only completed with either the ordinal or cardinal data but not both.
As a result, the final sample in the ordinal analysis includes data on 136 job offers, while the final
sample in the cardinal analysis includes data on 123 job offers. In addition, for some of these
offers some of the control variables are missing (e.g., the respondent did not report whether stock

39

As mentioned earlier, the survey actually includes much more detailed information about each offer, including the
source of each job offer (and how applicants found out about the job opportunity, etc…). While such issues are
interesting in their own right, they are unrelated to the direct question of the relationship between Science and wages,
and so I defer analysis of these variables for later work.

22

options were received). For any variable which includes missing values, a dummy variable has
been included which is equal to one if the variable is missing for that observation and is zero
otherwise. With these issues in place, we now turn to the empirical findings.

VI.

Empirical Results
This section presents the empirical evidence about the relationship between different

measures of monetary compensation and the scientific orientation of organizations. The analysis
is divided into two distinct sections. First, the analysis focuses on the ordinal (ranked) data,
establishing a negative relationship between individuals’ ranking of jobs according to their
monetary compensation and their ranking of these jobs according to (a) the quality of the internal
research environment and (b) the flexibility of the job in terms of research project selection. This
evidence is interpreted to be consistent with the relative salience of the Preference hypothesis.
The analysis then turns to the cardinal data. Conditional on the presence of individual fixed
effects, offered wages are declining in (a) the permission to publish in the scientific literature, (b)
permission to continue postdoctoral research projects, and (c) in the presence of an incentive
system based on scientific publication. These findings depend critically on controlling for
individual heterogeneity; cross-sectional comparisons result in the (expected) upward bias to the
measured compensating differential.
Ordinal Data
The discussion begins in Table 4, where the offers have been cross-tabulated according to
two distinct dimensions in each panel (recall that the job ranked highest for a given dimension is
assigned a value of one for that characteristic). Tables 4A and 4B present the cross-tabulation
between MONETARY and (a) JOBFIT and (b) CAREER. The majority of the rankings are on or
just off the diagonal – jobs ranked highly in terms of fit or career advancement also tend to rank
highly in terms of monetary compensation. In contrast, Tables 4C and 4D presents MONETARY
cross-tabulated with the RESEARCH QUALITY and FLEXIBILITY rankings, respectively.
The distribution of these rankings is much more dispersed. For example, out of 53 individuals
who reported the ordinal rankings, only 16 (30%) chose to rank the job with highest monetary
23

compensation as highest on FLEXIBILITY. In other words, the majority of jobs ranked most
highly in terms of MONETARY were ranked as less than highest in terms of RESEARCH
QUALITY or FLEXIBILITY.40
Table 5 extend this logic. For each regression in Table 5, the dependent variable is the
MONETARY rank of each job. Each regression includes both a full set of individual fixed effects
as well as controls for JOBFIT, CAREER, and FUNDING.41 Beginning with the full sample of
observed job offers, (5-1) and (5-3) demonstrate that MONETARY is negatively correlated with
RESEARCH QUALITY and FLEXIBILITY, respectively. These results continue to hold even
when we exclude all purely academic jobs (university positions and postdoctoral appointments),
though the statistical significance on the FLEXIBILITY coefficient becomes marginal (see (5-2)
and (5-4)). Finally, in (5-5), the effect of the RESEARCH QUALITY and FLEXIBILITY
rankings are both included with both effects remaining statistically significant and of roughly the
same magnitude as in the specifications where each was included individually.
These results provides preliminary evidence for the salience of the Preference effect in
shaping the relationship between monetary compensation and the scientific orientation of the firm.
Research environments which allow workers access to high-quality research colleagues and an
ability to choose their own projects (both of these aspects will be instrumentally important for
scientists who have a taste for Science) tend to offer less attractive monetary compensation. Of
course, the methodology for evaluating the quantitative importance of ordinal data is problematic
since one cannot concretely identify the intensity associated with an ordinal ranking.42 The
analysis is therefore extended through the analysis of the cardinal data, to which we now turn.
Cardinal Data
The analysis of the cardinal data proceeds in three stages. First, we begin the analysis by
examining the pairwise correlations among the key variables. Second, we examine a baseline
40

As well, cross-tabulations between elements of the job itself were examined (available from the author). To the extent
that several of these distributions are along the diagonal (e.g., the cross-tabulation of FLEXIBILITY AND CAREER),
controlling for this collinearity in the regression will be important.
41
The results are robust to the inclusion of different control variables (or subsets of the current controls).
42
If we take the estimates at face value, the results suggests that as the value of RESEARCH QUALITY increases by
one, the predicted value of MONETARY declines approximately .3.

24

regression and compare the results depending on whether fixed researcher effects are included.
This allows us to evaluate both the equilibrium relationship between Science and wages as well as
providing a glimpse at the bias arising from not controlling for ability effects. Finally, we review
the regression evidence for the cardinal data more thoroughly, highlighting the robustness (or not)
of each of the results as well as the ability to distinguish between more fine-grained hypotheses.
Similar to the cross-tabulation analysis with the ordinal data, we begin our analysis by
examining the pairwise correlations among our key variables (Table 6). These unconditional
correlations are cross-sectional and so do not control for scientist quality. It is useful to note that,
in this cross-section, SALARY is statistically uncorrelated with the elements of a firm’s scientific
orientation (PERMIT_PUB, CONTINUE RESEARCH, and INCENT_PUB). However,
SALARY is positively correlated with the BONUS associated with the offer, the availability of
STOCK OPTIONS, and (more weakly) with PROMOTION opportunities. Based on these
pairwise results, we ensure that our regression results are robust to their inclusion throughout.43
In addition, the individual elements of Science are correlated positively with each other. For
example, firms who provide incentives for employees to publish also tend to allow researchers to
continue research projects from prior employment (an agenda-continuance effect). As a result, in
Tables 7A-7C, we first explore the relationship between SALARY and each of the individual
aspects of Science separately; in Table 7D, the elements are combined into a single empirical
model.
In Table 7A, we examine the baseline regression of the relationship between the (natural
log of ) offered SALARY44 and PERMIT_PUB (whether the employees is permitted to publish
results in the public scientific literature). As mentioned earlier, this is, in some sense, the most
direct test of the relationship between Science and wages; the permission to publish is the
hallmark of Science as an institution. (7a-1) reports the unconditional pairwise correlation
between SALARY and PERMITPUB, which is both quantitatively small (.03) and statistically
insignificant. In sharp contrast, once we include individual fixed effects (7a-2), the parameter

43

Actually, given the high collinearity between STOCK and BONUS we include both of these variables in only some
regressions and focus on the more relevant STOCK variable for the remainder.
44
While the hedonic is in the form of ln(SALARY) throughout, the results are robust to the use SALARY level.

25

estimate becomes both negative and significant (-.27), both statistically and quantitatively.
These two estimates allow us to directly evaluate the salience of key effects identified in
the economic model. First, at the point estimate provided in (7a-2), γ (φ β S − α S ) = − .27 . In
other words, at the mean human capital level in the observed sample, the Preference effect
outweighs the impact of the Productivity effect and implies a 27% salary discount for Scienceoriented firms. Second, the difference between the cross-sectional results and the fixed effects
results provides information about the “size” of the ability bias effect. Once again taking the
results from (7a-1) and (7a-2) at face value, the estimates imply (a) that we can reject the nonfixed-effect regressions and (b) that the size of the bias is approximately equal to 30% of observed
average wages. Examining the distribution of the researcher fixed effects (Figure 1) illustrates the
magnitude of the researcher ability effects more directly. According to Figure 1, the inter-quartile
distribution ranges from a nearly 40% wage decline for the 25% scientists (relative to the median
scientist) to nearly a 40% wage increase for the scientist at the 75% level. These results are
perhaps even more striking when one considers that the sample conditions on a population of
PhD holders. While the relatively small sample size and the simple specification suggest that these
results should be treated with caution, the extremely large estimated magnitudes suggest that
there seem to be important differences based on whether jobs incorporate PERMIT_PUB and
according to the perceived ability of the researcher by the job market.
These two quite striking results in the baseline model are robust to the inclusion of several
different control structures. First, consistent with the correlation patterns from Table 7, we
include the PROMOTION, BONUS and STOCK variables; the coefficient on PERMIT_PUB
remains negative (7a-3). As well, in (7a-4) and (7a-5), we include dummies for each type of
employer type (listed in Table 3); the results suggest that the PERMIT_PUB result does not
simply reflect differences between these types. In particular, this suggests that the results are not
being driven purely by differences between the following organizational forms: (a) university
versus private job offers or (b) established versus start-up firms. Indeed, in (7a-5), we include
controls for both employer type and the other observed elements of the offer; the results are
negative and of the same magnitude.
Finally, in (7a-6), the sample is restricted to include only non-academic jobs (thus we
26

include offers from established firms, start-up firms, government labs, and medical centers in the
analysis). The coefficient remains negative, though the parameter is somewhat smaller than earlier
regressions and becomes only marginally significant. In other words, even if one focuses only on
non-academic employment offers, the labor market for life scientists reflects a wage discount for
those firms who allow their scientists to continue publication in the scientific literature.
Tables 7B and 7C employ a similar set of regressions to establish how wages are impacted
by two other elements of the firm’s scientific orientation (CONTINUE and INCENT_PUB). We
first examine the impact of allowing the research to continue research on projects begun prior to
employment. As with PERMIT_PUB, there is a marked difference in the coefficient depending
on whether one controls for individual fixed effects (which result in a negative coefficient on
CONTINUE). Similarly, this negative result is robust to the inclusion of the PROMOTION and
STOCK_DUMMY variables. In contrast to the PERMIT_PUB result, however, this finding
seems to be driven, at least in part, by differences among employer types; after one controls
additionally for employer type, the coefficient remains negative but marginally loses significance at
the 10% level (t=1.58).
In table 7C, we examine the relationship between SALARY and two additional elements
of the firm’s scientific orientation (INCENT_PUB and EQUIPMENT). With respect to the
incentives to publish in the public scientific literature, the results reinforce the earlier findings and
are consistent with the presence of a quantitatively significant compensating differential which
reduces wages for firms who offer high levels of INCENT_PUB. As before, this result remains
significant even when one restricts the sample to non-academic employers. On the other hand,
using the full sample, there seems to be a wage premium associated with employment at firms
who offer cutting-edge scientific equipment. However, this result is clearly not robust to the
exclusion of academic employment offers, suggesting caution when interpreting this finding. As
well, in contrast to Tables 7A & 7B, the results for INCENT_PUB and EQUIPMENT do not
depend on the inclusion of individual fixed effects; the compensating differential is estimated to be
negative even when uses the cross-sectional dimension of the dataset.
Finally, Table 7D presents two combination models which allow us to evaluate the ability
to separately distinguish the separate impacts of different elements of the firm’s scientific
27

orientation. The evidence when one does not control for human capital differences is extremely
ambiguous. While INCENT_PUB is negative and significant, PERMIT_PUB is positive (and
nearly significant) while CONTINUE RESEARCH is positive though not significant. When one
turns to the fixed effects analysis, however, the analysis consistently reflects a negative association
between salary and scientific orientation. While the separate effects for INCENT_PUB and
PERMIT_PUB cannot be distinguished (in every attempted regression, one was negative and
significant and the other was negative but insignificant), the results suggest a joint impact for
these two regressors, and also for CONTINUE and EQUIPMENT.

VII. Discussion and Conclusion
Though the sample size is small, the results strongly point towards the possibility that
scientists pay a compensating differential to participate in Science. While the theoretical
relationship between Science and wages is ambiguous (depending on the relative salience of the
Preference and Productivity effects, and the degree of rent-sharing), the empirical evidence
suggests that the balance is tilted in favor of the Preference effect, at least for researchers seeking
employment as research biologists. Offers from Science-oriented firms are ranked lower in terms
of their monetary compensation and indeed, this is reflected in lowered offered wages.

This

finding turns out to be robust across different characterizations of participation in Science and
across different samples and control structures. However, the results depend critically on
controlling for differences among workers in terms of their ability (which was accomplished by
the introduction of the multiple job offer methodology). Indeed, cross-sectional analysis which
did not include individual effects leads to a substantial upward bias on the parameter describing
the empirical relationship between wages and Science.
Three additional issues stand out from this analysis. First, these results have potential
implications for the estimates of the benefits from science-oriented practices in the context of
prior R&D productivity studies. As discussed in Section II, prior studies have focused almost
exclusively on the Productivity effect in interpreting the R&D productivity “boost” associated
with science-oriented practices. Such an interpretation ignores two sources of bias: the wagesavings associated with the compensating differential and the unmeasured correlated between the
28

adoption of scientific practices and average researcher ability. While prior researchers have
acknowledged the possibility of bias (Henderson and Cockburn, 1994), the results, taken at their
face value, suggest that these two effects may explain an important portion (perhaps even a
majority) of the overall measured effect (which is equal to approximately a 40% productivity
increase according to Henderson and Cockburn (1994)).
Consider the specification which speaks most directly to these prior results, which focused
on the “Incentives to Publish in the Scientific Literature” (see Table 7C). Even in the model in
which all non-academic offers are excluded, the estimated compensating differential over the full
“range” of the Likert scale variable (the same comparison used by Henderson and Cockburn
(1994)) is equal to 20%. Taking this as a baseline (which also corresponds to the approximate
median estimates across all the specifications for all practices), the estimates imply that a Scienceoriented firm will pay workers 20% less, on average; if researcher salaries compose two-thirds of
overall R&D expenditures (and if we assume that the cost of participating in Science is a sunk
cost unreflected in current R&D budgets), then science-oriented firms can employ nearly 15%
more scientists (of equal ability), or approximately 40% of the total measured productivity effect.

In addition, the measured productivity effect is potentially biased by the fact that scienceoriented firms employ better researchers who both have higher returns to participation in Science
and will be associated with higher R&D productivity (see FN 28). Indeed, while we cannot
estimate the magnitude of this bias without a full examination of the relationship between Science
and accepted job offers, a preliminary analysis suggests that there is a significant correlation (.24)
between the estimated fixed effect (drawn from the sample in Figure 1) and the probability of
accepting a job with PERMIT_PUB = 1. While this calculation is obviously preliminary, it
suggests the possibility that the R&D productivity results do in fact reflect some degree of
unmeasured ability bias.
Taken together, the evidence suggests a potentially important role for ability bias and
compensating differentials in understanding the productivity results. Of course, it is possible that
the results depend on the fact that the sample is drawn from an “extreme” case – biologists with
PhDs are perhaps uniquely associated with a “taste” for Science. While the generality of these
29

results to a wide sample of biologists, to other scientific disciplines, and to researchers without
their PhD, remains an open area for future research, it should be highlighted that life sciences
researchers now compose over one-third of all graduating PhDs in the natural sciences (National
Science Foundation, 1999).
Beyond the direct application of these results to research on the productivity and labor
market consequences of participation in Science, the framework and empirical results may have
more general implications for future research on the economics of science and technical change
and for public policy analysis. Specifically, while there is broad (though not unanimous)
agreement that basic research of some type should be subsidized as the result of the
appropriability issues, the exact form of that subsidy is much more contentious (Wright, 1983).
While much public policy discussion argues that researchers – even basic researchers – should be
evaluated on their ability to long-term commercial consequence of their research proposals
(Committee for Economic Development, 1998), others contend that the peer-reviewed scientific
research funding and publication system operates according to an internal logic which can be
easily undermined by providing high-powered explicit incentives for applied commercial output
(David and Dasgupta, 1994; Nelson and Rosenberg, 1994). The plausibility of this latter view is
made much more salient in the presence of a distinct “taste” for Science on the part of
researchers. Indeed, from an extreme perspective, one could argue that the peer-reviewed
funding and publication system is in fact more efficient, even from a purely commercial
perspective. If there is a significant compensating differential under such a system, then the total
amount of scientific research per dollar of expenditure will be higher under this latter system; as
long as the level of spillovers per unit of scientific research are not sufficiently lower under peer
review than under the more focused system, then the total spillover into technological innovation
may be increasing in the degree of insulation from commercial incentives.
Finally, perhaps the key finding of this paper is that a professional ethic – participation in
the public scientific community – has real effects on an economic observables (the wage) and may
have effects on observed productivity. The relatively large quantitative impact of this is
particularly surprising since, as opposed to most on-the-job amenities (such as safety or benefits
programs), a “taste” for Science is most likely not universally shared among all workers but is
30

concentrated among workers in research-oriented careers. Moreover, scientists are by no means
the only professional community in which profession-specific values may influence behavior. For
example, if physicians claim to value the health of their patients (as they often do), do physicians
pay to cure their patients? In particular, do HMOs who offer higher-quality health care (in terms
of fewer restrictions on costly procedures and the like) extract a discount on the salary they offer
new physicians as a result of their pro-patient reputation? Similarly, lawyers often claim to value
justice in the legal system. Is this reflected in lower wages for those firms who participate in pro
bono activities or who are more directly involved in courtroom activity or appellate work (as
opposed to corporate law)? Perhaps surprisingly, following the seminal study of Friedman and
Kuznets (1954), there has been almost no systematic economic analysis of the impact of
professional ethics on labor markets (though Weisbrod (1983) is an interesting (though not
dispositive) exception). This paper provides something of a foundation to perform these future
studies.45 Similar to the current context, accounting for human capital effects will be paramount
in any professional labor market; however, the multiple job offers methodology will also apply in
these markets. The average law student receives several job offers during their law school career,
and, after residency, many physicians receive multiple offers from different HMOs. Moreover,
relative to the number of postdoctoral biologists seeking first-time employment in the private
sector, law schools and medical residencies offer potentially much larger cohort populations from
which to gather data on multiple job offers. Such studies are left for future research.

45

For example, Miller (1999) employs the multiple job offers methodology to evaluate the value placed on diversity and
mentoring programs by minority MBA candidates. While not a profession-specific intrinsic preference, Miller
highlights how the methodology can be extended to evaluate the economic impact of group-specific preferences.

31

REFERENCES
Abowd, J. and Lemieux, T. (1993). “The Effects of Product Market Competition on Collective Bargaining
Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 pp. 9831014.
Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., and D. Margolis (1999). “High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,”
Econometrica 67(2) pp. 251-333.
Abrevaya, J. and J. Hausman (1999). “Semiparametric Estimation with Mismeasured Dependent Variables:
An Application to Duration Models for Unemployment Spells,” mimeo, MIT Department of Economics.
Arora, A. and A. Gambardella (1993). “Evaluating Technological Information and Using It,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 24(1) pp. 91-114.
Arrow, K. (1962). “Economics of Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity ed. R.R. Nelson Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Autor, D.H., Katz, L:.F. and A.B. Krueger (1998). “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the
Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4) pp. 1169-1214.
Berman, E., Bound, J. and Z. Griliches (1994). “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor in U.S.
Manufacturing Industry: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109 pp. 367-397.
Brown, C. (1980). “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
Cockburn, I., Henderson, R. and S. Stern (1999). “The Diffusion of Science-Driven Drug Discovery:
Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research,” NBER WP 7359.
Cohen, W. and R. Levin (1989). “Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Structure,” Handbook of
Industrial Organization eds. R. Schmalansee and R. Willig. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cohen, W. and D. Levinthal (1989). “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D,” Economic Journal,
99(397): 569-596.
Cohen, W. and D. Levinthal (1990). “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation,"
Administrative Science Quarterly, 1990.
Cole, J. and S. Cole (1973). Social Stratification in Science. University of Chicago Press.
Committee for Economic Development (1998). America’s Basic Research: Prosperity Through Discovery.
Dasgupta, P. and P. David (1987). “Information Disclosure and the Economics of Science and Technology,”
in Arrow and the Ascent of Economic Theory New York: New York University Press.
Dasgupta, P. and P. David (1994). “Towards a New Economics of Science,” Research Policy. 23(5): 487-

32

521.
Duncan, G. and B. Holmlund (1983). “Was Adam Smith Right After All? Another Test of the Theory of
Compensating Differentials,” Journal of Labor Economics
Ehrenberg, R.G. (1992). “The Flow of New Doctorates,” Journal of Economic Literature 30(2) pp. 830-75.
Entorf, H. and F. Kramarz (1998). “The Impact of New Technologies on Wages: Lessons from Matching
Panels on Matching Employees and their Firms,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 5(2-4) pp.
165-198.
Friedman, M. and S. Kuznets (1954). Income from Independent Professional Practice. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Freeman, R. (1975). “Supply and Salary Adjustments to the Changing Science Manpower Market: Physics,
1948-1973,” American Economic Review 65(1): 27-39.
Gambardella, A. (1995). Science and Innovation: The U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry During the 1980s.
Cambridge University Press.
Gibbons, R. and L. Katz (1992). “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-Industry Wage Differentials?”
Review of Economic Studies pp. 515-35.
Hamermesh, D. (1977). “Economic Aspects of Job Satisfaction,” Essays in Labor Market Analysis edited by
O. Ashenfelter and W. Oates, New York.
Hamermesh, D. (1999). “Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Hamermesh, D. and A. Rees (1984). The Economics of Work and Pay. New York.
Hicks, D. (1995). “Published Papers, Tacit Competencies, and Corporate Management of the Public/Private
Character of Knowledge,” Industrial and Corporate Change 4(2) pp. 401-24.
Henderson, R. and I. Cockburn (1994). “Measuring Competence? Exploring Firm Effects in Drug
Discovery,” Strategic Management Journal Winter Special Issue, 15: 63-84.
Hicks, D. (1995). “Published Papers, Tacit Competencies and Corporate Management of the Public/Private
Character of Knowledge,” Industrial and Corporate Change 4(2): 401-24.
Hwang, H., Reed, W.R. and C. Hubbard (1992). “Compensating Wage Differentials and Unobserved
Productivity,” Journal of Political Economy 100(4) pp. 835-858.
Hwang, H., Mortesen, D. and W.R. Reed (1998). “Hedonic Wages and Labor Market Search,” Journal of
Labor Economics 16(4) pp. 815-847.
Kostiuk, P.F. (1990). “Compensating Differentials for Shift Work,” Journal of Political Economy 98(5) pp.
1054-1075.

33

Kreps, D. (1997). “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives,” American Economic Review 87: 359-64.
Kremer, M. (1998). “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113 (4). pp. 1137-67.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamb, D. and S.M. Easton (1985). Multiple Discovery: The Pattern of Scientific Progress Averbury
Publishing.
Levin, R., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R., and S. Winter (1987). “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial
Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3 pp. 783-831.
Levin, S.G. and P. Stephan (1991). “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle: Evidence for Academic
Scientists,” American Economic Review 81(1) pp. 114-32.
Lim, K. (1999). “Do Firms Have to Perform Basic Research in order to Capture Spillovers,” mimeo, MIT
Sloan School.
Merton, R. (1957). “Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of Science,” American
Sociological Review 22(6) pp. 635-59.
Merton, R. (1973). The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigation, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Miller, A. (1999). “Do Minority MBA Candidates Pay for Diversity Programs,” mimeo, MIT Department of
Economics.
Mortensen, D.T. (1990). “Equilibrium Wage Distributions: A Synthesis,” Panel Data and Labor Market
Studies edited by J. Hartog, G. Ridder, and J. Theeuwes, Amerstdam: North-Holland.
Murphy, K. and R. Topel (1987). “Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings: Testing for Equalizing Differences
in the Labor Market,” Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets Basil Blackwell.
Nelson, R. (1959). “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political Economy
67(2) pp. 297-306.
Nelson, R. and R. Rosenberg (1994). “American Universities and Technical Advance in Industry,” Research
Policy (23)3 pp. 323-348.
Price, D.J. de Solla, and Beaver, D.D. (1966). “Collaboration in an Invisible College,” American
Psychologist 21 pp. 1011-18.
Romer, P. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy 98 pp. S71-S102.
Rosen, S. (1974). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition,”
Journal of Political Economy, pp. 34-55.

34

Rosen, S. (1986). “The Theory of Equalizing Differentials,” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, ed. O.
Ahsenfelter and R. Layard, pp. 641-692.
Rosenberg, N. (1974). “Science, Invention, and Economic Growth,” Economic Journal 84(333) pp. 90-108.
Rosenberg, N. (1982). Inside the Black Box. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1990). “ Why Do Firms Do Basic Research (with Their Own Money)?” Research Policy
19(2): 165-174.
Royalty, A.B. (1999). “A Discrete Choice Approach to Estimating Workers’ Marginal Valuation of Fringe
Benefits,” Stanford University Department of Economics Working Paper 98-008.
Sattinger, M. (1977). “Compensating Wage Differences,” Journal of Economic Theory 16(2) pp. 496-503.
Scott Morton, F., and J. Poldony (1999). “Love or Money?: The Effect of Owner Motivation in the
California Wine Industry” NBER WP 6743.
Stephan, P. (1996). “The Economics of Science,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34: 1199-1235.
Stephan, P. and S. Levin (1992). Striking the Mother Lode in Science: The Importance of Age, Place and
Time. Oxford University Press.
Stern, S. (1995). “Incentives and Focus in University and Industrial Research: the Case of Synthetic Insulin,”
The University-Industry Interface and Medical Innovation edited by A. Geligns and N. Rosenberg, Institute
of Medicine, National Academy Press.
van Reenen, J. (1996). “The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K.
Companies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1). pp. 195-226.
Viscusi, W.K. 1993). “The Value of Risk to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic Literature 31 pp. 19121946.
Watson, J. (1968). The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA.
Weisbrod, B. (1983). “Nonprofit and Proprietary Sector Behavior: Wage Differentials and Lawyers,”
Journal of Labor Economics.
Weiss, Y. (1976). “The Wealth Effect in Occupational Choice,” International Economic Review. 17 (2) pp.
292-307.
Wright, B. (1983). “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and Research Contracts,”
American Economic Review 73(4) pp. 691-707.
Zucker, L., and M. Darby (1996). “Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation: Patterns of Invention
and Innovation in the Formation of the Biotechnology Industry,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science 93(23): pp. 709-716.

35

Zucker, L., Darby, M., and M. Brewer (1998). “Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S.
Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review 88(1): 290-306.
Zuckerman, H. and R. Merton (1971). “Patterns of Evaluation in Science: Institutionalization, Structure, and
Functions of the Referee System,” Minerva 9 pp. 66-100.

36

TABLE 1
VARIABLES & DEFINITIONS
VARIABLE

DEFINITION

JOB MARKET EXPERIENCE
# OFFERS RECVD

Number of offers received

JOB OFFER ORDINAL COMPARISON RANKINGS (1=highest)
MONETARY

Ranking of offer in terms of monetary compensation

RESEARCH QUALITY

Ranking of offer in terms of internal research environment

FLEXIBILITY

Ranking of offer in terms of flexibility to choose research projects

FUNDING

Ranking of offer in terms of availability of research funding

CAREER

Ranking of offer in terms of impact on career advancement

JOBFIT

Ranking of offer in terms of how well it ‘fits’ with prior research experience

JOB OFFER CARDINAL RECORD INFORMATION
JOB TYPE
SALARY

1= Established Firm, 2= Startup Firm, 3= Government,
4=Medical School or Medical Center, 5=University, 6=Postdoc
Annual starting salary (in US Dollars)

BONUS

Signing bonus and relocation (in US Dollars)

STOCK_DUMMY

Job offer includes stock options = 1, No = 0

PERMIT_PUB

Permission to publish in outside journals = 1, No permission = 0

INCENT_PUB

Likert Scale rating (1-5) of incentives to publish in refereed outside journals

EQUIPMENT

Likert Scale rating (1-5) of access to “cutting-edge” equipment

CONTINUE RESEARCH

Job allows continuation of current research project = 1, No = 0

PROMOTION

Likert Scale rating (1-5) of opportunities for internal promotion

TABLE 2
MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS
N

MEAN

STANDARD
DEVIATION

JOB MARKET EXPERIENCE
# OFFERS RECVD

166

2.51

1.032

JOB OFFER ORDINAL COMPARISON RANKINGS (1=highest)
MONETARY

136

1.949

0.984

RESEARCH QUALITY

125

1.888

0.986

FLEXIBILITY

117

1.897

0.977

FUNDING

119

1.916

0.996

CAREER

132

1.947

0.983

JOBFIT

118

1.898

1.008

JOB OFFER CARDINAL RECORD INFORMATION
Monetary Compensation
SALARY

123

61958.85

31394.96

BONUS

73

8.19

15.77

STOCK_DUMMY

74

0.37

0.48

Scienentific Orientation Indicators
PERMIT_PUB

116

0.91

0.28

INCENT_PUB

105

3.88

1.13

EQUIPMENT

113

4.06

0.86

CONTINUE RESEARCH

113

0.46

0.50

PROMOTION

112

3.48

1.29

TABLE 3
DISTRIBUTION OF JOB OFFERS
Job Category
1
2
3
4
5
6

Description
Established Firm
Startup Firm
Government
Medical Center
University
Postdoc
Total

No of
Offers
40
28
6
37
34
21
166

TABLE 4
CROSS TABULATIONS: JOB OFFER COMPARISON RANKINGS
(Rank = 1 is highest)

MONETARY

(Ranking of
monetary
compensation)
1

Table 4c: Money and Research Environment
MONETARY
RESEARCH QUALITY
(Ranking of offer in terms of
internal research environment)
1
2
3
4
5
(Ranking of
monetary
compensation)
1
19
20
5
3

Table 4a: Money and Jobfit
JOB FIT
(Ranking of offer in terms of how well it ‘fits’
with prior research experience)
1
2
3
4
5
6
20

14

2

2

2

19

17

5

1

3

5

5

8

2

1

4

4
1

5

26

15

4

1

3

6

6

8

1

4

1

2

3

1

6

Table 4b: Money and Career Advancement
MONETARY
CAREER
(Ranking of impact on career advancement)

MONETARY

(Ranking of
monetary
compensation)
1

26

20

3

1

(Ranking of
monetary
compensation)
1

2

20

25

3

2

3

4

3

13

1

4

1

3

4

1

2

3

4

5

1

5
6

6

1

1

1

Table 4d: Money and Flexibility
FLEXIBILITY
(Ranking of offer in terms of flexibility to choose
research projects)
1
2
3
4
5
6
16

19

8

1

2

25

17

2

1

1

3

5

5

8

1

1

4

2

1

1

2

1

1

5
6

1

1

5

1

6

2

6

1

TABLE 5
REGRESSION: JOB OFFER COMPARISON RANKINGS
(5-1)

(5-2)

(5-3)

Dependent Variable
Sample

(5-4)

(5-5)

Exclude Academic
Job Offers*

All Job Types

MONETARY
All Job Types

RESEARCH
QUALITY
FLEXIBILITY

-0.34
(0.12)

JOBFIT

0.20
(0.12)
0.23
(0.12)
0.34
(0.13)

Exclude Academic
Job Offers*
-0.32
(0.16)

All Job Types

0.29
(0.16)
-0.04
(0.16)
0.26
(0.17)

-0.39
(0.13)
(0.32)
(0.12)
0.30
(0.13)
0.17
(0.12)

-0.27
(0.19)
0.35
(0.17)
0.04
(0.18)
0.18
(0.17)

-0.27
(0.12)
-0.30
(0.13)
0.27
(0.12)
0.33
(0.13)
0.28
(0.13)

(53)

(42)

(53)

(42)

(53)

R-squared

0.49

0.53

0.49

0.50

0.52

# of Observations

136

88

136

88

136

CAREER
FUNDING
Controls
Individual Dummies
Regressions Statistics

Notes:

Only persons with multiple job offers are included in the regressions
Standard errors shown in parenthesis
Sig. = significant at 10% level.
* Regressions 5-2 and 5-4 exclude postdoctoral positions and job offers from universities and medical centers.

TABLE 6
CORRELATION OF
JOB OFFER RECORD DATA
SALARY

PERMIT_PUB

CONTINUE
RESEARCH

INCENT_PUB

EQUIPMENT

BONUS

SALARY

1.0000

PERMIT_PUB

0.0042

1.0000

CONTINUE
RESEARCH
INCENT_PUB

-0.0881

0.0224

1.0000

-0.1522

0.2541*

0.2666*

EQUIPMENT

0.0966

-0.0035

-0.0068

0.2633*

1.0000

BONUS

0.2935*

0.0732

0.1162

0.0941

0.1713

1.0000

PROMOTION

0.1534

-0.0538

0.1878*

0.0118

0.1089

0.2524*

* = significant at 5%

PROMOTION

1.0000

1.0000

TABLE 7A
HEDONIC WAGE REGRESSION: PERMISSION TO PUBLISH
DEPENDENT VARIABLE = LN(SALARY)

PERMIT_PUB

(7a-1)

(7a-2)

(7a-3)

(7a-4)

(7a-5)

Baseline
(NO FE)

Baseline
(w/ FE)

Include
Promotion,
Bonus and
Stock Options
(w/ FE)
-0.24
(0.10)

Include Job
Type
(w/ FE)

Full Model
(w/ FE)

0.03
(0.18)

-0.27
(0.11)

(7a-6)
Full Model
excluding
Academic
Job Offers*
(w/ FE)
-0.14
(0.08)

-0.18
(0.10)

-0.18
(0.10)

0.04
(0.03)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.09
(0.07)

YES

0.04
(0.02)
0.003
(0.002)
0.19
(0.08)
YES

CONTROLS
0.06
(0.02)
0.004
(0.002)
0.25
(0.07)

PROMOTION
BONUS
STOCK_DUMMY
JOBTYPE
CONTROLS
INDIVDIUAL
FIXED EFFECTS
Regressions Statistics
R-squared
# of Observations

NO

YES
(54; Sig.)

YES
(54; Sig.)

YES
(54; Sig.)

YES
(54; Sig.)

YES
(43; Sig.)

0.009

0.92

0.95

0.94

0.96

0.97

123

123

123

123

123

84

Notes:
Only persons with multiple job offers are included
Standard errors shown in parenthesis
Sig. = significant at 10% level.
* Regression 7a-6 excludes postdoctoral positions and job offers from universities and medical centers.

TABLE 7B
HEDONIC WAGE REGRESSION:
OPPORTUNITY TO CONTINUE Ph.D./POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH
Dependent Variable

CONTINUE
RESEARCH
CONTROLS

LN(SALARY)
(7b-1)

(7b-2)

(7b-3)

(7b-5)

Baseline
(NO FE)

Baseline
(w/ FE)

Include
Promotion and
Stock Options
(w/ FE)
-0.18
(0.06)

Full Model
(w/ FE)

-0.01
(0.10)

-0.25
(0.07)

PROMOTION
STOCK_DUMMY
JOBTYPE
CONTROLS
INDIVDIUAL
FIXED EFFECTS
R-squared

0.05

YES
(54; Sig.)
0.92

# of Observations

123

123

NO

Notes:
Only persons with multiple job offers are included
Standard errors shown in parenthesis
Sig. = significant at 10% level.

-0.11
(0.07)

0.05
(0.02)
0.25
(0.07)

0.04
(0.02)
0.17
(0.08)
YES

YES
(54; Sig.)
0.94

YES
(54; Sig.)
0.95

123

123

TABLE 7C
HEDONIC WAGE REGRESSION:
EQUIPMENT AND INCENTIVES TO PUBLISH
Dependent Variable

INCENT_PUB
EQUIPMENT

LN(SALARY)
(7c-1)

(7c-2)

(7c-3)

(7c-4)

Baseline
(NO FE)

Baseline
(w/ FE)
-0.07
(0.03)
0.10
(0.03)

Include
Promotion and
Stock Options
(w/ FE)
-0.06
(0.03)
0.07
(0.03)

Full Model
Excl. Academic
Job Offers*
(w/ FE)
-0.05
(0.03)
-0.005
(0.04)

0.044
(0.020)
0.23
(0.07)
YES
(54; Sig.)
0.95

0.041
(0.026)
0.04
(0.07)
YES
(43; Sig.)
0.97

123

84

-0.13
(0.05)
0.09
(0.06)

CONTROLS
PROMOTION
STOCK_DUMMY
INDIVDIUAL
FIXED EFFECTS
R-squared

NO
0.11

YES
(54; Sig.)
0.94

# of Observations

123

123

Notes:
Only persons with multiple job offers are included
Standard errors shown in parenthesis
Sig. = significant at 10% level.
* Regression 7c-4 excludes postdoctoral positions and job offers from universities and medical centers.

TABLE 7D
HEDONIC WAGE REGRESSION:
COMBINATION MODELS
Dependent Variable

PERMIT_PUB
CONTINUE
RESEARCH
INCENT_PUB
EQUIPMENT

LN(SALARY)
(7d-1)

(7d-2)

Baseline
(NO FE)

Baseline
(w/ FE)

0.30
(0.19)
0.12
(0.10)
-0.16
(0.05)
0.09
(0.06)

-0.06
(0.11)
-0.17
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.03)
0.10
(0.03)

NO

CONTROLS
INDIVDIUAL
FIXED EFFECTS
R-squared

0.16

YES
(54; Sig.)
0.94

# of Observations

123

123

Notes:
Only persons with multiple job offers are included
Standard errors shown in parenthesis
Sig. = significant at 10% level.

FIGURE 1
Distribution of Individual Fixed Effects Coefficients in Regression (7a-5)
1.00

0.80

0.40

0.20

-0.20

-0.40

-0.60

-0.80

-1.00

By Ascending Rank of Individual Fixed Effect

Number of Individuals = 53

53

51

49

47

45

43

41

39

37

35

33

31

29

27

25

23

21

19

17

15

13

11

9

7

5

3

0.00
1

Estimated Individual Fixed Effect

0.60

APPENDIX A
The Job Market Survey for Life Science Researchers
Principal Investigator: Professor Scott Stern, MIT Sloan School & NBER
Research Assistants: Kwanghui Lim, Amalia Miller
The goal of this project is to evaluate how organizations recruit life science researchers. We are
exploring the components of job offers provided to candidates, and how candidates choose among
competing job packages. Our focus is on the tradeoffs between monetary and non-monetary
elements of the job package. Among candidates with more than one job offer, we are analyzing
differences in packages offered to the same individual and how candidates choose among
competing offers.
Enclosed is a survey which we are administering to life sciences researchers. The survey requests
information about each job offer that you have received in your current job search and requires at
most 25 minutes to complete. If you are not yet on the job market or have not yet received a job
offer, please retain this survey until you receive offers. The survey is divided into five parts:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Background information (a resume can be substituted for this section)
Job market experience
Job offer comparisons
Job Offer Record(s)
Factors affecting job choice
Compensation choice and future contact

Please detail each job offer you have received in a Job Offer Record. Four are enclosed; if you
have received more than four job offers, please make and complete additional copies of the Job
Offer Record.
Each participant will receive a small gift (see Section VI) as well as a copy of the completed
analysis. Participation in this study is entirely voluntary, and you can decline to answer any
questions or decline further participation at any time without prejudice. Responses will be kept
both confidential and anonymous (your name and address will only be used to process your
compensation and will be deleted thereafter). Please return this survey and direct inquiries to:
Professor Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School
E52-554
Cambridge, MA 02142
TEL: 617-253-5219
FAX: 617-253-2660
e-mail: sstern@mit.edu
Thank you for your participation!

The Job Market Survey for Life Sciences Researchers

PART I.

BACKGROUND (You may skip this section by attaching a resume)
(please check √ )

Sex:

Male

Female

Marital status:

Married

Unmarried

Age:

_____

Nationality:

__________________

Number of children:

_____

Race (optional):

__________________

Current employer:
Current lab affiliation:

______________________________________
______________________________________

Expiration date of current funding:

Month: ____ Year: _____

Previous degrees

Institution

Field of Study

Year Granted

BA/BS

_____________________

____________________

___________

MA/MS

_____________________

____________________

___________

PhD

_____________________

____________________

___________

MD

_____________________

____________________

___________

Other (______)

_____________________

____________________

___________

PART II.

JOB MARKET EXPERIENCE

•

How many jobs have you formally applied for (by letter, e-mail, or through a formal
interview)?
__________ Applications

•

When did you start your current job search (by sending out a resume, application, or
participating in a formal interview)?
Month: _____ Year: _____

•

What was the length of time between the start of your job search and the receipt of your first
offer?
_______ Months

Have you already accepted a job offer?
If yes, which offer did you accept?

Yes

No

Name of Organization:

_____________________________

Job title:

_____________________________

IV.

JOB OFFER RECORD

Name of organization:

________________________

Location (City/State): ___________ /____

Please complete one per offer you received
Department/Division: ___________________
Job title: ______________________________

•
•
•

Did you send a resume or job application letter to this organization? Yes
No
Did you personally know any member of this organization prior to your job search?
Yes
What aspects of your scientific background will you use in this job?
None
Disciplinary principles
Doctoral research
Postdoctoral research
• Will you continue your current research projects at this job?
Yes
Please rate this job along the following dimensions:
LOW
HIGH
Overall impact on career advancement (internal or external)
Opportunities for internal promotion

A.

N/A
N/A

1
1

2
2

3
3

4
4

MONETARY COMPENSATION

Annual (12 month) starting salary:

$_______________

Signing bonus + relocation allowance:

$_______________

Maximum bonus in 1st year of employment:

$_______________ (excluding salary)

Stock option plan (describe):

B.

_______________________________________________________

RESEARCH ENVIRONMENT

Please rate this job along the following dimensions:
Quality of internal research environment
Flexibility to choose research projects
Incentives to present & publish scientific research
Availability of “cutting-edge” technologies/equipment
Availability of research funding
Work on joint research with university researchers
Work on joint research with other external researchers

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Do you have permission to publish scientific results in refereed journals?
Does the company sponsor an in-house seminar series?
Does the company sponsor continuing education?
Yes

LOW
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Yes
Yes

HIGH
4
5
4
5
4
5
4
5
4
5
4
5
4
5
No
No

No

Number of paid research conferences attendances per year ______
What share of your time will be devoted to:
Company research
Individual research
_____%
_____%
Number of technicians and junior researchers reporting to you
______

C.

5
5

Other
_____%

BENEFITS PACKAGE

Health care insurance
Yes
No
Paid pregnancy leave
Yes
No
On-site day care facilities
Yes
No
Number of days of paid:
Vacation _____
Sick ______
No. of people you share an office with:
0(own office)
1

Other benefits (list)

2

Personal ______
more than 2

_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________

No

No

PART V.

FACTORS AFFECTING JOB CHOICE

From the following list of factors, please rank the top three in terms of their importance to you in choosing a
job.
FACTORS

Rank the top three factors
(1 = Highest, 3 = Lowest)

Monetary compensation

_______

Quality of organization’s internal research environment

_______

Availability of research funds

_______

Flexibility to choose research projects

_______

Opportunity to interact with outside researchers

_______

Incentives to publicly present and publish scientific research

_______

Non-monetary benefits (Health, Daycare, Vacation, etc…)

_______

Geographic location

_______

Family concerns (e.g., spouse or family location)

_______

Other (describe) ______________________

_______

Imagine that you received job offers from two organizations. The first has an ideal research environment,
while the second has a minimally acceptable research environment. How much more must the second
organization pay you in order for you to accept its offer?
$____________
Why?
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________

PART VI.

COMPENSATION CHOICE AND FUTURE CONTACT

•

How would you like to be compensated for this survey? (choose one)
Starbucks’ gift certificate ($10)
CDNOW digital gift certificate ($10)
Amazon.com digital gift certificate ($10)

•
•

If you have not yet accepted an offer, can we contact you again?
How?
E-mail: ________________________________

Yes

Phone: ________________________________

Thank you for your participation in this survey !!!

No

PART III.

JOB OFFER COMPARISON
Each column lists a dimension of the job offer. Please rank your offers along these dimensions.
(1 = Highest, 2=2nd Highest, and so on)

Name of Organization

Overall
monetary
compensation

Overall impact
on career
advancement

Overall
benefits
package

Quality of
internal
research
environment

Availability of
research
funding

Job Offfer Comparison Example
3
3
3

Flexibility to
choose research
projects

Incentives to
present & publish
scientific research

Degree of “fit”
between job and
prior scientific
background

1

2

2

Ivy Medical Center

1

2

Silicon Biotech

2

1

2

2

2

3

1

3

ViagraPharm Inc.

3

3

1

1

1

2

3

1

Job Offer Comparison Record

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

7360

Douglas Holtz-Eakin
John W. Phillips
Harvey S. Rosen

Estate Taxes, Life Insurance, and Small Business

9/99

7361

Bong-Chan Kho
René M. Stulz

Banks, the IMF, and the Asian Crisis

9/99

7362

Jagadeesh Gokhale
Laurence J. Kotlikoff

Social Security’s Treatment of Postwar Americans:
How Bad Can It Get?

9/99

7363

Bruce D. Meyer
Dan T. Rosenbaum

Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers

9/99

7364

Dani Rodrik
Andrés Velasco

Short-Term Capital Flows

9/99

7365

Michael D. Bordo
Lars Jonung

The Future of EMU: What Does the History of
Monetary Unions Tell Us?

9/99

7366

Emmanuel Saez

Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?

9/99

7367

Emmanuel Saez

The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel
Study of 'Bracket Creep'

9/99

7368

Alan L. Gustman
Thomas L. Steinmeier

What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions
and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data
From The Health and Retirement Study

9/99

7369

Wolfgang Keller
Arik Levinson

Environmental Compliance Costs and Foreign Direct
Investment Inflows to U.S. States

9/99

7370

Michael Baker
Gary Solon

Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian
Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income
Tax Records

9/99

7371

Michael Baker
Nicole M. Fortin

Occupational Gender Composition and Wages in Canada: 9/99
1987-1988

7372

B. Douglas Bernheim
Lorenzo Forni
Jagadeesh Gokhale
Laurence J. Kotlikoff

The Adequacy of Life Insurance: Evidence from the
Health and Retirement Survey

You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:

www.nber.org
Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.

Date

10/99

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

7373

Paul A. David
Bronwyn H. Hall
Andrew A. Toole

Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for Private 10/99
R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence

7374

Peter Cappelli
David Neumark

Do “High Performance” Work Practices Improve
Established-Level Outcomes?

10/99

7375

Charles I. Jones

Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable?
Economic Growth Over the Very Long Run

10/99

7376

Harrison Hong
Jeremy C. Stein

Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage
and Market Crashes

10/99

7377

George Chacko
Luis M. Viceira

Dynamic Consumption and Portfolio Choice with
Stochastic Volatility in Incomplete Markets

10/99

7378

Bruce A. Blonigen
Stephen E. Haynes

Antidumping Investigators and the Pass-Through of
Exchange rates and Antidumping Duties

10/99

7379

Victor R. Fuchs

The Future of Health Economics

10/99

7380

Michael D. Hurd
James P. Smith

Anticipated and Actual Bequests

10/99

7381

Olivia S. Mitchell

New Trends in Pension Benefit and
Retirement Provisions

10/99

7382

Michael B. Devereux
Charles Engel
Cedric Tille

Exchange Rate Pass-through and the Welfare
Effects of the Euro

10/99

7383

Stephen L. Mehay
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula

The Effectiveness of Workplace Drug Prevention
Policies: Does ‘Zero Tolerance’ Work?

10/99

7384

Michael Klein
Giovanni Olivei

Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and
Economic Growth

10/99

7385

Jean Abraham
Ashish Arora
Martin Gaynor
Douglas Wholey

Enter at Your Own Risk: HMO Participation and
Enrollment in the Medicare Risk Market

10/99

You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:

www.nber.org
Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.

Date

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

7386

Gerardo della Paolera
Alan M. Taylor

Internal Versus External Convertibility and Developing- 10/99
Country Financial Crises: Lessons from the Argentine
Bank Bailout of the 1930's

7387

Alberto Alesina
Stephan Danninger
Massimo V. Rostagno

Redistribution Through Public Employment: The Case 10/99
of Italy

7388

Oliver Hart
John Moore

On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination Versus
Specialization

10/99

7389

Joshua Aizenman
Nancy Marion

Uncertainty and the Disappearance of International
Credit

10/99

7390

David M. Cutler
Ellen Meara

The Technology of Birth: Is it Worth It?

10/99

7391

Joel Waldfogel

Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who
Benefits Whom in Differentiated Product Markets

10/99

7392

James M. Poterba
Andrew A. Samwick

Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition: U.S.
Evidence from the 1980's and 1990's

10/99

7393

Bennett T. McCallum

Theoretical Issues Pertaining to Monetary Unions

10/99

7394

Alan M. Taylor

Latin America and Foreign Capital in the Twentieth
10/99
Century: Economics, Politics, and Institutional Change

7395

Bennett T. McCallum

Analysis of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism:
Methodological Issus

10/99

7396

Owen A. Lamont
Christopher Polk

The Diversification Discount: Cash Flows vs. Returns

10/99

7397

V. Joseph Hotz
Susan Williams McElroy
Seth G. Sanders

Teenage Childbearing and its Life Cycle Consequences: 10/99
Exploiting a Natural Experiment

7398

Joshua Aizenman

Capital Controls and Financial Crises

7399

Anne Case
Motohiro Yogo

Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and 10/99
the Characteristics of Schools in South America

You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:

www.nber.org
Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.

Date

10/99

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

7400

Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Chi-Wa Yuen

Excessive FDI Flows Under Asymmetric Information

10/99

7401

Anne Case
I-Fen Lin
Sara McLanahan

How Hungry is the Selfish Gene?

10/99

7402

Eckhard Janeba
John D. Wilson

Tax Competition and Trade Protection

10/99

7403

Rafael La Porta
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Andrei Shleifer
Robert Vishny

Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation

10/99

7404

Thomas J. Prusa

On the Spread and Impact of Antidumping

10/99

7405

H. Naci Mocan
Daniel I. Rees

Economic Conditions, Deterrence and Juvenile Crime: 10/99
Evidence from Micro Data

7406

Alon Brav
George M. Constantinides
Christorpher C. Geczy

Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers and
Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence

7407

David W.Galenson

Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters - 10/99
and Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism

7408

Yin-Wong Cheung
Menzie D. Chinn
Eiji Fujii

Market Structure and the Persistence of Sectoral Real
Exchange Rates

10/99

7409

Luis M. Viceira

Optimal Portfolio Choice for Long-Horizon Investors
with Nontradable Labor Income

10/99

7410

Scott Stern

Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?

10/99

10/99

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02138-5398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made
payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder's
name, account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders@nber.org).
You can download these and other papers at the NBER Web site:

www.nber.org
Free searchable abstracts are also available at the site.

