                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HOW EFFECTIVE ARE CAPITAL CONTROLS?


                                           Sebastian Edwards


                                          Working Paper 7413
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7413


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Effective Are Capital Controls?
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 7413
November 1999
JEL No. F32, F33


                                             ABSTRACT

     In the aftermath of the East Asian crisis a number of authors have argued that capital mobility
is highly destabilizing, and that emerging countries would benefit from restricting capital flows. In
this paper I investigate, from a historical perspective, the effectiveness of capital controls. I deal with
Tobin taxes, controls on outflows and controls on inflows. I argue that controls on outflows have
seldom worked as expected. They introduce major distortions and breed corruption. Market-based
controls on inflows - similar to those implemented by Chile - have the potential for lengthening the
maturity of foreign debt. They are not very effective, however, in achieving other objectives,
including a higher degree of monetary policy independence.


Sebastian Edwards
Anderson Graduate School of Management,
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/sebastian.edwards/
                                                1


        A number of authors have recently argued that globalization has gone too far, and

that free capital mobility has created a highly unstable international financial system.

Krugman (1999, p. 74), for instance, has maintained: “[S]ooner or later we will have to turn

the clock at least part of the way back: to limit capital flows for countries that are

unsuitable for either currency unions or free floating.” Discussions on the new

international financial architecture have focused on two type of controls on cross-border

capital movements: controls on capital outflows, perhaps similar to those that Malaysia

imposed in mid-1998, and controls on capital inflows, perhaps similar to those

implemented in Chile between 1991 and 1998. While most economists continue to be

skeptical about the former, the idea of restricting capital inflows has grown in popularity.

For example, Joseph Stiglitz (1999), the World Bank’s Chief Economist, has said:

“Volatile markets are an inescapable reality. Developing countries need to manage them.

They will have to consider policies that help stabilize the economy…These could include

sound bankruptcy laws and Chilean-style policies that put some limits on capital flows.”

This view has also been recently endorsed by Ito and Portes (1998) and Eichengreen

(1999), among others.

        The idea of restricting capital mobility as a means of reducing macroeconomics

instability is not new in modern policy discussions. In the 1970s James Tobin (1978)

argued that a global tax on foreign exchange transactions would reduce destabilizing

speculation in international financial markets. In the mid 1990s Tobin’s proposal was

discussed in the context of the devaluation of the British Pound and the Italian Lira. Barry

Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz (1993), for example, argued that Tobin-taxes would

discourage short-term speculators from betting against major currencies. However, it soon
                                               2


became evident that to be effective, Tobin-taxes would have to be implemented by all

countries simultaneously. This made them technically and politically unfeasible. Recent

discussions on the future of the international monetary system have tended to shy away

from grand and universal schemes, focusing instead on the merits of more modest

proposals aimed at restricting capital mobility in (some of) the emerging economies.

       In this paper I review some evidence on capital controls, with some focus on Chile

as the leading example of where such controls have been widely acclaimed as effective.

The discussion deals with: capital controls and the sequencing of economic reform, the

measurement of the degree of capital mobility, the empirical evidence on the relationship

between capital mobility and economic performance, and the effectiveness of controls on

both capital outflows and inflows. In Chile, I will discuss how controls on capital inflows

have affected the composition of capital flows, the behavior of exchange rates, and Chile's

monetary policy and macroeconomic instability.



Capital Controls and the Sequencing of Reform

       For a long time economists have argued about the benefits of free capital mobility.

This discussion has been carried out at both theoretical and empirical levels. Theoretically,

the question is whether the theorems on the gains from free trade in goods, extend to free

trade in financial capital. Maurice Obstfeld and Keneth Rogoff (1996), for example, have

provided persuasive theoretical arguments that support the existence of gains from

intertemporal trade, through a free international market for securities. Jagdish Bhagwati

(1998) and Richard Cooper (1998), on the other hand, have argued that in a world with

imperfect information, free capital mobility is likely to amplify existing distortions, create
                                                3


situations of moral hazard, encourage excessive risk taking, and generate major and costly

crises.

          At the practical policy level the debate has centered, not so much on whether capital

controls should be eliminated, but on when and how fast this should be done. This

discussion has come to be known as the “sequencing and speed of reform debate” (James

Hanson 1995, Stanley Fischer 1998). Early discussions on the sequencing of reform

focused on the order of liberalization of the current and capital accounts of the balance of

payments. Ronald McKinnon (1973) argued that the opening of the capital account,

through the dismantling of capital controls, should be postponed until free trade in goods

was consolidated. According to him, if the opposite sequencing were followed, excessive

capital inflows would result in a substantial real exchange rate appreciation, which, in turn,

would frustrate the attempt to open-up trade in goods.

          With time, the sequencing debate extended to other markets, and by the late 1980s a

consensus of sorts had emerged. Most authors agreed that major fiscal imbalances had to

be tackled first, and that a minimal degree of macroeconomic stability should be attained

very early on during the reform process. Most analysts also agreed that the capital account

should only be liberalized once the domestic financial sector had been reformed, and once

the liberalization of trade in goods had become consolidated. It was also agreed that an

effort should be made to ease labor markets regulations as early as possible in the reform

process.

          During the 1990s, a number of authors argued that a successful sequencing required

establishing a sound banking system -- including effective prudential regulations --, before

restrictions on capital mobility were lifted. Mc Kinnon (1991) and McKinnon and Pill
                                              4


(1995) argued that, because of the moral hazard associated with the financial sector, capital

account liberalization should wait until the end of the reform episode. In the aftermath of

the Mexican and East Asian crisis economists have become particularly aware of the need to

put in place, very early on in the reform process, a modern banking supervisory system. As

Calvo (1998) has pointed out, the problem is that poorly regulated banks will intermediate

the inflows of capital in an inefficient – or even corrupt – way, increasing the probability

of a systemic financial crisis (See also, Rudi Dornbusch 1998, Graciela Kaminsky and

Carmen Reinhart 1999 and Frederic Mishkin, this issue).



Capital Controls, the “True” Extent of Capital Mobility and Economic Performance

       Legal controls on capital mobility are not always translated into actual restrictions

on these movements. In country after country the private sector has found ways of

getting around controls. The simplest mechanisms are the overinvoicing of imports, the

underinvoicing of exports, and the mislabeling of the nature of the capital movement

(Garber 1998 discusses more sophisticated mechanisms). The differences between the

legal and actual degree of capital mobility has affected economists’ ability to measure

the “true” degree of financial integration of particular countries, and has been at the

center of recent debates on the effectiveness of capital controls. Some authors have

followed Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka (1980), and have relied on the correlation

(or lack there off) between savings and investment as a measurement of the degree to

which capital markets in different countries are integrated. Using this approach, Peter

Montiel (1994) concluded that in most developing countries, savings and investment

exhibited a rather low degree of correlation. This, in turn, suggests that the “true” degree
                                                5


of capital mobility is much larger than what a simple analysis of legal restrictions would

indicate. Other authors have concentrated on interest rate differentials in trying to

determine whether a particular country is actually integrated to world financial markets.

Using this methodology, Michael Dooley, Donald Mathieson and Liliana Rojas-Suarez

(1997) have found that the degree of “actual” capital mobility is almost always larger than

what the authorities had intended when imposing capital controls.

        More recently, some authors have used information contained in the International

Monetary Fund’s Exchange Rate and Monetary Arrangements to construct indexes on

capital controls for a panel of countries. Alberto Alesina, Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria

Milesi-Ferreti (1994), for example, constructed a dummy variable index of capital controls.

This indicator -- which takes a value of one when capital controls are in place and zero

otherwise -- was then used to analyze some of the political forces behind the imposition of

capital restrictions in a score of countries. Dani Rodrik (1998) used a similar index to

investigate the effects of capital controls on growth, inflation and investment between 1979

and 1989. His results suggest that, after controlling for other variables, capital restrictions

have no significant effects on macroeconomic performance.

        A serious limitation of these IMF-based indexes, however, is that they are extremely

general and do not distinguish between different intensities of capital restrictions.

Moreover, they fail to distinguish between the type of flow that is being restricted, and they

ignore the fact that, as discussed above, legal restrictions are frequently circumvented. For

example, according to this IMF-based indicator, Chile, Mexico and Brazil were subject to

the same degree of capital controls in 1992-1994. In reality, however, the three cases were

extremely different. While in Chile there were restrictions on short-term inflows, Mexico
                                               6


had (for all practical purposes) free capital mobility, and Brazil had in place an arcane array

of restrictions. Montiel and Reinhart (1999) have combined IMF and country-specific

information to construct an index on the intensity of capital controls in 15 countries during

1990-96. Although their index, which can take three values (0, 1 or 2) represent an

improvement over straight IMF indicators, it is still extremely general, and does not capture

the subtleties of actual capital restrictions. As Rogoff (this issue) has argued, empirical

work aimed at understanding the relationship between trade in financial assets and

growth is in its infancy. Progress in this area will require constructing indexes that are

able to adequately capture the “true” degree of capital mobility in different countries.



Controls on Capital Outflows

        Controls on capital outflows have been advocated as a way of dealing with a

financial and currency crisis. In assessing the effectiveness of controls on outflows it is

useful to distinguish between two type of controls. The first type corresponds to

“preventive controls.” These are imposed (or tightened) when a country is facing a severe

balance of payments deficit, but has not yet suffered a devaluation crisis. These

preventive controls can take a number of forms, including taxes on funds remitted

abroad, dual exchange rates (with a more depreciated rate for capital account

transactions), and outright prohibition of funds’ transfers. The idea is that these measures

will help slow down the drainage of international reserves, giving the authorities the time

required to implement corrective policies, and fend-off speculators.i

        The empirical evidence suggests that this type of controls have been largely

ineffective. When faced with the prospect of a major crisis, the private sector finds ways
                                              7


of evading the controls, moving massive volumes of funds out of the country. Worse yet,

more often than not, controls on capital outflows have resulted in corruption, as investors

try to move their monies to a “safe haven.” Moreover, once controls are in place the

authorities usually fail to implement a credible and effective adjustment program. Quite

on the contrary, once the controls are imposed – or tightened --, the extent of the

macroeconomic disequilibria tends to increase, rather than subsiding. Edwards (1989)

and Edwards and Julio Santaella (1993) analyzed, in great detail, the anatomy of currency

crises in a large number of developing countries. These studies show that the private

sector found easy ways of circumventing the controls in the months prior to the

devaluation crisis. In almost 70% of the cases were controls on outflows were used a s a

preventive measure, there was a significant increase in “capital flight” after the controls

had been put in place. Cuddington (1986) reached a similar conclusion in his study on

the determinants of capital flight in developing countries. Also, in a large number of the

balance of payments crises analyzed by Kaminsky and Renhart (1999), the authorities

tried, unsuccessfully, to avoid the currency collapse by stepping up controls on capital

outflows.

       There is also evidence suggesting that controls on capital outflows may give a

false sense of security, encouraging complacent and careless behavior on behalf of policy

makers and market participants. The recent currency crisis in Korea is a case in point.

Until quite late in 1997, international analysts and local policy makers believed that, due

to the existence of restrictions on capital mobility, Korea was largely immune to a

currency crisis. So much so that, after giving the Korean banks and central bank stance

the next to worst ratings, Goldman-Sachs (1997) argued, in its Emerging Markets
                                              8


Biweekly, that because Korea had “a relatively closed capital account”, these indicators

should be excluded from the computation of the overall vulnerability index. As a

consequence, during most of 1997 Goldman-Sachs played down the extent of Korea’s

problems. If, however, it had (correctly) recognized that capital restrictions cannot truly

protect an economy from financial weaknesses, Goldman would have clearly anticipated

the Korean debacle, as it anticipated the Thai meltdown. During 1997-98, controls on the

free mobility of capital also gave a false sense of security to Brazilian policy makers.

They repeatedly argued that since short-term capital inflows were restricted, their

currency could not suffer the same fate as the Mexican peso. As it turned out, they were

wrong. Once the collapse of the Real became imminent, investors rushed to the door, and

flee the country.

       More recently, a second type of controls of capital outflows has gained support

among some academics and policy makers. Paul Krugman (1998), for example, has argued

that countries already facing a major crisis could benefit from the temporary imposition (or

tightening) of controls on outflows. According to this view, once these “curative” controls

on outflows are in place, the crisis-country can lower interest rates, and put in place pro-

growth policies. Controlling capital outflows would give crisis countries additional time

to restructure their financial sector in an orderly fashion. Once the economy is back on

its feet, the argument goes, controls are to be dismantled. Malaysia followed this path in

1998-99. And, although it is too early to assess fully the effects of this policy on that

country’s economic performance, preliminary evidence suggests that, contrary to the

fears of orthodox analysts, the temporary controls did not produce much harm. A skeptic

could argue, however, that Brazil did not tighten controls on outflows after its
                                              9


devaluation crisis in January 1999, and that it has experienced – so far – a very strong

recovery.

       Naturally, the merits of a particular policy cannot be evaluated on the basis of one

or two historical episodes. So, what does comparative history tell us about the

effectiveness of this type of post-crisis “curative” capital controls? Although the

evidence is not fully conclusive, my reading of it is that the imposition (or tightening) of

controls on outflows in post-crisis periods has not been, on average, very helpful. For

instance, according to the analysis in Edwards (1989), in 50% of the countries that

imposed post-crisis controls, the devaluation was “unsuccessful,” in the sense that it

failed to generate a significant change in the real exchange rate, and failed to improve the

balance of payments. Furthermore, according to the data compiled in that study, two-

thirds of the countries that enacted post-crisis controls experienced “unsatisfactory” GDP

growth in the period immediately following the currency crisis. In contrast, only 35% of

the countries that did not restrict outflows after the crisis went through a period of growth

slowdown.ii

       The 1980s debt crisis provides a recent historical illustration of the working of

controls on capital outflows. Those Latin American countries that stepped-up controls on

capital outflows – Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, to mention just the largest ones–

muddled through, and experienced a long and painful decline in growth, high inflation

and protracted unemployment. Moreover, the stricter controls on outflows did not

encourage the restructuring of the domestic economies, nor did they result in orderly

reforms. The opposite, in fact, happened. In country after country, politicians

experimented with populist policies that encouraged corruption, and that at the end of the
                                              10


road deepened the crisis. Mexico nationalized the banking sector and expropriated

dollar-denominated deposits. Argentina and Brazil created new currencies, at the same

time as they controlled prices and expanded public expenditure. In Peru, tighter controls

on outflows allowed President Alan Garcia’s administration to systematically erode the

bases of a healthy and productive economy, as the country was rapidly consumed by a

virtual civil war. Moreover, in none of these countries were controls on capital outflows

successful in slowing down capital flight (Dornbusch and Edwards 1991, World Bank

1993).

Controls on Capital Inflows

         In the aftermath of the East Asian crisis, there has been increasing support for the

imposition of controls on capital inflows, as a way of preventing future currency crises

(Eichengreen 1999). Controls on inflows are expected to protect emerging countries

from international speculation, at the same time as allowing them to undertake an

independent monetary policy. Some of the countries that have relied on controls on

capital inflows during the last two decades include Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Czech

Republic and Malaysia. It has been Chile’s experience, however, the one that has

attracted the greatest attention from economists, policy advisers and the specialized

media. It has been argued that by discouraging short-term capital, while still attracting

longer terms funds, Chile’s controls have helped the country achieve a remarkable record

of growth and stability (Massad 1998a, Stiglitz 1999).



How Chile's Controls on Capital Inflows Worked
                                              11


        Chile has relied on controls on capital inflows on two occasions during the last 20

years: in 1978-82 and, more recently, during 1991-98. In both episodes, foreigners wishing

to move funds into Chile were required to make non-interest bearing deposits at the Central

Bank.

        Controls were first imposed in 1978 when, as a result of massive inflows, the real

exchange rate experienced a large appreciation, and the Central Bank faced increasing

difficulties managing money supply. This first episode came to an end in 1982 when, as a

consequence of the Latin American debt crisis, capital began to move out of the country.

During this early period (1978-82), the controls were particularly stringent. Inflows with

maturities below 24 months were prohibited, and those with maturities from 24 to 66

months were subject to reserve requirements that ranged from 10 percent to 25 percent of

the value of the inflows (Edwards and Edwards 1991).           Chile reintroduced restrictions

on capital inflows in June 1991 when, once again, a surge in capital inflows intruded with

macroeconomic policy. Originally, all portfolio inflows were subject to a 20 percent

reserve deposit that earned no interest. For maturities of less than a year, the deposit

applied for the duration of the inflow, while for longer maturities, the reserve requirement

was for one year. The private sector quickly found ways of avoiding the controls. The

most common mechanism was misstating the purpose of the inflow; for instance, short-

term portfolio flows were often labeled as trade credit, or as loans supporting a direct

foreign investment (DFI) project. In July 1992, the rate of the reserve requirement was

raised to 30 percent, and its holding period was set at one year, independently of the length

of stay of the flow. Also, at that time, its coverage was extended to trade credit and to

loans related to DFI. In 1995, and in an effort to close additional loopholes, the controls
                                               12


were extended to Chilean stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange, and to

international bond issues. In June 1998, to reduce the risk that the capital flows to Chile

would decline as part of contagion from the East Asian financial crisis, the rate of the

reserve requirement was lowered to 10 percent, and in September of that year the rate was

reduced to zero. Throughout this period Chile also regulated foreign direct investment.

Until 1992, foreign direct investment was subject to a three years minimum stay in the

country; at that time the minimum stay was reduced to one year. No restrictions exist on

the repatriation of profits from foreign direct investment.iii

        By forcing investors to deposit, at zero interest, a proportion of their funds in the

Central Bank, Chile's system of unremunerated reserve requirements is equivalent to a tax

on capital inflows. The implicit rate of the tax depends both on the proportion of the

investment that has to be held in reserve, on the length of time the reserve must be held at

the bank, on the length of time the investment funds stay in the country, and on the

opportunity cost of these funds.iv Figure 1 contains estimates of this tax-equivalent for

funds that stay in Chile for six months, one year and three years. These calculations are

based on the prevailing reserve requirements each year, and assume that the opportunity

cost of these funds is the interest rate on one-month certificates of deposit in the United

States. Three aspects of this figure are particularly interesting. First, the shorter the length

of time that investment funds remain in the country, the higher the implicit tax rate.

Second, the rate of the tax is fairly high – even for longer maturities. During 1997, for

example, the average tax, even for three-year investments, was 80 basis points. Third, the

tax equivalent has varied through time, both because the rate of the required deposit was

altered and because the opportunity cost has changed.
                                              13


       Of course, the implicit tax imposed by capital controls only applies to the extent

that the controls cannot be easily sidestepped. The discussion has already pointed out

that it is relatively easy for investors to avoid capital controls on outflows, and also on

many kinds of inflows. In particular, large firms typically have access to international

finance, and thus have the connections and ability to reconfigure their assets in a way that

will circumvent controls on capital inflows or outflows. Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1998)

have argued that in spite of the authorities' efforts to close loopholes, Chile's controls

have been subject to considerable evasion. Cowan and De Gregorio (1997) constructed a

subjective index of the “power” of the controls. This index takes a value of near one if

the controls are rarely evaded, and takes a value of zero if they are completely evaded.

This index reached its lowest value during the second quarter of 1995; by early 1998, and

after many loopholes had been closed, this index had reached a value of 0.8, still

significantly below one.



The Goals of Chile's Capital Controls

       The Chilean authorities had three explicit goals in mind when they passed capital

controls. First, to slow down the volume of capital flowing into the country, and to tilt its

composition towards longer maturities. Second, to reduce (or at least delay) any real

exchange rate appreciation that stemmed from these inflows. And third, to allow Chile's

Central Bank to maintain a high differential between domestic and international interest

rates, and thus to conduct an independent monetary. An additional goal, and one that

follows from these first three, was to reduce the country's vulnerability to international
                                              14


financial instability policy (Zahler 1992, Cowan and De Gregorio, 1997; Massad, 1998a;

Valdes-Prieto and Soto, 1996).



The Composition of Capital Inflows in Chile

       There is some primae facie evidence that by restricting capital mobility, the Chilean

authorities indeed affected the composition of inflows. Between 1979 and 1981, when

relatively draconian restrictions on capital inflows were in place, the average maturity of

inflows to Chile was a very long 59 months (Edwards and Edwards 1991).

       Table 1 presents data on the composition of capital flowing into Chile between

1988 and 1998. During this period shorter-term flows -- that is, flows with less than a year

maturity -- declined very steeply relative to longer term capital, and the change in

composition happened immediately after the implementation of the controls on capital

inflows in 1991. Regarding the post-controls period, the data in Table 1 show that, with the

exception of a decline in 1993, the total volume of capital inflows into the country

continued to increase until 1998. In constructing the figures in Table 1, the Central Bank of

Chile, classified inflows as “short term” or “long term” on the basis of contracted maturity.

It is possible to argue, however, that when measuring a country's degree of vulnerability to

financial turmoil what really matters is “residual” maturity, measured by the value of the

stock of the country's liabilities in hands of foreigners that come due within a year. Figures

on “contractual” and “residual” maturity can, in fact, be very different. Consider the

following simple example: assume the case of a county that, every year, receives US$ 100

million in flows with a two-year contractual maturity. Assume also, that the end of the two

years these funds flow back to their country of origin. In the steady state, this country’s
                                              15


stock of debt is US$200, one half of which (US$200) is due within a year. In this

hypothetical case, then, from a “contractual” point of view, there are no short- term inflows

(all the funds are coming in for two years), suggesting that the country faces a very low

degree of vulnerability. However, one half of the stock of debt is due within a year,

making the “residual” maturity equal to 50%.

       Table 2 presents data, from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), on residual

maturity for the stock of loans extended by banks in the BIS “Reporting Area,” to Chile

and a group of selected of Latin American and East Asian countries.v The results are

revealing. First, once residual maturity is used, the percentage of short-term debt does not

look as low as when contracting maturities are considered. Second, the figures in table 2

indicate that in late 1996, before the detonation of the East Asian financial crisis, Chile had

a lower percentage of short-term residual debt to the BIS “Reporting Area” banks than any

of the East Asian countries, with the exception of Malaysia. Third, although by the end of

1996 Chile had a relatively low percentage of short term residual debt to BIS “Reporting

Area” banks, it was not significantly lower than that of Argentina, a country with no capital

restrictions. Moreover, this percentage was higher than that of Mexico, another Latin

American country without controls. Fourth, Chile experienced a significant reduction in its

residual short-term debt to BIS “Reporting Area” banks between 1996 and 1998, just after

the controls were tightened in 1995.




       The general picture emerging from Tables 1 and 2 has been confirmed by more

formal analyses. For example, Soto (1997) and De Gregorio et al. (1998) have used vector
                                              16


autoregression analysis on monthly data to analyze the way in which capital controls have

affected the composition of capital inflows. Their findings suggest that the tax on capital

movements indeed discouraged short-term inflows. Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1998) reach a

similar conclusion, although they argue that the controls only became effective in

discouraging short-term flows after 1995, when the implicit rate of taxation imposed by the

controls increased significantly. These studies also suggest that the reduction in shorter-

term flows was fully compensated by increases in longer- term capital inflows and that,

consequently, aggregate capital moving into Chile was not altered by the controls.

Interestingly enough, these findings are in broad agreement with the results from a

comparative study on the experience of 15 countries during 1990-96, undertaken by

Montiel and Reinhart (1999).



Real Exchange Rates

       In December 1989, after 17 years of a military regime, a new government was

democratically elected in Chile. Chile regained access to international financial markets,

and capital began to flow into the country, raising demand for the peso and putting upward

pressure on the real exchange rate. The newly elected authorities believed that to gain

credibility among international and domestic investors, it was important to obtain the

support of exporters, a group that from the beginning had been behind the market-oriented

reforms program (Labán and Larraín, 1997). By late 1990, exporters had begun to

complain that the rapid strengthening of the peso in real terms – it had appreciated by more

than 20 % since 1985-- was negatively affecting their ability to compete in international

markets. As Cowan and De Gregorio (1997, p. 3) write: "[G]rowing concerns [in 1991]
                                               17


about inflation and the exchange rate pressure of capital inflows ... led policymakers to

introduce specific capital controls."

        During the period when the controls were in effect – April 1991 through September

1998 – the real exchange rate experienced an accumulated appreciation of 28%. vi An

important question is whether the extent of real exchange rate appreciation would have

been greater in the absence of controls on inflows. Several authors, using different

methodologies and various time periods in the 1990s, have investigated this issue and have

concluded that Chile's capital controls did not affect real exchange rates. Valdés-Prieto and

Soto (1996) analyzed the relationship between capital controls and the real exchange rate

with an error correction model and concluded that (p. 99) the "reserve requirement does not

affect in any way the long run level of the real exchange rate ... [I]n addition ... these

reserve requirements have an insignificant effect on the real exchange rate in the short run."

Edwards (1999) used monthly data for the period June 1991-September 1998 to estimate a

number of vector autoregressions concerning how changes in the tax on capital inflows

might have affected the real exchange rate. Four endogenous variables were included in the

vector autoregressions: the tax equivalent of the controls, under the assumption that the

funds stay in Chile for 180 days; the change in the log of the bilateral real exchange rate

with respect to the United States; the rate of devaluation of the nominal exchange rate; and

domestic various alternative measures of domestic interest rates.vii The results showed that

a hike in the tax on capital inflows did not have a significant effect on the real exchange

rate. De Gregorio et al (1998) made an effort to capture the effects of other variables on the

equilibrium real exchange rate. Their results, obtained from the estimation of an error
                                              18


correction model, suggest, once again, that contrary to what the authorities had hoped,

Chile’s controls on capital inflows had no effects on the behavior of the real exchange rate.



Domestic Interest Rates and the Independence of Monetary Policy

       Since the mid-1980s, the Chilean Central Bank pursued an anti-inflation policy

based on interest rate targeting. The authorities argued that by maintaining domestic peso-

denominated interest rates above international rates, inflation would decline gradually.

This policy worked relatively well until the late 1980s, when capital inflows to Chile

surged, threatening a rise in domestic inflation. The democratic government of Chile

elected in 1989 thus turned to controls on capital inflows as a tool to allow a persistent gap

between Chilean and world interest rates, which in turn was expected to help the

government's effort to reduce inflation to the lower single-digit level (Zahler 1992).

       There is some evidence that Chile's controls on capital inflows were able to affect

domestic interest rates. However, the magnitude of this effect was rather small. Analysis

on this point tends to focus on inflation-indexed interest rates, since most financial

transactions in Chile have traditionally been based on such rates. Using a vector

autoregression specification, Soto (1997) found that a change in the implicit tax on capital

inflows had a positive, very small, short-term effect on indexed interest rates. My own

calculations, based on the vector autoregression framework sketched in the previous

section and reported in Edwards (1999), suggest that an increase in the tax on capital

inflows will have a positive and small effect on indexed interest rates. De Gregorio et al

(1998), however, found a somewhat larger effect of the controls on domestic interest rates.
                                                19


According to their calculations, if the rate of the reserve requirement is 30%, short-term

interest rates will increase by approximately 140 basis points.

        In Edwards (1998b), I argued that if the controls on capital inflows are effective,

then once they are imposed, the differential between dollar and peso interest rates should

rise (after properly adjusting by expected devaluation). I also argued that once the controls

are in place, it should take longer for interest rate differentials to return to their equilibrium

level. I tested these propositions by examining the evolution of the interest rate differential

in response to a range of variables and its own value in the previous period. I found out that

the controls had a very small effect on long-term differentials between peso and US Dollar

denominated interest rates. I found, however, that interest rate differentials became more

sluggish after the imposition of controls -- that is, it took longer for them to reach their

steady state equilibrium. An important implication of this result is that in the post-controls

period the Central Bank had a greater ability to manipulate domestic interest rates.

        All in all, then, the accumulated evidence suggests that the controls on inflows

allowed Chile’s Central Bank to undertake a more independent monetary policy. The flip

side of this, however, is that by rising domestic interest rates, the controls resulted in a

higher cost of capital to Chilean firms.



Do Controls on Capital Inflows Reduce Financial Instability?

        Controls on capital inflows are clearly insufficient to eliminate financial instability.

In spite of Chile's draconian restrictions on capital inflows from 1978-82, Chile went

through a traumatic currency crisis in 1981-82: the peso was devalued by almost 90 percent

and the government had to bail out a large number of banks. The main cause behind this
                                              20


crisis was a poorly regulated banking sector, which used international loans to speculate in

real estate, and that extended large volumes of credit to the owners of the banks. A

massive banking reform, implemented in 1986, established strict guidelines on banks'

exposure and activities, and instituted a broad system of on-site inspections. This banking

reform has helped Chile withstand the global financial travails of the second half of the

1990s (Edwards and Edwards, 1991; Bosworth, Dornbusch and Laban, 1994).

       Surprisingly, to date there have been no in-depth attempts to evaluate formally the

extent to which Chile's capital controls in the 1990s may have helped its financial stability.

In this section I use weekly data to provide a preliminary analysis. Have the controls on

inflows reduced stock market and interest rate volatility in Chile? Has Chile been at least

somewhat immune from financial "contagion" during the 1990s when the controls have

been in effect?

       To analyze the effect of the tax on inflows on Chile’s financial volatility, I

considered a Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH)

framework, which has become standard in financial economics, and is discussed in detail

by Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997). This methodology consists of estimating two

equations jointly. In the first one, the dependent variable is the change in either the

domestic interest rate or (the log of) the stock market index. The independent variables

include, in principle, a range of variables that affect changes in these financial market

variables, and may include lagged values of interest rates or the stock market index as well.

The error term in this equation, will be expected to have a mean of zero and a time-varying

variance σ2t. Thus, this first equation – known as the mean equation -- will be:
                                                   21


∆ r t = θ + Σ φ j x t-j + η t



The second equation to be estimated is the variance equation itself. It is assumed that the

variance (σ2t ) depends on lagged squared values of the first equation’s error term, on its

own lagged values, and possibly on other variables (y t – j ). This second equation – known

as the conditional variance equation -- is:



σ2t = ϕ + α η2t - 1 + β σ2t - 1 + Σ γ j y t - j.



I estimated this two-equation model for changes in the short-term central bank nominal

interest rates (known as the repo rate), and for changes in the logarithm of the stock market

index. In both cases the data were weekly, covered the longest period for which they are

available, and were obtained from Datastream.viii In order to simplify the analysis, I

estimated the mean equations using only lagged values of past interest rates and stock

market prices (respectively) as explanatory variables.

        The question at hand is whether the level of variance is reduced by the implicit rate

of tax on capital inflows. Thus, in estimating the equation for the (conditional) variance, the

explanatory variables were the square of the error term in the previous time period, the

variance in the previous time period, and the existing tax rate implied by the capital

controls.ix That is, the conditional variance equation that was actually estimated is:



σ2t = ϕ + α η2t - 1 + β σ2t - 1 + γ Tax t .
                                                22


In particular, the tax level corresponds to the calculations in Figure 1, under the assumption

that the funds stay in the country for 180 days. If the controls on capital inflows have

indeed succeeded in reducing financial volatility, then the coefficient on the tax rate in the

estimated variance equation, should be significantly negative.

        The interesting results obtained from the conditional variance equations are

reported in Table 3, for both the interest rate and stock market data. First, this

representation works adequately for both stock market returns and nominal interest rates.x

Second, the coefficient on the tax variable is negative and significantly different from zero

in the stock market regression; on the other hand, it is not significant in the short-term

interest rate equation. The fact that the estimated coefficient of γ is significantly negative

is important, and suggests that the policy of restricting capital inflows helped Chile reduce

stock market instability; interestingly enough, these results also suggest that that policy did

not help reduce short term interest rate volatility.xi

        These results have nothing to say about whether Chile's controls on capital inflows

helped to insulate its economy from contagion stemming from shocks that originated in

other emerging markets. A particularly interesting issue is whether Chile’s controls on

inflows helped the country to become partially isolated from the financial turmoil that

erupted in east Asia in mid-1997. To address this issue, I asked whether changes in short

term rates in Chile were affected by changes in short term interest rates in Hong Kong. The

use of Hong Kong's interest rates as an index of financial instability in East Asia is, of

course, arbitrary. When alternative indicators are used the results are similar, however.

        For the dependent variable, this regression uses the same data on the change in

Chile's short-term nominal interest rates (∆r) as in the previous regression. The explanatory
                                                 23


variables are the change in Chile's interest rates in the previous four periods; the change in

the one-month U.S. certificate of deposit rate in the previous four periods (∆ rUS); the

change in Hong Kong's one-month deposit interest rate in the previous four periods (∆

rHK); and the rate of devaluation of the Chilean peso in the previous four time periods (∆

dev). The time period is weekly, and the data, which cover the period October 1994

through January 1999, were again obtained from Datastream. The regression is:



∆ r t = θ + Σ αj ∆ r t – 1 - j + Σ βj ∆ rUS t – 1 - j + Σ λj ∆ rHK   t–1-j   + Σ ϕj ∆ dev   t–1-j   +ε
t




The sum of the coefficients on the four lags of the Hong Kong interest rate variable are

taken to capture the extent to which Chile has been subject to "contagion" from East Asia

during this period. An analysis of the data (including an analysis of a regression’s

residuals) suggested that, approximately in May 1997, there was a break point in the series.

For this reason the equation was estimated for two subperiods: October 1994-May 1997

and May 1997-January 1999. The results obtained are reported in Table 4.xii

        During the early period, changes in Chile's interest rates were apparently not

affected by changes in interest rates in Hong Kong, which was highly insignificant. Things

changed, however, during the later period, when according to these estimates, changes in

short-term interest rates in Hong Kong had a positive effect in Chile's short term rate.

Notice that, for the May 1997-September 1998 period, the sum of the estimated coefficients

for Hong-Kong’s interest rates is larger than one, indicating that these shocks were

amplified in Chile. The fact that this transmission took place in spite of the presence of
                                               24


capital controls -- and moreover, capital controls which had been specifically tightened

after 1995, as discussed earlier -- suggests that the controls on capital inflows may have

been able to protect Chile from relatively small external shocks, but were not effective in

preventing "contagion" stemming from very large shocks. Determining the size of shock at

which capital controls come to lose effectiveness is an interesting topic for future research.



Concluding Observation

        A number of authors have recently argued that, in order to avoid financial

instability, emerging countries should rely on capital controls. Two type of controls have

been considered: controls on capital outflows, and controls on capital inflows. The

existing historical evidence suggests, quite strongly, that controls on outflows – and, in

particular, quantitative controls on outflows --, have been largely ineffective. They are

easily circumvented, encourage corruption and, in most historical episodes, have not helped

the adjustment process. A major drawback of controls on outflows is that, in most cases,

they are not used as a temporary device to face a crisis situation. Instead, they become a

permanent feature of the country’s incentive structure.

        It has been argued that a way of avoiding these problems, and still protecting the

economy from international financial markets’ instability, is by adopting controls on short-

term capital inflows. If speculative capital cannot come in, the argument goes, then it will

not go out suddenly. Advocates of this policy have used Chile’s experience between 1991

and 1998, as a successful example of this policy (Eichengreen 1999).

        The effectiveness of Chile's controls on capital inflows has often been exaggerated.

Chile's controls did appear to increase the maturity of its foreign debt significantly.
                                              25


However, even in 1996 more than 40 percent of Chile's debt to banks in the BIS “Reporting

Area” had a residual maturity of less than one year, and the total volume of aggregate

capital flows moving into Chile during the 1990s did not decline. The controls on inflows

had no significant effect on Chile's real exchange rate, and only a very small effect on

interest rates. There is some preliminary evidence that Chile's capital controls policy helped

reduce stock market instability, also that the controls were unable to isolate Chile from the

very large financial shocks stemming from East Asia in 1997-1999.

       Moreover, Chile's capital controls have also had costs. The most important one is

that they have increased the cost of capital significantly, especially for those small- and

medium-size Chilean firms which find it difficult, or impossible, to evade the controls on

capital inflows. During 1996, for example, the cost of funds for smaller Chilean firms was

as high as 24 percent in pesos; in U.S. dollars, this translated into more than 21 percent per

year. During 1997, the cost of funds to small firms exceeded 19 percent in dollar terms. A

country considering the adoption of Chile-style controls must compare this higher cost of

capital, especially for small and medium firms, with potential benefits like a reduced

macroeconomic vulnerability to short-term inflows of capital.

       Economists have long recognized that cross-border capital movements pose a

difficult policy issue. In the absence of strong financial supervision in either lending or

borrowing countries, unregulated capital flows may indeed be misallocated, eventually

generating waves of major disruptions in the receiving nations.

       Many authors, myself included, have argued that the relaxation of controls on

international capital movements is in order towards the end of a market-oriented reform,

and only after a sound supervisory system for the domestic financial market is in place.
                                               26


Controls on capital inflows may sometimes be a partial stop-gap. However, the long-term

solution for a nation concerned with its vulnerability to flows of international capital is for

countries to pursue sound macroeconomic policies, to avoid overly rigid exchange rates,

and to implement banking supervisory systems that reduce moral hazard and corruption.
                                           27




Acknowledgements



       I am grateful to Brad DeLong, Rick Mishkin and Timothy Taylor for very helpful

suggestions. I have benefited from discussions with Marty Feldstein, Ed Leamer, Jose de

Gregorio and Rodrigo Valdes. I am indebted to Rajesh Chakrabarti, Kyongchul Kim and

Alejandro Jara for assistance.
                                            28




                                       References

       Alesina, Alberto; Vittorio Grilli and Gian-Maria Milesi, 1994. “ The Political

Economy of Capital Controls”; in L. Leiderman and A. Razin, (eds.), Capital Mobility:

The Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth.. Cambridge, New York and

Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, pages 289-321.

       Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1998. The Capital Myth: The Difference Between Trade in

Widgets and Trade in Dollars” Foreign Affairs, 77, 7-12

       Bosworth, Barry, Rudi Dornbusch and Raúl Labán. 1994. The Chilean economy:

Lessons and Challenges, The Brookings Institution.

       Budenich, Carlos and Guillermo Lefort. 1997. “Capital Account Regulation and

Macroeconomics Policy: Two Latin American Experiences”, Banco Central de Chile

       Calvo, Guillermo 1998. “The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops”, Journal of

Applied Economics, 1, 1

       Campbell, John, Andrew Lo and A. Craig MacKinlay. 1997. The Econometrics of

Financial Markets, Princeton University Press.

       Cooper, Richard N. 1998. “Should Capital Account Convertibility be a World

Objective?” Essays in International Finance No. 207

       Cowan, Kevin and José De Gregorio. 1997. “Exchange Rate Policies and Capital

Account Management: Chile in the 1990s” Departamento de Ingeniería Industrial,

Universidad de Chile.

       Cuddington, John. 1986. Capital Flight: Estimates, issues and Explanations.

Princeton Essays in International Finance, No. 58.
                                           29


        De Gregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards and Rodrigo Valdés. 1998. “Capital

Controls in Chile: An Assessment” Presented at the Interamerican Seminar on

Economics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/sebastian.edwards/

        Dooley, Michael, D. Mathieson, and L. Rojas-Suarez 1997. “Capital Mobility,

and Exchange Market Intervention in Developing Countries, “ NBER Working Paper,

6247.

        Dornbush, Rudiger. 1998. “Capital Controls: An Idea Whose Time is Past”

Essays in International Finance No. 207

        Dornbush, Rudiger and Sebastian Edwards. 1991. The Macroeconomics of

Populism in Latin America. University of Chicago Press.

        Edwards, Sebastian 1989. Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment, The

MIT Press.

        Edwards, Sebastian 1998a. “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates and Capital

Controls: Some Latin American Experiences” NBER Working Paper 6000. Also in

author’s web page: http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/sebastian.edwards/

        Edwards, Sebastian 1998b. “Interest Rate Volatility, Contagion and Convergence:

An Empirical Investigation of the Cases of Argentina, Chile and Mexico.” Journal of

Applied Economics, 1,1.

        Edwards, Sebastian 1999. “On Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexico and East

Asia.” NBER Working Paper xxxx. Also in author’s web page:

http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/sebastian.edwards/

        Edwards, Sebastian and Alejandra Cox Edwards, 1991. Monetarism and
                                            30


Liberalization: The Chilean Experiment. University of Chicago Press.

       Edwards, Sebastian and Julio Santaella, 1993. Devaluation Controversies in the

Developing Countries. In Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (Eds) A Retrospective on

the Bretton Woods System. University of Chicago Press.

       Eichengreen, Barry. 1999. Toward a New International Financial Architecture: A

Practical Post-Asia Agenda, Institute for International Economics.

       Eichengreen, Barry and Charles Wyplosz. 1993. “The Unstable EMS”, Brookings

Papers on Economics Activity. 51-143.

       Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, 1980. “Domestic Saving and International

Capital Flows”, Economic Journal 90 (June): 314-29.

       Fischer, Stanley. 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF>”

Princeton Essays on International Finance, 207.

       Garber, Peter M. 1998. “Buttressing Capital Account Liberalization with

Prudential Regulation and Foreign Entry.” Essays in International Finance No. 207

       Goldman-Sachs. 1997. Emerging Markets Biweekly. Several Issues.

       Hanson, James. 1995. “Opening the Capital Account: Costs, Benefits and

Sequencing” in Edwards, Sebastian ed.. Capital Controls, Exchange Rates and Monetary

Policy in the World Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

       Ito, Taka and Richard Portes. 1998. “Dealing with the Asian Financial Crises”,

European Economic Perspectives, CERP.

       Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The

Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review, 89,

473-500
                                            31


        Krugman, Paul. 1998. “Saving Asia: It’s Time to get Radical”, Fortune,

September 7 p. 74-80.

        Krugman, Paul. 1999. “Depression Economics Returns”, Foreign Affairs, 78, 1

        Labán, Raúl and Felipe Larraín. 1997. “El Retorno del los Capitales privados a

Chile en los Noventa: Causas, Efectos y Reacciones de Política” Cuadernos de Economía,

103

        Massad, Carlos, 1998a. “The Liberalization of the Capital Acount: Chile in the

1990s”, Essays in International Finance N0. 207

        Massad, Carlos, 1998b. “La Política Monetaria en Chile,” Economía Chilena, 1, 1

        McKinnon, Ronald I. 1973. Money and Capital in economic Development. The

Brookings Institution.

        McKinnon, Ronald I. 1991. The Order of Economic Liberalization. Johns Hopkins

University Press.

        McKinnon, Ronald I. and Howard Pill. 1995. “Credit Liberalization and

International Capital Flows.” Department of Economics, Stanford University

        Mishkin, Frederic. 1999. “Global Financial Instability” Journal of Economic

Perspectives (this issue)

        Montiel, Peter. 1994. “Capital mobility in Developing Countries: Some

Measurement Issues and Empirical Estimates” World Bank Economic Review, 8, 3

        Montiel, Peter and Carmen Reinhart. 1999. “Do Capital Controls and

Macroeconomics Policies Influence the Volume and Composition of Capital Flows?

Evidence from the 1990s. University of Maryland.
                                             32


       Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 1996. Foundations of International

Finance, The MIT Press.

       Rodrik, Dani, 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?”, in Should the

IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility, Essay in International Finance No 207.

Princeton University.

       Rogoff, Keneth. 1999. “International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial

Instability” Journal of Economic Perspectives (this issue)

       Soto, Claudio. 1997. “Controles a los Movimientos de Capitales: Evaluación

Empírica del Caso Chileno” Banco Central de Chile

       Stiglitz, Joseph, 1999 “Bleak Growth Prospects for the Developing World”,

International Herald Tribune, April 10-11, 1999, p. 6.

       Tobin, James. “A Prposal for International Monetary Reform,” Eastern Economic

Journal, p. 154-159.

       Valdés-Prieto, Salvador and Marcelo Soto 1996. “Es el Control Selectivo de

Capitales Efectivo en Chile? Su efecto Sobre el Tipo de Cambio Real” Cuadernos de

Economía, 98

       Valdés-Prieto, Salvador and Marcelo Soto 1998. “The Effectiveness of Capital

Controls: Theory and Evidence from Chile” Empirica 25, 2.

       World Bank. 1993. Latin America a Decade After the Debt Crisis. Washington,

D.C.

       Zahler, Roberto M. 1992. “Plítica Monetaria en un Contexto de Apertura de la

Cuenta de Capitales”. Speech delivered at the 54th Meeting of Latin American Central

Bank Governors, San Salvador, El Salvador, May 5, 1992.
                                              33




          Table 1 : Capital Inflows (gross) to Chile: Millions of US$a

  Year     Short term Percentage Long term Percentage          Total      Deposits*

             flows       of total     flows        of total

  1988        916,564      96.3         34,838       3.7       951,402          --

  1989      1,452,595      95.0         77,122       5.0      1,529,717         --

  1990      1,683,149      90.3        181,419       9.7      1,864,568         --

  1991        521,198      72.7        196,115      27.3       717,313               587

  1992        225,197      28.9        554,072      71.1       779,269       11,424

  1993        159,462      23.6        515,147      76.4       674,609       41,280

  1994        161,575      16.5        819,699      83.5       981,274       87,039

  1995         69,675      6.2       1,051,829      93.8      1,121,504      38,752

  1996         67,254      3.2       2,042,456      96.8      2,109,710     172,320

  1997         81,131      2.8       2,805,882      97.2      2,887,013     331,572




a. These figures refer to gross foreign capital flowing into Chile each year.

* Deposits in the Banco Chile due to reserve requirements; short term flows have

a stay of less than one year.
                                            34




            Table 2: Ratio of Short-term Bank Loans to Total Bank Loansa

                                      (Percentage)



                 Mid-1996       End-1996         Mid-1997      End-1997        Mid-1998



 Argentina         53.4            56.3            54.2           57.7               57.4

Brazil             57.7            63.0            62.6           64.3               62.6

Chile              57.7            51.2            43.3           50.4               45.9

Colombia           45.9            39.3            39.4           40.0               39.6

Mexico             47.8            44.7            45.5           43.7               44.9

Peru               78.3            79.2            67.0           69.3               75.7



Indonesia          60.0            61.7            59.0           60.6               55.0

Korea              70.8            67.5            68.0           62.8               45.8

Malaysia           49.7            50.3            56.4           52.7               48.6

Taiwan             86.4            84.4            87.3           81.6               80.1

Thailand           68.9            65.2            65.7           65.8               59.3

a. These figures correspond to the stock of bank loans that are due within a year to banks

in the Bank for International Settlements’ “Reporting Area.” See text for details.

Source: The Bank for International Settlements.
                                            35




         Table 3: Financial Market Volatility and Controls on Capital Inflows*
              Results from Estimation of Conditional Variance Equation
                          (GARCH Estimates: Weekly Data)

    Dependent variable:       Change in short      Change in log of
                             term interest rate   stock market index

ϕ                                  3.387                0.0005
                                  (2.539)               (3.855)
η t-12                             0.864                 0.619
                                  (7.669)               (6.377)
σ t-12                             0.407                 0.507
                                  (7.669)              (15.909)
Tax t                              0.008                 -0.010
                                  (0.847)              (-2.695)

Period                        1994/9-1999.1         1991.9-1999.1


Number of observations             229                   385

LM Test a                          4.41                 13.86

a. This is a maximum likelihood test for the presence of heteroskedasticity.
* The figures in parentheses are the t-values. See text for details.
                                             36




Table 4: Changes in Chile’s Short Term Domestic Interest Rates and Asian Interest
                                      Rates:
                               Is there Contagion?
                            (Weekly Data, 1994-1999)

                               October 1994-           May 1997-
                                May 1997              January 1999

θ                                 0.0732                  -0.092
                                  (0.309)                (-0.312)

Σ ∆ r t–1-j                        -0.597                 -0.649
                                  (-1.432)               (-2.730)

Σ ∆ dev t – 1 - j                  2.302                  4.871
                                  (1.006)                (2.930)

Σ ∆ rUS t – 1 –   j                -6.541                 -2.441
                                  (-0.406)               (-1.491)

Σ ∆ rHK t – 1 - j                  -1.498                 2.684
                                  (-0.733)               (5.129)

Number of observations              139                     89

R2                                 0.081                  0.281

Durbin-Watson                      2.143                  2.376


* The figures in parentheses are the t-values. See text for details.
                            37




0.06


0.05

0.04


0.03


0.02

0.01


0.00
    90   91    92      93    94   95   96     97   98

              TAX180         TAX1YR         TAX3YRS




Figure 1: Tax Equivalent of Capital Controls:
     Stay of 180 days, 1 year and 3 years
                                             38


                                          ENDNOTES



1. This view was particularly prevalent in Latin America during the 1960s, 1970s and
   1980s. See the discussion and case studies in Dornbusch and Edwards (1991). See
   also John Cuddington (1986).

2. “Unsatisfactory” growth was defined as a situation where real GDP growth, in that
particular year, was in the lowest quartile for a group of developing countries that
included both crisis and non-crisis countries. For details see Edwards (1989, Ch. 7)

3. For further details see Massad (1998a, b), De Greogorio, Edwards and Valdes (1999),
and Budnevich and Lefort (1997).

4. As shown by Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1996) and De Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes
(1998), the tax equivalent for funds that stay in Chile for k months, is given by the
following expression:

τ (k) = [ r * λ / ( 1 - λ ) ] ( ρ / k),

where r* is an international interest rate that captures the opportunity cost of the reserve
requirement, λ is the proportion of the funds that has to be deposited at the Central Bank,
and ρ is the period of time (measured in months) that the deposit has to be kept in the
Central Bank.

5. Ideally, one would want to have comparative data on the total stock of national
liabilities in hands of foreigners. These data, however, are not available for a long-
enough period of time. The BIS “Reporting Area” is comprised of the Group of Ten
countries plus Austria, Denmark, Finland Ireland, Luxembourg, Norway and Spain. A
somewhat broader coverage can be obtained, for some countries and for a limited period
of time, from the BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank project on debt data (http:/www.imf.org/)
6.
  It should be mentioned that some authors have found a small transitory effect of Chile's
capital controls on real exchange rates in certain specifications, including Soto (1997) and
De Gregorio et al. (1998).
vii.
  These data were obtained from the International Financial Statistics and from the Central
Bank of Chile and are available on request. All the VARs were estimated using two lags.

8. More specifically, the central bank nominal interest rate is the repo rate, which is the
rate used for short-term transactions with commercial banks. When other interest rates
were used, the results were similar.

9. A likelihood ratio test suggests that the residuals of both the interest rates and stock
market equations are subject to heteroskedasticity. This means that estimating a GARCH
model is appropriate.
                                             39




10. The results for the mean equation are not reported due to space considerations. For
the case of stock market returns, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis of an integrated
(1,1) GARCH.

11. The LM test reported in the final row of Table 3 is Engle's test for the existence of
residual conditional heteroskedasticity.

12. These results were obtained using a polynomial distributed lag procedure, that allows
for greater flexibility in the estimated lag structure.
