NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AFFECT PLANT PERFORMANCE?:
THE CASE OF COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING

Morris M. Kleiner
Jonathan S. Leonard
Adam M. Pilarski

Working Paper 7414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7414

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1999

This study was supported by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The authors thank Neil Chaffee,
Sandy Donovan, Adrienne Howard, Yongjin Nho, Yonglin Ren, Keith Vargo, and Donghoon Yang for their
assistance with this study, as well as comments from participants at seminars at the University of Minnesota
and the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Morris M. Kleiner, Jonathan S. Leonard, and Adam M. Pilarski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Industrial Relations Affect Plant Performance? :
The Case of Commercial Aircraft Manufacturing
Morris M. Kleiner, Jonathan S. Leonard, and Adam M. Pilarski

NBER Working Paper No. 7414
November 1999
JEL No. J5, J3, L2
ABSTRACT
This study analyzes the impact of major industrial relations variables on productivity within
a plant that assembles large commercial aircraft. The analysis combines the deep firm-specific
knowledge of management and labor typical of the best of traditional industrial relations with formal
statistical tests. We use a before and after research design over an 18-year period with monthly data,
as well as information from the participants in the industrial relations events. Our approach is unusual
in showing that by focusing only on managerial factors or the learning curve, and omitting factors
such as union leadership and related labor relations events, estimates may mis-specify impacts on firm
performance. Strikes, slowdowns, and tough union leaders influenced the productivity of this plant
by both large percentages and absolute dollar amounts during the period they were occurring. In
contrast with much of the firm performance literature, we find small initial productivity impacts of
movements from traditional adversarial management, which is the norm in this industry, to total
quality management (TQM) and back again. How and why TQM is adopted may be just as
important as whether it is adopted. Finally, simulations from a counterfactual case show that major
industrial relations events like strikes, slowdowns, and the TQM program did not have long term
productivity effects, and that the firm we studied returned to pre-event levels of production within
one to four months.
Morris M. Kleiner
Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs
and Industrial Relations Center
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Mn. 55455
and NBER
mkleiner@hhh.umn.edu
Adam M. Pilarski
AVITAS,DNV
1835 Alexander
Bell Drive, Suite 200
Reston, Va.20191
gurudude@avitas.com

Jonathan S. Leonard
Walter A. Hass Graduate School
School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, Ca. 94720
leonard@haas.berkeley.edu

