                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MACROECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE BELIEFS AND
                    BEHAVIOR OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRADERS


                                           Yin-Wong Cheung
                                            Menzie D. Chinn


                                          Working Paper 7417
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7417


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 1999




We thank Helen Popper and Russ Root for useful comments, Eiji Fujii and Madhushree Dasgupta for research
assistance, and the UCSC Document Publishing and Editing Center for logistical assistance in conducting the
survey. The financial support of faculty research funds of the University of California is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Yin-Wong Cheung and Menzie D. Chinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Macroeconomic Implications of the Beliefs and Behavior of
Foreign Exchange Traders
Yin-Wong Cheung and Menzie D. Chinn
NBER Working Paper No. 7417
November 1999
JEL No. F31, G15


                                             ABSTRACT

        We report findings from a survey of United States foreign exchange traders. Our results
indicate that (i) technical trading best characterizes about 30% of traders, with this proportion
rising from five years ago; (ii) news about macroeconomic variables is rapidly incorporated into
exchange rates; (iii) the importance of individual macroeconomic variables shifts over time,
although interest rates always appear to be important, and; (iv) economic fundamentals are
perceived to be more important at longer horizons. The short run deviations of exchange rates
from their fundamentals are attributed to excess speculation and institutional customer/hedge fund
manipulation. Speculation is generally viewed positively, as enhancing market efficiency and
liquidity, even though it exacerbates volatility. Central bank intervention does not appear to have
a substantial effect, although there is general agreement that it increases volatility. Finally, traders
do not view purchasing power parity as a useful concept, even though a significant proportion
(40%) believe that it affects exchange rates at horizons of over six months.



Yin-Wong Cheung                                                 Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
Social Sciences I                                               Social Sciences I
University of California                                        University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                            Santa Cruz, CA 95064
cheung@cats.ucsc.edu                                            and NBER
                                                                chinn@cats.ucsc.edu
