                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        EXCHANGE RATES AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY


                                            Barry Eichengreen
                                            Ricardo Hausmann


                                            Working Paper 7418
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7418


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 1999




This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Conference on Issues in Monetary
Policy, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27-29 August 1999. Eichengreen is George C. Pardee and Helen N. Pardee
Professor of Economics and Political Science at the University of California, Berkeley. Hausmann is Chief
Economist, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C. The views expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Inter-American
Develpment Bank, or its Board of Directors. For financial support, Barry Eichengreen thanks the Ford
Foundation, through the Berkeley Project on International Financial Architecture.

© 1999 by Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
                          Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility
                         Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann 1
                                       August 1999


1. Introduction

          If one positive thing can be said about the Asian crisis and subsequent discussions of how to

strengthen the international financial architecture, it is that they breathed new life into a moribund debate

on the consequences of exchange-rate arrangements. Curiously, early contributions to post-Asia

literature about how to make the world a safer financial place said little about the choice of exchange

rate regime, focusing instead on transparency, prudential supervision, policy toward capital flows, and

IMF reform.2 The emphasis in recent writings is different; there, the exchange rate has taken center

stage.3




1
 This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Conference on Issues in
Monetary Policy, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27-29 August 1999. Eichengreen is George C. Pardee
and Helen N. Pardee Professor of Economics and Political Science at the University of California,
Berkeley. Hausmann is Chief Economist, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Inter-American Development
Bank or its Board of Directors. For financial support, Barry Eichengreen thanks the Ford Foundation,
through the Berkeley Project on International Financial Architecture.

2
 This emphasis is apparent in the three G22 reports on strengthening the international financial
architecture (G22 1998a, b, c), which were the official community’s definitive word on the subject circa
1998.

3
    Drage and Mann (1999) and Frankel (1999) are representative of many examples that could be cited.



                                                1
       In a sense, this shift reflects a maturation of the debate — a recognition that exchange-rate

policy and the other items on the architects’ agenda are connected. The exchange rate has an

important influence on the volume capital flows. It is a key determinant of the response of local interest

rates to global credit conditions. There is a close connection between the exchange rate and financial

fragility, although its nature is a matter of dispute.

       In what follows we distinguish three views of the relationship between the exchange rate and

financial fragility.

       The Moral Hazard Hypothesis. The first view, which of the three has received the most

attention, emphasizes moral hazard and in particular the distorting consequences of implicit guarantees.

These guarantees stem from the disposition of governments to provide bailouts to domestic financial-

market participants and from the willingness of the international community to rescue countries in

trouble. They imply that investors do not face the full risks of their investments, which in turn creates an

incentive to take on excessive risk. It is this excessive risk taking that is at the root of financial fragility.

       The corresponding solution is to reduce moral hazard through more vigorous supervision and

regulation of the financial system and by replacing international rescues with workouts that require

private-sector burden sharing. Putting moral hazard back in the bottle also requires reform of the

exchange-rate system. Pegged exchange rates are a form of implicit guarantee and hence a source of

moral hazard. They promote unhedged foreign-currency borrowing and, since they are least credible at

long horizons, skew financial flows toward the short end. These unhedged, short-term, foreign-

currency-denominated liabilities are a time bomb waiting to explode. By implication, more flexible


                                                2
exchange rates are desirable to limit short-term capital inflows and buttress the stability of the financial

system.

       The Original Sin Hypothesis. The second view emphasizes an incompleteness in financial

markets we call “original sin.” This is a situation in which the domestic currency cannot be used to

borrow abroad or to borrow long term, even domestically. In the presence of this incompleteness,

financial fragility is unavoidable because all domestic investments will have either a currency mismatch

(projects that generate pesos will be financed with dollars) or a maturity mismatch (long-term projects

will be financed with short-term loans).

        Critically, these mismatches exist not because banks and firms lack the prudence to hedge

their exposures. The problem rather is that a country whose external liabilities are necessarily

denominated in foreign exchange is by definition unable to hedge. Assuming that there will be someone

on the other side of the market for foreign currency hedges is equivalent to assuming that the country

can borrow abroad in its own currency. Similarly, the problem is not that firms simply lack the

foresight to match the maturity structure of their assets and liabilities; it is that they find it impossible to

do so. The incompleteness of financial markets is thus at the root of financial fragility.

       It follows that both fixed and flexible exchange rates are problematic. If the government allows

the currency to depreciate, the currency mismatch will cause bankruptcies. If instead it defends the peg

by selling reserves and hiking interest rates, it will precipitate defaults on short-term domestic debts.

The solution, rather than a more flexible exchange rate, is no exchange rate -- dollarization or its euro




                                                3
equivalent.4 Once the dollar is adopted for all domestic payments, currency mismatches dissolve, since

income streams are now denominated in the same unit as liabilities. Maturity mismatches are attenuated

because it now becomes easier to issue long-term paper in dollars. The greater willingness of

foreigners to lend at long maturities and of residents to leave their money at home deepens domestic

financial markets, rendering them less fragile and crisis prone.

          The Commitment Problem Hypothesis. A third view sees financial crises as resulting from

neither moral hazard nor original sin but from the weakness of the institutions that address commitment

problems. In contrast to a textbook spot market, where the parties meet once to complete their

transaction, financial contracts are discharged over time. Creditors lend their money today but have to

wait until tomorrow to be repaid. Financial transactions, in other words, are intertemporal trades

carried out over time. Inevitably, therefore, problems of commitment and enforcement arise.

Transactions that are mutually desirable ex ante may not be mutually desirable ex post. The borrower

might be better off, for example, if he did not have to repay.5 This means that financial agreements are

not necessarily self-enforcing. It is one way of understanding why financial markets are contract

intensive and rely on judicial enforcement, and why the volume of transactions is small, and outcomes

are volatile, where the contractual, legal and judicial infrastructure is least adequate.




4
    For ease of exposition, in what follows we refer to this as dollarization.

5
 Assuming no subsequent desire to return to the market and/or no reputational effects. To be sure,
these are not inconsequential assumptions. They are adopted here for expository convenience only.
We discuss the implications of relaxing them in what follows.


                                                 4
       If this is the problem, then the solution lies in policies to improve the financial infrastructure.

Examples include steps to strengthen property rights and titles, to provide for rapid attachment of

collateral, and to develop credit bureaus. The implications for exchange rate policy are less clear. On

the one hand, there is an argument for greater flexibility to free the authorities to backstop the market,

which in conditions of institutional underdevelopment is likely to be particularly fragile and in need of

official support. If they are committed to a fixed rate, the central bank and government may be

prevented from providing lender-of-last-resort services. They will be prevented from engineering a

surprise inflation to bring down the real value of otherwise unsustainable debts and save the banking

system. At the same time, however, lenders will understand the authorities’ incentive to resort to this

tax of last resort and demand higher interest rates in compensation. And higher interest rates will make

the financial system more fragile to the extent that debts grow faster than the capacity to service them.

       Outline of the Paper. Are these three views incompatible, and, if so, which one is correct?

What are the implications for the exchange rate regime and monetary policy?

       We start by further elaborating the connections between exchange rates and financial fragility.

We then confront our theories with the relevant facts. Which theory can best explain the volume of

capital flows? Which theory can best explain their composition? Which theory can best explain the

nature of crises in emerging markets?

       Following this, we consider three case studies with the potential to shed further light on the

competing interpretations. Finally, we explore the implications of our theories for the future of monetary

policy and the international financial architecture.


                                               5
2. The Moral Hazard Hypothesis

       Moral hazard is a problem in financial systems with the following characteristics:

   ·   banks are leveraged,

   •   banks have limited liability,

   •   markets have asymmetric information about the risks banks take, and

   •   banks are rescued with some probability when they get into trouble.

This is to say that moral hazard is a problem, to a greater or lesser extent, in all financial systems.

These four characteristics create incentives for excessive risk taking because depositors or taxpayers

pay for the bad outcomes while bankers pocket the good ones. This is one way of understanding why

financial markets are regulated. In particular, regulations require banks to hold sufficient capital to

ensure that their money and not that of depositors or taxpayers is lost at the margin. To make sure that

the actual and bookkeeping capital coincide, banks are supervised, and supervisors are empowered to

inspect banks’ books and take control of their operations when capital is low or other problems arise

that are likely to tempt managers to gamble for redemption.

       If banks are well managed and regulated, the expansion of their balance sheets will be limited

by their capital, not by the availability of funds. But when regulation is lax and the moral hazard

associated with the financial safety net is present, banks may expand their balance sheets excessively by

borrowing abroad. When international markets are flush, banks will have access regardless of their


                                               6
capitalization and the quality of their management. This leads to the notorious lending-boom problem,

when banks use foreign funding to compete for domestic market share and the quality of bank assets

deteriorates (Gavin and Hausmann 1996). And if capital flows reverse direction, a very serious

financial crisis can ensue.

       A long line of emerging-market crises has been interpreted in this light. Balino (1987) attributes

the Argentine banking crisis of 1980-1 to inadequate implementation of prudential regulations and lax

bank supervision.6 Bisat, Johnston and Sunararajan (1999) attribute Chile’s 1982 financial crisis to a

weak supervisory framework (especially before 1980) and to an ownership structure conducive to

excessive lending by related entities. They similarly attribute the severity of the concurrent crisis in the

Philippines to “a failure to enforce supervisory rules....various banking irregularities exacerbated by the

political environment; and excessive risk taking by bank holding companies through newly created and

inexperienced subsidiaries” (p.137).

       If the problem is moral hazard, then the solution is to remove implicit and explicit guarantees

and develop alternatives to international bailouts. Until significant progress is made in achieving these

goals, care should be exercised in liberalizing the capital account. In particular, policy should be used

to prevent more short-term foreign borrowing than the financial system can safely support. Inspired by

this logic, the international community has been pressing for the removal of blanket guarantees and




6
 Central bank inspections of financial institutions actually fell from 23 to 10 per cent over the four years
leading up to the crisis, allowing the share of problem loans in bank portfolios to rise fivefold. See also
Bisat, Johnston and Sundararajan (1999).


                                               7
exploring ways of “bailing in” the private sector. The Basle Committee of Banking Supervisors has

proposed revisions to the 1988 Capital Accord to make short-term bank-to-bank lending more

expensive. The U.S. Treasury and the IMF, for their part, have evinced sympathy for the use of

Chilean style holding-period taxes to avoid excessive dependence on short-term foreign debt.7

          A pegged exchange rate is a specific instance of this genus of implicit guarantees. To sustain

the peg, the authorities will insist that there is absolutely no prospect of it being changed. (Otherwise it

might be subject to attack immediately.) The government, in effect, is offering the private sector

insurance against the risk of exchange-rate changes. In this situation, borrowers have little incentive to

hedge their foreign exposures.8 The pegged exchange rate will be a source of moral hazard (Mishkin

1996, Obstfeld 1998, Buiter and Sibert 1999).




7
    See e.g. Rubin (1999).

8
 Early influential statements of this view included Goldstein (1997), Dooley (1997), Krugman (1998),
and Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998). Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (1999) develop a
theoretical model that derives these conclusions. In the absence of government guarantees, they show,
it is optimal for banks to hedge exchange risk in forward markets, since banks incur the loss of sunk
costs in the event of devaluation-induced bankruptcy. But the presence of government guarantees
completely eliminates the incentives to hedge the risk of a devaluation. Instead, it may be optimal for
banks to further magnify their exchange exposure, since they reap additional returns in the event of no
devaluation but get bailed out if the exchange rate changes. This result, that hedging is more prevalent
when exchange-rate flexibility is greater, is derived from some very special assumptions. (Below we
argue that this result may well not obtain in the more general case.) Specifically, the authors assume the
presence of moral hazard in the credit market but no distortion in the market for hedges, whose supply
side is not modeled. Assuming that the rest of the world is willing to supply currency hedges is
equivalent to assuming that a country is able to borrow abroad in its own currency. Below we
challenge the realism of this assumption.


                                                8
       The Asian crisis is frequently taken as illustrating these points. Table 1 summarizes the

incentives for unhedged borrowing as portrayed by the World Bank. The table purports to show how

the low volatility of exchange rates compared to the mature markets led investors to believe that the

authorities were insuring them against exchange risk. The consequence of this combination of an

exchange-rate guarantee and a financial safety net, it is argued, was to cause a large amount of short-

term foreign capital to be intermediated through the banking system, as shown in Table 2.9 BIS and

IFS data differ, but both show that Asian banks and firms accumulated large net foreign exposures in

the run-up to the crisis.10 To be sure, in some countries such as Thailand banks were required to hedge

their positions by acquiring offsetting assets in foreign currency, but they did so by making foreign-

currency loans to domestic corporations, which became the repositories of the unhedged exposure. In

other countries, notably Indonesia, corporations borrowed offshore directly (Table 3), but their

unhedged exposures created credit risk for domestic banks that also extended them domestic-currency

loans. In both cases, the accumulation of unhedged exposures was fostered by, in the words of the




9
 This is not to deny that there was a role for other factors such as the maintenance in Korea of
restrictions on other forms of inward foreign investment, and Thailand’s establishment of the Bangkok
International Banking Facility.

 BIS data rely on reports from major OECD banks, while IFS makes use of reports from non-OECD
10


countries that are borrowing funds. Both suggest that about 30 per cent of this lending was
denominated in yen, while most of the remainder was denominated in dollars. BIS (1998), p.123.


                                              9
World Bank, “exchange rate stability in...countries that had pegged currencies to the dollar or to

baskets of currencies with a high dollar weight” (World Bank 1999, p.61).11

       The policy recommendation that flows from this analysis is greater exchange rate flexibility.

With the exchange rate fluctuating more freely, banks and corporates will better appreciate the need to

hedge their exposures. Their greater propensity to hedge will mean that large exchange-rate changes,

when they come, will not devastate their finances. Since the havoc wrought by large exchange rate

movements will be less, the IMF can credibly commit not to always run to the rescue of shaky

currencies. And constructive ambiguity about whether international assistance will be forthcoming will

limit the moral hazard associated with the presence of the IMF.

       Dollarization is also an acceptable solution, although it is not often recommended by advocates

of the moral-hazard view. If financial fragility results from the combination of unhedged exposures and

large exchange rate changes, dollarization eliminates the problem by removing the second component

from the mix. The caveat, of course, is that it not substitute other equally or more serious sources of

financial fragility, for example by removing portions of the financial safety net under an accident-prone



11
  In the IMF version, Indonesia, Korea and Thailand quite actively pursued either nominal or real
exchange rate targets “....while orienting interest rates toward internal stability objectives.
This...encouraged capital inflows that were substantially short term in nature, and in particular in the
form of foreign currency borrowing. Such borrowing was largely unhedged because of expectations
that relatively stable exchange rates would be maintained indefinitely.” Or, in the BIS version, “long-
standing policies of fixed or quasi-fixed exchange rates probably nurtured a misperception of exchange
rate risk. With a flexible exchange rate, and frequent movements in both directions, firms and
households learn from their daily experience to take account of exchange rate risk. But when many
years of nominal stability...are followed by a large, discrete shift, the danger that private agents will be
caught unprepared is much greater” (BIS 1999, p.124).


                                              10
banking system. And observers disagree about how long dollarization that respects this caveat will take

to achieve.




3. The Original Sin Hypothesis

       Our second view seeks to explain why financial markets in developing countries are fragile and

crisis prone in terms of three national characteristics: good economic prospects, openness to

international capital flows, and a national currency that cannot be used by local firms or the government

to borrow abroad and cannot be used, even at home, for long-term borrowing.

       If a developing country is economically promising and open, it will be attractive to investors.

But if its currency cannot be used for foreign or long-term borrowing, firms needing external finance will

have to choose between borrowing in foreign currency or borrowing short-term. If a company

borrows in dollars to finance a project that generates pesos, peso devaluation can thrust it into

bankruptcy. If instead it finances its long-term projects with short-term domestic-currency loans, it will

go bust if interest rates rise and credits are not renewed. Unavoidably, investments will suffer from a

currency mismatch (because projects that generate local currency are financed with dollars) or a

maturity mismatch (because long-term investments are financed with short-term loans).

       Original sin seems to capture a fact about the world. What causes it is an open question. One

hypothesis is that a history of inflation and depreciation renders investors reluctant to invest in domestic-

currency assets and to invest long term. In fact, however, original sin appears to apply as well to more




                                              11
than a few emerging markets that do not have a recent history of high inflation. Essentially all non-

OECD countries have virtually no external debt denominated in their own currency.

       Another hypothesis is that sovereign risk renders investors reluctant to invest in domestic-

currency-denominated assets. If a country was able to borrow abroad in its own currency, it would

stand to benefit by depreciating that currency and thus eroding the real value of its external debts. In

anticipation of this, foreigners are unwilling to lend in a denomination that the borrower can manipulate

unless they are compensated to an extent that only those borrowers planning to devalue are prepared to

pay. In the presence of incomplete information about borrower type, the market could disappear.

       Why then are some developed countries able to borrow abroad in their own currencies? It

may be that they developed their domestic markets first, creating a political constituency that opposed

opportunistic depreciation. Foreigners were only willing to participate after a substantial domestic

demand existed.

       The currency and maturity mismatches caused by original sin create a dilemma for exchange-

rate policy. If the government seeks to defend the currency by hiking interest rates and draining

liquidity from the financial system, banks faced with the increased cost of funding will be forced to

contract their portfolios by calling their loans. If borrowers are unable to repay immediately due to

maturity mismatches, a banking crisis can result. Under these circumstances the financial system may

be subject to self-fulfilling runs: if people think that other people are about take their money out because

they fear that the interest-rate defense will bring down the banking system, they will want to be first

through the door, requiring the authorities to raise rates to defend the currency and producing the very


                                              12
result investors most feared. 12 This is the basis for the now-prevalent view that pegged exchange rates

and open international capital markets are an accident waiting to happen in all but the most financially-

robust emerging markets.

          If, on the other hand, the authorities let go of the peg and permit the exchange rate to float more

freely, banks and corporates will be hammered by currency mismatches. As the exchange rate starts to

fall, moreover, firms fearful of further depreciation will scramble to purchase foreign exchange to cover

their exposures. This will cause the domestic currency to depreciate further.13

          The implication is that allowing the exchange rate to float is counterproductive, since banks and

firms will be hammered by the currency mismatch problem. The central bank will be reluctant to let the

exchange rate move too much, lest the dollar liabilities in the financial system precipitate widespread

bankruptcies. Calvo and Reinhart (1999) have a nice name for this: they call it “fear of floating.”

Experience in Asia and Latin America suggests that central banks whose currencies officially float often

use monetary policy to limit exchange-rate variability. They attempt to do so even in the face of

massive terms-of-trade shocks like those suffered by Chile, Peru and Venezuela in 1998. To limit the

movement of their currencies, they raise interest rates.

          As a result, interest rates will be volatile, even more than in fixed-rate economies. This

interest-rate volatility will complicate the development of a long-term bond market, as these assets will



12
     A problem modeled formally, in its variants, by Chang and Velasco (1999).

13
  Note that this dynamic can take place under floating as well as a discrete devaluation, as happened in
Indonesia at the time of its final collapse.


                                                13
have unstable prices.14 Exchange-rate and interest-rate volatility will lead investors to demand a higher

return on domestic-currency deposits, jacking up the level of interest rates.15 Moreover, letting the

exchange rate appreciate in good times and depreciate in bad times reduces the incentive for residents

to hold assets in the domestic currency, since doing so does not provide insurance against income risk.

When incomes are high and residents are in a position to save, the value of their previously-

accumulated savings goes up as a result of currency appreciation. In bad times, when income is low

and residents might wish to dip into their savings, their assets are worth less because of currency

depreciation. They have an obvious incentive to insure themselves against income risks by moving their

savings out of domestic currency.16

       Not only does floating have costs when markets suffer from the incompleteness we posit, but its

benefits can be questioned. It has not obviously allowed monetary policy to be used in countercyclical




 Hausmann et al. (1999) estimate that Latin American countries with floating currencies have financial
14


systems 15 to 30 percent smaller than they otherwise would have been.

 Real interest rates in Latin American countries with floating exchange rates have averaged 9 percent in
15


the 1990s, compared to 5 percent for Latins with fixed rates. In addition, domestic interest rates have
been more sensitive to foreign rates under floating rather than fixed regimes, implying less, not more,
monetary autonomy. When the cost of foreign borrowing rises by one percent, domestic interest rates
have risen on average by 1.4 percent under Argentina’s currency board but by 5.9 percent under
Mexico’s floating regime (Hausmann et al. 1999). Frankel (1999) also finds that domestic interest
rates are more sensitive to the U.S. federal funds rate in floating rate than fixed-rate countries.

 This mechanism would explain why Latin America remains highly dollarized even after a decade of
16


low inflation.


                                             14
ways. Interest rates in emerging markets go up instead of down in recessions, even more sharply under

floating than under the typical fixed-rate regime.

       The alternative to floating is not to peg, which is also problematic, but abandoning the national

currency all together. Dollarizing -- abandoning a weak national currency for a stronger international

or supranational currency -- would eliminate currency and maturity mismatches because debts would

be denominated in the same unit as cash flow. It would allow countries to borrow longer term. And its

effects would be enhanced if it was accompanied by deeper integration of the domestic financial system

with the rest of the world through the internationalization of the banking sector.

       A world of international or supranational currencies, the conclusion follows, would be safer for

capital mobility. Interest rates would become less volatile, as we have seen in Europe where rates have

fallen in the continent’s chronically high interest-rate countries (such as Ireland, Italy, Portugal and

Spain), making it easier to cut budget deficits and stimulate growth. Safe capital mobility would

accelerate the income convergence between advanced and emerging markets, again as in Europe, and

permit the exploitation of differences in demographic trends in the two regions. It would move capital

to the South, where the labor force is growing faster, and thus maintain high returns to capital in the

North, easing the financial burden of aging.




4. The Commitment Problem Hypothesis

       Financial markets are contract-intensive because of the time-inconsistency problem intrinsic to

intertemporal trade. Borrowers in general lack incentives to repay and need to be able to commit. If




                                               15
they are unable to do so, creditors will view lending as risky and charge accordingly. But higher interest

rates exacerbate the incentives for non-payment and make the pool of available projects riskier through

adverse selection. 17 Even if the market does not disappear, it can be characterized by rationing.

          One common commitment device is collateral, which transfers ownership of an asset in the

event of non-payment. If the collateral is worth more than the loan, the borrower does not benefit from

not paying. But if property rights are weak, the assets that can be used as collateral will be limited. If it

is difficult to attach collateral, borrowers will be less able to commit.

          Another common commitment device is reputation. In a world of one lender, borrowers will

know that he who does not repay will not get another loan. The same applies in a world of multiple

lenders if they share information on credit performance. This, of course, is the economic function of

credit bureaus and rating agencies.

          The point is that collateralization and reputation do not typically emerge as equilibrium results of

isolated agreements between borrowers and lenders -- the market alone does not supply them, in

other words. Rather, doing so requires a social arrangement in whose absence the market will be

small and risky. La Porta et al. (1996, 1997) and Levine (1998) provide evidence that the strength of

creditor rights and their enforcement affect the depth and liquidity of private debt markets.

          What about equity? If the institutions of corporate governance are weak, equity investors will

have reason to fear that management will siphon off profits. They will be willing to invest only at price-

earning ratios that make it unattractive to go public. Equity markets will be shallow not because firms




17
     See inter alia Greenwald, Stiglitz and Weiss (1984).


                                                16
are unprofitable but because shareholders do not know to whom the profits will accrue. Lenders will

then want to keep corporations on a short leash by providing only short-term credit.

       Finally, at the international level there is sovereign risk. Since sovereigns cannot be forced to

abide by the rulings of the court, their commitment problem is unusually severe. This leads to small,

rationed, and unstable sovereign debt markets.18 Reputation can substitute, but to what extent that is

disputed (Bulow and Rogoff 1989, Ozler 1991).

       Insofar as these institutional inadequacies are at the root of financial fragility, the solution is

institutional reform. Property rights should be strengthened. Efficient and autonomous judicial systems

should be established and charged with contract enforcement. Credit bureaus should be developed to

facilitate the use of reputation. Adequate accounting and auditing standards should be adopted to limit

the information asymmetries that weaken market discipline.

       At the international level, the commitment hypothesis would argue for care in adopting

mechanisms that facilitate bailing in the private sector in times of crisis. While it is good to have

investors face the real risks of lending to emerging markets, easing nonpayment might make it harder for

borrowers to signal their willingness to repay and thus aggravate sovereign risk, causing international

lending to become smaller and more expensive. This is the emerging-market countries’ objection to

collection-action clauses and to the international community’s new emphasis on comparability and

burden sharing.




18
  Cooper and Sachs (1984) provide an early theoretical statement. Fernandez-Arias and Lombardo
(1998) present an up-to-date model in which sovereign risk leads to over-borrowing, followed by a
crisis.


                                               17
          The implications for exchange-rate policy are less obvious. Where the financial infrastructure is

least developed, the markets may most need a lender of last resort, and the lender of last resort may

most need the freedom conferred by a flexible currency policy. At the same time, investors anticipating

that the authorities may resort to this tax of last resort will demand higher spreads. This may lead to a

self-fulfilling crisis insofar as expected devaluation means that interest rates are high, causing liabilities to

grow more than planned and leading to a solvency crisis.




5. Which Theory Fits the Facts?

          Gauging the explanatory power of these interpretations means considering their testable

implications.

          The Level of Capital Flows. By any measure, capital flows are small.19 International

comparisons of capital/labor ratios (Lucas 1990) and comparisons of flows within nations with flows

between them (Bayoumi and Rose 1993, Bayoumi 1997) both suggest that the global allocation of

resources would be more efficient if there was additional capital transfer between rich and poor

countries. In the 1990s, capital flows to Latin America have averaged five percent of GDP. With a

capital-output ratio of three, this means that capital flows have averaged less than two per cent of the

capital stock. At present, the capital/labor ratio in the United States is some 300 per cent higher than in

Latin America. At a rate of two per cent per year, convergence would take centuries, not even

considering the fact that labor-force growth is faster in Latin America.




19
     A point made famous by our discussant; see Feldstein and Horioka (1980).


                                               18
       That flows are small poses the greatest difficulty for the moral-hazard view, which predicts that

flows should be large. That investors face artificially low risks implies that they should be willing to

invest more than is socially optimal. So the moral hazard hypothesis would predict too much, not to

little capital flowing across borders. This does not mean that moral hazard is absent. It does imply,

however, that moral hazard is not the only policy-relevant distortion and, arguably, not the most

important.

       The fact that capital flows are small is consistent with the original-sin hypothesis. More capital

does not flow from rich to poor countries because it can only flow in a form that generates mismatches

which discourage lending and heighten the fragility of the financial system. This fact is also consistent

with the commitment-problem hypothesis in which more capital does not flow from rich to poor

countries because sovereign risk and inability to commit at the domestic level make additional lending

unattractive. More borrowing and lending does not take place not because of currency risk but

because the contractual environment cannot support it.

       Thus, while moral hazard may be present, its tendency to encourage excessive capital flows

could be more than offset by our two other forces, both of which work in the opposite direction. For

example, lending to Russia in the first half of 1998 could have been depressed, relative to the first-best

equilibrium, by the weakness of the institutional framework for contract enforcement and creditor rights.

At the same time, however, financial flows were artificially stimulated relative to what they would have

been otherwise by the “moral hazard play” (the perception on the part of international investors that the

country was too big to fail geo-politically and would be the recipient of an international bailout). This




                                              19
indicates that the moral-hazard reform agenda may help to limit irresponsible lending but without

necessarily addressing the other underlying problems.

       The Composition of Flows. The moral-hazard hypothesis has strong implications for the

composition of capital flows. It predicts that flows will take the form or forms most likely to benefit

from a bailout. Banks are particularly likely to be bailed out because of the perceived threat to

macroeconomic and financial stability posed by large or widespread failures. Governments are

particularly likely to be bailed out insofar as they are the recipients of IMF support. If moral hazard is

the dominant story, then lending should be skewed towards these borrowers.

       Table 4 presents data on the structure of lending by BIS reporting banks. It shows that

developing countries in fact have proportionally less debt flowing through banks than developed

countries (32 versus 40 per cent) and more debt flowing through non-banks (53 versus 50 per cent),

while the proportion going to governments is roughly the same (15 versus 14 per cent).20

       Table 5 shows the proportion short-term debt owed to BIS reporting banks. It shows that

developed-country banks did not skew their emerging-market lending toward the short end relative to

their lending to advanced countries. The amount of short-term lending by BIS reporting banks is




20
  The first contrast is sharpest in Latin America, where only 24 per cent flows through banks while
almost 56 per cent goes through non-banks. One could object that developed countries have better
developed banking systems, but in fact it is securities markets, not banking systems, that are especially
late to develop, given their relatively demanding information and regulatory requirements (Levine 1997).
This bias goes in the wrong direction to rescue the moral-hazard hypothesis.


                                              20
roughly comparable across all regions, uncomfortably for the moral-hazard view. 21




       While bank-to-bank lending was massive in East Asia, so was foreign lending to corporates,

which is harder to explain in terms of moral hazard. Korean chaebol may be bailed out, but not

Indonesian corporations. In addition, there were very large investments in the stock market, a form of

lending — the Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s intervention in the Hang Seng to the contrary

notwithstanding — that carries the least probability of a bailout.

       The moral-hazard hypothesis has an especially hard time accounting for the composition of

capital flows to Latin America. International commercial banks have been minor players in Latin

America in the 1990s. Portfolio flows were the single most important form of finance as major Latin

American corporations sought to the international capital markets. It is hard to imagine a less likely

candidate for a bailout.22

       The lack of a short-term bias by BIS reporting banks also poses something of a problem for the

commitment hypothesis. When it is difficult to monitor the agents who control borrowed funds and to

enforce the contract specifying their use, lenders will utilize short-term debt as a disciplining device,

since the knowledge that the loan will be rolled over only if specific conditions are met should

encourage the borrower to adhere to the terms of the loan agreement and reveal information about his




 This does not mean that total short-term debt was the same across all regions, since the BIS reporting
21


banks do not represent the same proportion of external debt in different countries.

 Although Mexico and its tesobonos can be invoked as a counterexample. That said, the growing
22


volume of foreign equity investment raises doubts about the relevance of this example for the future.


                                              21
compliance. Yet the extent of short-term debt in emerging markets is surprisingly small. An improving

contractual environment in, inter alia, Latin America is one possible explanation for why we do not

observe this short-term bias at present. It would also explain why we now observe more contract and

institution-intensive flows, such as corporate long-term bonds and ADRs.

       The Nature of Crises. Dooley (1997) provides a model in which moral hazard can explain

the timing and dynamics of crises. His model runs off of a policy conflict between the desire of a credit-

constrained government to hold reserve assets of a form of self-insurance and the government’s inability

to commit not to liquidate those assets in order to bail out domestic financial and nonfinancial firms.

This policy creates incentives for investors to acquire insured claims on residents and then to exchange

them en masse for the government’s assets when yield differentials make this optimal. The slow but

steady acquisition by foreigners of claims on residents has as its mirror image capital inflows. When the

government’s reserves are exactly matched by its contingent insurance liabilities, the yield on domestic

liabilities falls below the market rate, and investors sell the insured assets to the government, exhausting

its reserves. The timing of the attack is both determinate and explicable in terms of moral hazard.

Whether Dooley’s model provides an accurate explanation for events like the Asian crisis is of course a

disputed question.

       More generally, proponents of the moral-hazard view explain recent crises in terms of the large

stock of short-term debt accumulated by crisis countries, reflecting the fact that the exchange-rate

insurance implied by a policy of pegging the currency is most credible over short horizons. The single

most robust leading indicator of currency and financial crises is the share of short-term debt in a

country’s external liabilities and the portion of that debt which flows through the banking system in


                                              22
particular (Frankel and Rose 1997, Rodrik and Velasco 1999). This has led to recommendations that

countries adopt Chilean style holding-period taxes and analogous measures to limit their dependence on

short-term borrowing.

       The evidence linking short-term debt to crises is robust, and not just in econometric cross

section: both the Mexican and East Asian crises erupted at moments when short-term liabilities

exceeded liquid assets. But one should be cautious about strong assumptions regarding the direction of

causality. If a country with a good debt profile and large reserves is suddenly rationed out of the

market for reasons entirely independent of the maturity structure of its debt, its reserves will decline and

it will have difficulty rolling over maturing long-term obligations. The short term structure of the debt is

a symptom, not the underlying cause of the crisis problem.23

       The underlying cause, then, could be either original sin or the absence of an institutional

environment conducive to credible commitments. Original sin suggests that a sudden reversal of capital




23
  Latin America is a case in point. After the Tequila crisis, governments and corporations paid special
attention to lengthening the maturity of their obligations and monitoring the relationship between short-
term assets and liabilities. As shown in Table 5, short-term debt in the region has averaged 26 percent
of total liabilities, or about half East Asia’s level. It is particularly low in Argentina and Brazil. But this
did not permit Latin American countries to maintain market access and cushion their economies by
borrowing when they were hit by negative terms of trade shocks. As capital inflows dwindled, they
were forced into contractionary adjustments designed to increase the trade surplus, this at a time when
the world market prices of their exports were collapsing. Limiting their dependence on short-term debt
may have allowed Latin American countries to avoid sudden exchange rate collapses, but it has not
made financial markets less volatile. In fact, long-term markets have shown incredible volatility (Figure
2): yields on Latin American dollar-denominated bonds have been ten times more volatile than
equivalent US bonds in the 1990s. This implies that something more than just short-term bias caused
by moral hazard is at work.


                                               23
flows, even if it occurs for reasons quite independent of the situation in a particular emerging market,

can precipitate serious financial problems, due either to maturity mismatches, if the exchange rate is

defended, or to currency mismatches, if it is not. Work by Eichengreen and Rose (1998), which finds a

strong impact of U.S. interest rates on the likelihood of banking crises in emerging markets, quite

independent of the situation in the emerging markets themselves is consistent with this view.

          The idea that the inability of borrowers to make credible commitments also finds some support

in the particulars of the Asian crisis. The tendency for the crisis to infect economies like Indonesia’s, as

panicked creditors scrambled to attach the available collateral, is consistent with the view that such

countries are especially crisis prone due to the weakness of creditor rights, of the judiciary, and of their

bankruptcy and insolvency procedures.

          The safe if unexciting conclusion is that no one of our three explanations alone can fully explain

the facts.


6. Would a More Flexible Exchange Rate Encourage More Hedging?

          Accounts that explain the severity of the Asian crisis in terms of the extent of unhedged foreign

exposures argue that these mismatches emerged out of “expectations that relatively stable exchange

rates would be maintained indefinitely.”24 They advocate greater exchange rate flexibility as a way of

giving banks and firms stronger incentives to hedge their positions.




24
     The quote is from Johnston, Darbar and Echeverria (1999), p.290.


                                                24
       In the original-sin interpretation, the problem is not that the private sector lacks incentives to

hedge but that it lacks the capacity. If foreign investors are willing to lend only in their own currencies,

then the country’s aggregate net foreign exposure must be unhedged, by definition. To assume the

ability to hedge is equivalent to assume that countries can borrow abroad in their own currencies but

choose not to do so, in spite of the fact that the market does not appear to exist. If inadequate

incentives are the reason for the failure to hedge, then we should see more foreign-currency borrowing

in countries with floating currencies. In fact, this is not the case: floaters such as Chile, Mexico and

Peru do their borrowing in foreign currency. By contrast, developed countries borrow mainly in their

own currency, whether their exchange rates float freely or not. This suggests that something besides

inadequate incentives to hedge is at work.

       The very idea that corporates should hedge the exposures that emanate from their foreign

currency loans implies a curious division of labor. Borrowing in dollars and hedging the risk is

equivalent to borrowing in pesos. Wouldn’t it make more sense for international banks to offer peso

loans and to themselves do the hedging?

       To be sure, even if the aggregate net foreign exposure of a country suffering from original sin

must be unhedged, individual banks and firms can hedge their exposure by selling its domestic-

currency-denominated liabilities for assets denominated in foreign currency, but only to other domestic

banks and firms, since foreigners are unwilling to buy those liabilities by assumption. They can pass

their exposures around like a hot potato, but they cannot eliminate them. There is an argument that the

redistribution of foreign exposures domestically can be stabilizing, either because it distributes them


                                              25
more evenly (avoiding unmanageable concentrations in a few corporate hands) or because it reallocates

them from banks and firms less able to manage them to other domestic entities in a stronger position to

absorb the impact of a large exchange-rate change on their balance sheets. But the extent to which this

has important stabilizing effects remains an open question.

       More fundamentally, the idea that floating, by increasing the volatility of the exchange rate, will

lead to more hedging overlooks the fact that the cost of hedging increases with volatility. The exchange

rate volatility associated with floating means that insurance will be more expensive, and that it may be

optimal to leave a larger portion of dollar liabilities unhedged. In currency futures and options markets,

volatility will aggravate uncertainty about whether the counterparty will be able to deliver on the

contract. Markets in currency hedges are insurance markets, and, as in any insurance market, adverse

selection can interfere with the tendency for the quantity of insurance to rise with the underlying risk. As

the risks go up, it may pay to sell less. A possible implication is that one should observe more, not less

hedging when exchange rates are stable. This may be why countries with very low exchange-rate

volatility, such as Hong Kong and Argentina, have relatively deep forward markets.25

       This is, as the theorists say, an empirical question. On the one hand there is anecdotal evidence

from Asia of unhedged exposures encouraged by “expectations that relatively stable exchange rates




25
  In addition, promoting futures markets in poorly regulated and supervised financial systems has a
downside. Derivatives are among the hardest instruments to regulate. While they can be used to hedge
risks, they also permit to place highly speculative bets hidden off balance sheet. The development of
options markets may be particularly dangerous in countries with weak banking supervision.


                                              26
would be maintained indefinitely.”26 Analysts seem convinced that more volatility would have

encouraged more hedging over the relevant range. On the other hand there is the fact of relatively deep

forward markets in countries like Hong Kong and Argentina. The plural of anecdote may be data, but

more than anecdotal evidence is needed to answer this question. In other words, gathering survey (and

other) data on hedged and unhedged exposures and analyzing their determinants should be a high

priority for academics and the multilaterals.




7. Case-Study Evidence

          Further light can be shed on these issues by three case studies: Argentina under the gold

standard and Panama and Australia in the 1990s.

          Argentina under the Gold Standard. Gold-standard experience, depending on how it is

viewed, lends some support for each of our three interpretations of the financial-fragility problem.

Capital flows, as is well known, were unusually large between 1880 and 1914. Figure 1 shows the

now-famous scatter plot of savings and investment rates for high-income countries during the gold

standard years.27 This correlation is looser than in the modern period; the adjusted R2 from a

regression of savings on investment ranges from 0.15 to 0.30 depending on the sample period and

number of observations, in contrast to 0.9 or more in Feldstein and Horioka (1980), indicative of a



26
     The quote is from Johnston, Darbar and Echeverria (1999), p.290.

27
     This uses the Jones and Obstfeld (1999) data set.


                                                27
higher level of capital transfer under the gold standard. Net outflows ranged as high as 9 per cent of

GDP on an annual average basis for Britain and reached somewhat lower peaks in France and

Germany. Current account deficits exceeded 10 per cent of GDP in Australia, Canada and Argentina

for significant portions of the three decades preceding 1913. Much of this lending was long term,

intermediated by the bond market. Since foreign funds were heavily devoted to railway construction,

this relatively free bond-market access eliminated the modern problem of maturity mismatches.

       Without doubt, the low level of exchange risk under the gold standard contributed to this

unusual willingness to lend and ability to borrow. Madden (1985, p.255) observes that it is “of course

common knowledge” that British investors viewed securities issued by countries not on the gold

standard as riskier than those of countries that were.” In a statistical study, Bordo and Rockoff (1996)

document that countries on the gold standard were able to borrow abroad at lower interest rates than

those with fluctuating, inconvertible currencies.

       The question is whether adherence to the gold standard was the real story behind this

exceptional level of capital transfer -- or, to put the point another way, what Bordo et al.’s gold-

standard variable is picking up. Many of the countries that loomed large on the receiving end of capital

flows in the high gold standard era (Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India) were members of the

British Empire. They imported the British legal system. They imported British auditing and accounting

standards, typically in the person of the expatriate British chartered accountant. They were dependent

on the British market for their exports, which, together with their political ties to the mother country,

rendered debt default virtually unthinkable. They possessed a relatively strong financial infrastructure, in


                                              28
other words, and a commitment technology that lent credibility to the promise to repay. These facts,

and not the internationalization of currencies per se, may explain their extraordinary capital-market

access.

          To be sure, there were exceptions like Argentina. While the British export market loomed

large there too, few of the other aforementioned conditions prevailed. Yet Argentina was able

nonetheless to access large amounts of foreign capital while on the gold standard, notably in the 1880s.

This is a clear suggestion of the importance of the exchange-rate regime, consistent with the predictions

of “original sin.”

          At the same time, Argentina’s experience under the gold standard was not entirely happy.28

The 1880s, the decade of large-scale capital imports, was riddled with fiscal and financial excesses.

The country had a weak banking system. Connected lending was pervasive. Disclosure standards

were weak, transparency inadequate.29 The government pressed the banks to finance its deficits and

underwrite its development plans, in return for which it extended them implicit promises of support. All

this will sound familiar to adherents to the moral-hazard view.

          The denouement in 1890 involved the suspension and restructuring of debt-service payments.

The gold premium skyrocketed. Argentina was then mired in recession until the second half of the

decade. Railroad construction ground to a halt as capital market access was curtailed. Argentina’s



28
     Readers interested in more detail might consult Marichal (1989).

29
     See Peters (1934) and Schwartz (1989) for two accounts.


                                               29
access to European capital markets was not restored for a decade, until the gold standard was

reinstituted in 1899 and full debt service payments were resumed in 1901.

       An interpretation is that internationalization of the currency under the gold standard was no

panacea, and that happy results hinged on putting in place other supportive policies such as fiscal

discipline, a strong banking system, arms-length lending, and adequate disclosure and transparency.

This reading of history suggests that dollarization is bound to produce happy results only if it is adopted

in the context of a sound policy framework.

       Panama. A second relevant case is Panama, a fully dollarized economy with an internationally

integrated financial system. Dollarization is of long standing. Based on a 1904 agreement with the

United States which led to adoption of Panamanian Law no. 84 that same year, Panama has no paper

currency of its own.30 The U.S. dollar circulates as legal tender, along with U.S. and Panamanian

coins.31 The National Bank serves as clearinghouse for checks and dollars but has no effective control

of the money supply.

       Panama’s experience would appear to provide clear evidence of the benefits of

internationalization of the currency. The country has had by far the lowest rate of inflation in Latin

America, averaging less than one per cent in the 1990s (Figure 2). At 4.3 per cent, it has had the



30
  The initial purpose of this agreement was to ease the process of paying workers engaged in building
the Panama Canal, although it remained in place subsequently.

 For a brief period in 1941 the Panamanian President (Arnulfo Arias Madrid) created a central bank,
31


which emitted one, five, ten and twenty balboa notes, but when Arias was deposed later that year, the
notes were invalidated and withdrawn from circulation.


                                              30
second fastest rate of growth in Latin America after Chile and the second lowest GDP volatility behind

Colombia (Figure 3). Capital inflows are large and smoothly finance payments imbalances. Panama’s

Brady Bonds are less volatile than those of any other Latin American country (Figure 4), and those

bond-price fluctuations have the least impact on domestic financial conditions.32

       Interestingly, Panama’s fiscal performance has been less than virtuous. It suffered significant

political disturbances as well, in 1964, with riots in the Canal Zone, and again in 1987-9, when the U.S.

imposed a trade embargo, stopped payments for the Canal and froze the assets of the National Bank of

Panama. And yet its banking system held up through those events as well as through the two oil-price

shocks, the lending boom of the 1970s, and then the debt crisis of the 1980s (Moreno-Villalaz 1999).

The country’s banking system is exceptionally large for a country of its size and income, bank credit to

the private sector exceeding 100 per cent of GDP. Panama has the highest ratio of M2 to GNP of any

Latin American country (Figure 5). And it is the only economy in Latin America with an active 30-year

mortgage market, which offers loans at twice the typical Latin American maturity at rates under nine per

cent, roughly half those on the average Latin American dollar mortgage.

       These are compelling benefits. But are they attributable to dollarization? A problem with this

attribution is that the growth of Panama’s financial sector and the development of an active 30 year

mortgage market did not coincide with dollarization but post-dated it by 60 years. The growth of the




 Stein et al. (1999) estimate the elasticity of short-term domestic interest rates with respect to the yield
32


on long-term dollar bonds and find large and statistically significant responses for six other Latin
American countries but not for Panama, where the short-term interest rate is essentially determined by
Libor.


                                             31
Panamanian banking sector only began following the adoption of Law No. 18 of 1959, which enhanced

secrecy and opened the way for numbered bank accounts. Cabinet Decree No. 238 of 1970 then

reorganized the country’s banking system, adding flexibility in bank licensing and further strengthening

secrecy provisions to lure foreign banks to Panama. This made Panama attractive as an offshore

banking center. The irony then, is that the financial depth and stability of the Panamanian financial

system is not associated with the transparency and good practices that dollarization is supposed to

bring, but precisely with the country’s lack of transparency.

       Be that as it may, the presence of a large financial sector permitted full integration of the

Panamanian domestic market into the U.S. financial system. Banks in Panama can place their excess

deposits in the Libor market and borrow quite freely there when credit demand exceeds deposit

demand. This has allowed the financial sector to cushion the economy from many of the major external

shocks of the last 30 years.

       Thus, Panama shows that, while dollarization may provide price stability, reaping its full benefits

also requires fully integrating the domestic financial system into international financial markets.

       Australia. Highly open, primary-commodity exporting countries, according to the

conventional wisdom, find it difficult to float. Australia is an important counterexample. The Asian

crisis showed the effectiveness of Australia’s flexible exchange rate regime. The country, which started

floating in 1983, spent more than a decade struggling with its new system. Ofttimes, monetary policy

had to be used to support the exchange rate, leading in the early 1990s to a procyclical response to




                                              32
shocks that produced a major recession. But credibility was established in time to be put to use during

the Asian crisis.33

          Australia was hit by a terms-of-trade decline of about 10 percent as a result of the crisis.

Policymakers decided to let the exchange rate take the hit and did not raise interest rates, easing

instead. The relaxation of monetary policy stimulated a consumption boom that sustained expansion at

more than four percent per annum. The currency depreciated by 20 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar.34

This depreciation had little effect on inflation, which remained subdued at less than two percent, the

central bank’s target rate. It compensated for the collapse of import prices, preventing deflation and

boosting the profitability of the export sector. Nonetheless, the current account deficit widened from

four to six percent of GDP.

          So much for “fear of floating.” The question is whether Australia’s success with floating can be

emulated by emerging markets. Many Latin American economies share the population size and

resource intensity of Australia. But does exchange rate flexibility promise similar results there?

          The reason for thinking not is that Australia does not suffer from original sin. It possesses a

deep and liquid long-term, domestic-currency, fixed-interest-rate market. Some 44 percent of its

external debt is denominated in its own currency. Not only are Australian companies able to issue A$-

denominated bonds in international markets, but non-Australian global firms issue such obligations as




 The first decade of floating was not easy. It involved paying spreads of about 400 basis points over
33


U.S. treasuries until the early 1990s, when both inflation and interest rates started to converge to U.S.
levels. Until then, it involved setting monetary policy with the exchange rate in mind.

34
     But by only 10 percent in trade weighted terms.


                                                33
part of a balanced funding strategy. Much of that debt is swapped with Australian firms in order to

further reduce Australia’s foreign currency exposure.

       Analysts (e.g. Gruen and Kortian 1996) argue that Australian bonds are attractive because the

A$ strengthens when commodity prices are high, reflecting the country’s resource intensity. This

typically coincides with periods in which global inflation is high. Australian bonds are therefore

perceived as providing an inflation hedge. Since Australia’s foreign debt is mainly denominated in $A,

depreciation works to reduce the domestic value of foreign debt instead of increasing it. By floating,

Australia is effectively able to transfer some of its risk abroad. In contrast, if a country suffers from

original sin and its external debt is denominated in foreign currency, a weakening currency will have

adverse balance-sheet effects. If it devalues it may therefore be perceived as less credit worthy, forcing

it to reduce instead of widening its current account deficit. Instead of the anti-cyclical policy Australia

was able to pursue, such a country would have no choice but to adopt a procyclical policy.

       This contrast is evident in Figures 6 and 7, which compare interest-rate and exchange-rate

behavior in Australia and Mexico. In Australia it has evidently been possible for the authorities to

decouple exchange-rate and interest-rate policies so as to operate in countercyclical ways. In Mexico,

in contrast, the interest rate continues to shadow the exchange rate, reflecting the authorities’ reluctance

to allow the latter to move freely, given the extent of currency and maturity mismatches in the banking

system. There, the active countercyclical use of monetary policy is necessarily more limited.

       Australian experience thus underscores the importance of original sin. But how did Australia

achieve redemption? One answer is that the country developed its market for long-term debt before it

liberalized its financial markets and before it started to float in 1983. The bond market became


                                              34
attractive to foreign investors only after a liquid domestic market had first been developed. Moreover,

Australia started to float not in the context of a currency crisis but in the context of an appreciation.

       This path may be hard to follow for countries that have already liberalized their financial systems

and begun to float. And in turn this suggests that dollarization may act as a scaffolding that allows

markets to develop.




8. Conclusion

       There are no easy solutions for countries confronted by the exchange-rate dilemma. It is a

commonplace of international economics textbooks that pegged exchange rates, international capital

mobility, and an independent stabilizing role for domestic monetary policy are incompatible. In a recent

paper, Richard Cooper (1999) has also questioned whether floating exchange rates, international

capital mobility, and an independent stabilizing role for domestic monetary policy are compatible. In a

world of high capital mobility, the textbooks teach, countries seeking economic and financial stability

cannot peg. But neither, recent experience as interpreted by Cooper and the apostles of original sin

suggests, can they safely float.

       This leaves two ways out. One is dollarizing. Dollarization eliminates all scope for an

independent national monetary policy and is likely to limit the capacity of the domestic authorities to

provide lender-of-last resort services.35 But by eliminating the currency and maturity mismatches that


 Ability to act as a lender of last resort is not exclusively based on the capacity of the central bank to
35


print money, of course, but instead on the capacity of the public sector to supply or borrow real
resources in times of crisis. If this cannot be done in other ways, the ability of the central bank to use
fiat money to backstop the financial system must be relied upon. However, since this tends to signal an


                                              35
are a particular threat to financial stability, it diminishes the need for either function of monetary policy.

By increasing the willingness of foreigners to lend, especially in periods when lending is needed most,

dollarization promises to reduce the level and volatility of interest rates, attenuate the severity of

business cycles, and buttress the stability of financial systems in emerging markets. The caveat is that if

dollarization proceeds before other risks to financial stability have been reduced by, inter alia,

reinforcing capital standards, strengthening prudential supervision and regulation, and putting the public

finances on a sound and stable footing, premature removal of part of the safety net may come back to

haunt the authorities.

       The other way out is to become more like Australia. Countries can shed their fear of floating

by achieving redemption from original sin — by building deep and liquid domestic markets in long-term,

domestic-currency-denominated securities. Doing so means adopting securities-market regulations that

discourage insider trading, market cornering and market manipulation in order to make participation

attractive to investors. It means reforming monetary and fiscal institutions in ways that enhance the

independence, transparency and credibility of the policy-making authorities, and acquiring a track

record of following sound and stable policies. It means privatizing social security systems to generate a

broad constituency of domestic investors opposed to the manipulation by sovereigns of domestic debt

markets.

       The problem, the advocates of dollarization object, is that emerging markets cannot afford to

wait. The cost of postponing growth and stability is very large. These are sorely needed now, not



acceleration of inflation, there is the risk that it can generate an attack on the currency (Chang and
Velasco 1999). Argentina in 1982, Venezuela in 1994 and Ecuador in 1999 are cases in point.


                                              36
tomorrow or the day after. Indeed, becoming like Australia may be even trickier and take even longer

than this. Australia developed its long-term domestic market before it liberalized its financial system

and started to float. Building a demand long-term, domestic-currency-denominated securities may be

even harder in today’s world of liberalized financial markets and floating exchange rates. The extent of

reform in emerging markets (IDB 1997) suggests that it may now be the monetary regime that is the

lagging component.36

       Time will tell which of these options proves more appealing to emerging markets. Only one

thing is sure: we are about to find out. Let us hope that it will not take too many more devastating

crises to see the issues more clearly.




36
  In Latin America, for example, countries have gone a long ways in strengthening their fiscal positions,
internationalizing their banking systems, and upgrading the supervision and regulation of their financial
markets, especially after the Tequila crisis of 1995. In addition, they have improved their international
liquidity position and debt structure. Thanks to these reforms the region was able to withstand a series
of large negative shocks starting in the second half of 1997 (the Asian crisis, the collapse in the terms of
trade, El Nino, the Russian crisis, the Brazilian contraction and devaluation, etc.). Its banking systems
were able to survive a very large decline in capital inflows and a sharp drop in economic activity. It
may therefore be that further strengthening domestic systems to cope with the consequences of original
sin is a less efficient response than dollarization.


                                             37
                                        References


Asian Development Bank (1999), Asian Development Outlook, Manila: Asian Development Bank.


Balino, Tomas J.T. (1987), “The Argentine Banking Crisis of 1980,” Working Paper no. 87/77,
Washington, D.C.: IMF.


Bank for International Settlements (1998), 68th Annual Report, Basle: BIS.


Bayoumi, Tamim (1997), Financial Integration and Economic Activity, Manchester: Manchester
University Press.


Bayoumi, Tamim and Andrew Rose (1993), “Domestic Saving and Intra-National Capital Flows,”
European Economic Review 37, pp.1197-1202.


Bisat, Amer, R. Barry Johnston, and V. Sundararajan (1999), “Sequencing Financial Reform and
Liberalization in Five Developing Countries,” in R. Barry Johnston and V. Sundararajan (eds),
Sequencing Financial Sector Reforms: Country Experiences and Issues, Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund, pp.95-185.


Bordo, Michael D. and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, pp.389-428.


Buiter, Willem H. and Anne C. Sibert (1999), “UDROP: A Small Contribution to the New
International Financial Architecture,” unpublished manuscript, University of Cambridge and Birkbeck
College, University of London.


Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989), “A Constant-Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,”
Journal of Political Economy 97, pp.155-178.


Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (1999), “Hedging and Financial Fragility in
Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes,” NBER Working Paper no. 7143 (May).


Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (1999), “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options,” unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland at College Park.




                                            38
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco (1999), “Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets: Theory and
Policy,” NBER Working paper no. 7272 (July).


Cooper, Richard (1999), “Exchange Rate Choices,” paper presented to the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston Conference on Rethinking the International Monetary System,” Chatham, Massachusetts (8-9
June).


Cooper, Richard N. and Jeffrey Sachs (1984), “Borrowing Abroad: The Debtor’s Perspective,”
NBER Working Paper no. 1427 (August).


Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini (1998), “What Caused the Asian Currency and
Financial Crisis? Part II: The Policy Debate,” NBER Working Paper no. 6843 (December).


Dooley, Michael (1997), “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” NBER Working Paper no. 6300
(December).


Drage, John and Fiona Mann (1999), “Improving the Stability of the International Financial System,”
Financial Stability Review 6 (June), Bank of England, pp.40-77.


Eichengreen, Barry and Paul Masson, with Hugh Bredenkamp, Barry Johnston, Javier Hamann,
Esteban Jadresic and Inci Otker (1998), Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries Seeking
Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility, Occasional Paper no. 168, Washington, D.C.: IMF (August).


Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Mussa, with Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Enrica Detragiache, Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti, and Andrew Tweedie, Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical and Practical
Aspects, Occasional paper no. 172, Washington, D.C.: IMF (September).


Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew Rose (1998), “Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts: External Factors
and Emerging Market Banking Crises,” NBER Working Paper no. 6370 (January).


Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka (1980), “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows,”
Economic Journal 90, pp.314-329.


Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew Rose (1997), “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
Treatment,” Journal of International Economics 41, pp.351-366.




                                            39
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1999), “The International Financial Architecture,’ Policy Brief no. 51, Washington,
D.C.: The Brookings Institution (June).


Gavin, Michael and Ricardo Hausmann (1996), “The Roots of Banking Crises: The Macroeconomic
Context,” in Ricardo Hausmann and Liliana Rojas-Suarez (eds), Banking Crises in Latin America,
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.


Goldstein, Morris (1998), The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes Cures and Systemic Implications,
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.


Greenwald, Bruce, Joseph Stiglitz and Andrew Weiss (1984), “Information Imperfections in the Capital
Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
74, pp.194-199.


Group of Twenty Two (1998a), Report of the Working Group on Transparency and
Accountability, Washington, D.C.: Group of Twenty Two.


Group of Twenty Two (1998b), Report of the Working Group on Strengthening Financial
Systems, Washington, D.C.: Group of Twenty Two.


Group of Twenty Two (1998c), Report of the Working Group on International Financial Crises,
Washington, D.C.: Group of Twenty Two.


Gruen, David and Tro Kortian (1996), “Why does the Australian Dollar Move So Closely with the
Terms of Trade?” Research Discussion Paper no. 9601, Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.


Hausmann, Ricardo, M. Gavin, C. Pages-Serra and E. Stein (1999), “Financial Turmoil and the Choice
of Exchange Rate Regime,” unpublished manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank.


Inter-American Development Bank (1997), Latin America After a Decade of Reforms, 1997
Economic and Social Progress Report, Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.


Johnston, R. Barry, Salim M. Darbar and Claudia Echeverria (1999), “Sequencing Capital Account
Liberalization: Lessons from Chile, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand,” in R. Barry Johnston and V.
Sundararajan (eds), Sequencing Financial Sector Reforms: Country Experiences and Issues,
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, pp.245-283.




                                            40
Jones, Matthew and Maurice Obstfeld (1999), “Saving and Investment Under the Gold Standard,”
unpublished manuscript, IMF and University of California at Berkeley.


Krugman, Paul (1998), “What Happened in Asia,” unpublished manuscript, MIT.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Schleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1996), “Law
and Finance,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5661 (July).


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Schleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1997), “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, pp.1131-1150.


Levine, Ross (1997), “Financial Functions, Institutions, and Growth,” in Alison Harwood and Bruce
Smith (eds), Sequencing? Financial Strategies for Developing Countries, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, pp.17-31.


Levine, Ross (1998) “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-Run Growth,” unpublished
manuscript, University of Virginia.


Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, pp.92-96.


Madden, John J. (1985), British Investment in the United States, 1860-1880, New York: Garland
Publishing.


Marichal, Carlos (1989), A Century of Latin American Debt Crises, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.


Mishkin, Frederic (1996), “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective,” in
Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic (eds), Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 1996, Washington, DC, pp.29-62.


Moreno-Vallalaz, Juan Luis (1999), “Lessons from the Monetary Experience of Panama: A Dollar
Economy with Financial Integration,” CATO Review (forthcoming).


Obstfeld, Maurice (1998), “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12, pp.9-30.



                                            41
Ozler, Sule (1991), “Have Commercial Banks Ignored History?” unpublished manuscript, UCLA.


Peters, H. (1934), Foreign Debt of the Argentine Republic, Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press.


Rodrik, Dani and Andres Velasco (1999), “Short-Term Capital Flows,” unpublished manuscript,
Harvard University and New York University (April).


Rossi, Marco (1999), “Financial Fragility and Economic Performance in Developing Countries: Do
Capital Controls, Prudential Regulation and Supervision Matter?” Working Paper no. 99/66,
Washington, D.C.: IMF.


Rubin, Robert (1999), “Remarks on Reform of the International Financial Architecture to the School of
Advanced International Studies,” Treasury News (21 April), RR-3093.


Savastano, Miguel A. (1999), “Dollarization,” unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund.


Schwartz, Herman M. (1989), In the Dominions of Debt: Historical Perspectives on Dependent
Development, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.


Stein, Ernesto, Ernesto Talvi, Ugo Panizza and Gustavo Marques (1999), “Evaluando la dolarizacion,
una aplicacion para America Central ye el Caribe,” unpublished manuscript, Inter-American
Development Bank.


World Bank (1999), Global Development Finance, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.




                                            42
Table 1 Macroeconomic conditions related to unhedged foreign currency borrowing
                    in East Asia, January 1991-June 1997


                                                                 Average annual
                                         Interest rate                                     Exchange rate
    Country                                                       appreciationb
                                            spreada                                          volatilityc
                                                                   (+) vs. US$
    Indonesia                                 11.5                     -3.8                      0.7
    Korea, Rep. of                            4.1                      -3.2                      3.4
    Malaysia                                  1.6                       1.2                      2.6
    Philippines                               6.5                       0.9                      3.8
    Thailand                                  4.0                      -0.3                      1.2


    Memorandum items
      Germany                                 1.2                      -2.0                      6.4
      Japan                                   -2.2                      2.5                      10.7
a. Local deposit rate less LIBOR (US$) for East Asian countries. Local LIBOR less LIBOR (US$) for Japan and Germany.
Interest rate spread in percentage points.
b. Relative to the US dollar (in percent); a minus sign indicates depreciation.
c. Standard deviation of percentage deviation of exchange rate (US$) from regression on a time trend.

Source: World Bank (1999).




                                                           43
                     Table 2 Foreign exposure of banks and finance companies
                                                        (percent)

                         Ratio of foreign liabilities to M2         Ratio of foreign liabilities to assets
                             1990             1994        1996        1990         1992-96           1996
 Indonesia                    1.2                 7.0      3.2        108             193             143
 Korea, Rep. of               4.4                 8.3      14.1       140             149             174
 Thailand                     6.1             25.1         32.8       265             519             775
 Argentina                   33.7             10.1         9.5        313             197             158
 Brazil                      20.6             10.0         17.3       207             177             282
 Mexico                      55.3             66.8         44.7       901             750             498
Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.




                                                           44
       Table 3 Corporate Debt Composition, Selected Asian Economies, 1996
                                              (percent)



                                    Foreign debt                Domestic debt
Economy                    Short-term      Long-term      Short-term      Long-term
      Indonesia                20.5           19.6          31.4           28.5
Korea                          29.4           17.0          27.7           25.8
Malaysia                       32.1           11.0          35.7           21.2
Philippines                    19.7           21.3          25.5           33.5
Taipei, China                  22.3           19.2          23.9           34.6
Thailand                       29.6           12.3          32.0           26.1
Source: Asian Development Bank (1999).




                                                   45
                Table 4 Structure of the debt owed to BIS reporting banks 1998
                     (as percentage of total debt owed to BIS reporting banks)

                                                  Banks            Gov't   Nonbanks   Short-term

ALL COUNTRIES                                   35.34%            14.34%   49.51%      52.43%
DEVELOPED COUNTRY                               39.60%            13.83%   46.30%      54.19%
    Australia                                   41.72%            7.18%    50.86%      55.03%
    Portugal                                    59.84%            8.08%    31.66%      65.87%
EASTERN EUROPE                                  44.83%            14.43%   40.52%      49.07%
    Czech Republic                              53.87%             6.09%   39.82%      56.15%
    Poland                                      35.79%            22.78%   41.23%      42.92%
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES                            31.76%            14.91%   53.20%      54.58%
LATIN AMERICA                                   23.71%            20.13%   55.90%      55.22%
    Argentina                                   18.19%            19.34%   62.45%      57.38%
    Brazil                                      31.34%            17.48%   51.01%      63.12%
    Chile                                       15.08%             7.06%   77.38%      45.51%
    Colombia                                    25.63%            20.93%   53.44%      39.06%
    Mexico                                      18.64%            29.22%   52.04%      44.81%
    Peru                                        34.23%             5.51%   60.26%      77.31%
    Venezuela                                   10.27%            40.77%   48.89%      39.81%
ASIA                                            37.00%            9.04%    53.90%      53.03%
    Indonesia                                   13.69%            15.65%   70.66%      54.07%
    Korea South                                 56.57%             6.75%   36.58%      45.08%
    Malaysia                                    30.79%             6.62%   62.47%      48.21%
    Philippines                                 45.05%            12.61%   42.31%      56.39%
    Thailand                                    26.09%             4.29%   69.60%      59.26%
    Hong Kong                                   53.70%             0.72%   45.01%      75.23%
Source: BIS Consolidated International Banking Statistics.




                                                             46
               Table 5 Structure of debt: short-term and debt from banks 1998

                                                   Short-term debt          Debt to BIS reporting
                                                                                    Banks
                 LATIN AMERICA                                     25.7%                        59.8%
                   Argentina                                       18.1%                        60.8%
                   Brazil                                          22.9%                        48.4%
                   Chile                                           46.1%                        98.4%
                   Colombia                                        22.1%                        71.0%
                   Mexico                                          25.4%                        55.1%
                   Peru                                            30.2%                        43.7%
                   Venezuela                                       14.9%                        41.5%
                 ASIA                                              50.0%                        86.0%
                   Indonesia                                       37.0%                        60.1%
                   Korea, Rep.                                     68.5%                       119.9%
                   Malaysia                                        46.3%                        85.3%
                   Philippines                                     36.0%                        60.2%
                   Thailand                                        62.0%                       104.8%
                 EASTERN EUROPE                                    29.8%                        50.6%
                   Czech Republic                                  49.1%                        74.9%
                   Poland                                          10.6%                        26.3%
Source: World Bank (Global Development Finance), Bank for International Settlements Data (Consolidated International Banking
Statistics), Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank statistics on external debt.




                                                            47
                        Figure 1

      Savings and investment rates (expressed as ratios
                     of GDP) 1885-1913

       0.25




         0.2
                                CAN                 JAP

                                       NOR         USA

                                     DEN                   FRA

I / GDP 0.15                   AUS

                                            ITA
                                            GER
                  FIN
                        SWE

         0.1            RUS


                                       UK




       0.05
           0.05          0.1                0.15          0.2    0.25
                                       S / GDP




                  48
Figure 2. Average CPI Inflation in Panama and Other Latin

                  American Countries, 1990-1998


    Perú
 Venezuela
  Uruguay
  Ecuador
 Argentina
 Colombia
    Haití
 Honduras
   México
Costa Rica
 Paraguay
 Rep.Dom.
Guatemala
    Chile
   Bolivia
El Salvador
  Panamá
              0    10        20   30   40   50    60   70   80




                        49
 Figure 3. GDP Growth in Panama and Other Latin
   American and Caribbean Countries, 1990-1998
                        GDP growth (1990-1998)
                            Chile
                         Guyana
                     El Salvador
                      Argentina
                     Panamá
                         Belice
                        Bolivia
                     Guatemala
                  Rep. Dominicana
                           Perú
                      Colombia
                     Costa Rica
                       Uruguay
                      Honduras
                     Venezuela
                       Ecuador
                     Nicaragua
                        México
                      Paraguay
                           T&T
                          Brasil
                      Suriname
                       Jamaica
                      Bahamas
                      Barbados
                                    Haiti
-4%   -3%   -2%      -1%       0%           1%   2%   3%   4%   5%   6%
                      50
                                                 1000
                                                        1200
                                                               1400
                                                                            1600
                                                                                               1800
                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                              2200




                200
                               400
                                     600
                                           800
       6/1/98

      6/15/98

      6/29/98

      7/13/98

      7/27/98

      8/10/98

      8/24/98

       9/7/98




51
      9/21/98

      10/5/98

     10/19/98

      11/2/98

     11/16/98

     11/30/98

     12/14/98

     12/28/98

      1/11/99

      1/25/99

       2/8/99

      2/22/99

       3/8/99

      3/22/99
                                                                                                                                                American Countries, 1998-1999




       4/5/99

      4/19/99

       5/3/99
                                                                                                      Brasil




      5/17/99
                      PANAMA




      5/31/99
                                                                      Colombia
                                                                                   Argentina
                                                                                                                  Venezuela
                                                                                                                                     Figure 4. Long-Term Bond Spreads for Selected Latin




      6/14/99

      6/28/99
     Figure 5. M2/GDP Ratio in Selected Latin American Countries:
                       Average for the 1990s



   Panamá
  Uruguay
    Bolivia
     Chile
    Brasil
 Costa Rica
EL Salvador
     Haiti
  Honduras
 Nicaragua
   Ecuador
 Venezuela
    Mexico
 Rep. Dom.
  Paraguay
 Guatemala
  Colombia
     Peru
  Argentina
              0%   10%    20%       30%      40%      50%      60%




                     52
                                               interest rate




                            4.2
                                   4.4
                                         4.6
                                                4.8
                                                            5.2
                                                                   5.4
                                                                         5.6
                                                                                5.8




                      4
                                                      5
                                                                                  6
             01/01/1997

             03/01/1997

             05/01/1997

             07/01/1997

             09/01/1997




53
             11/01/1997

             01/01/1998

             03/01/1998




     ausr
             05/01/1998
                                                                                                              Figure 6




             07/01/1998

     auser   09/01/1998

             11/01/1998

             01/01/1999

             03/01/1999

             05/01/1999
                                                                                       Australian Exchange Rates and Interest Rates, 1997-1999




             07/01/1999

             09/01/1999
                      1.2
                                  1.3
                                          1.4
                                                      1.5
                                                                  1.6
                                                                          1.7
                                                                                 1.8




                                           exchange rate
                                          interbank rate




                          15
                               20
                                     25
                                           30
                                                 35
                                                      40
                                                            45
                                                                 50
                                                                        55
             01/02/1997

             03/02/1997

             05/02/1997

             07/02/1997

             09/02/1997




54
             11/02/1997

             01/02/1998

             03/02/1998




     mexr
             05/02/1998
                                                                                                 Figure 7




             07/02/1998

     mexer   09/02/1998

             11/02/1998

             01/02/1999

             03/02/1999

             05/02/1999
                                                                             Mexican Exchange Rates and Interest Rates, 1997-1999




             07/02/1999
                          7
                                     8
                                                 9
                                                            10
                                                                        11




                               7.5
                                           8.5
                                                      9.5
                                                                 10.5




                                          exchange rate
