NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OUTPUT-BASED PAY: INCENTIVES OR SORTING?

Edward P. Lazear

Working Paper 7419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7419

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1999

This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation. I am most grateful to Kevin J.
Murphy, who provided me with many facts and references. I also thank James Baron, David Frankel,
Charles Jones, Kenneth Judd, David Kreps, Steven Tadelis and participants of the Stanford GSB faculty
workshop for providing useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Output-based Pay: Incentives or Sorting?
Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 7419
November 1999
JEL No. J3

ABSTRACT
Variable pay, defined as pay that is tied to some measure of a firm’s output, has become more
important for executives of the typical American firm. Variable pay is usually touted as a way to provide
incentives to managers whose interests may not be perfectly aligned with those of owners. The incentive
justification for variable pay has well-known theoretical problems and also appears to be inconsistent with
much of the data. Alternative explanations are considered. One that has not received much attention, but
that is consistent with may of the facts, is selection. Managers and industry specialists may have information
about a firm’s prospects that is unavailable to outside investors. In order to induce managers to be truthful
about prospects, owners may require managers to “put their money where their mouths are,” forcing them
to extract some of their compensation in the form of variable pay. The selection or sorting explanation is
consistent with the low elasticities of pay to output that are commonly observed, with the fact that the
elasticity is higher in small and new firms, and with the fact that variable pay is more prevalent in industries
with very technical production technologies. It does not explain why some firms give stock options even
to very low-level workers.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
lazear_edward@gsb.stanford.edu

</ref_section>

