                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE LONG-RUN GROWTH IN OBESITY AS
                          A FUNCTION OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE


                                             Tomas J. Philipson
                                             Richard A. Posner


                                            Working Paper 7423
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7423


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 1999




The authors thank Gary Becker, John Cawley, D. Gale Johnson, Lars Lefgren, Casey Mulligan, Ignacio
Palacios-Huertas, Eric Posner, Allen Sanderson, and George Zanjani for very helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1999 by Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of
Technological Change
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner
NBER Working Paper No. 7423
November 1999
JEL No. I1


                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper analyzes the factors contributing to the worldwide long-run rise in obesity and the
effects of public interventions on its continued growth. The growth of obesity in a population results from
an increase in calorie consumption relative to physical activity. Yet in developed countries, obesity has
grown with modest rises in calorie consumption and with a substantial increase in both dieting and
recreational exercise. We consider the economic incentives that give rise to a growth in obesity by
stimulating intake of calories while discouraging the expending of calories on physical activity. We argue
that technological change provides a natural interpretation of the long-run growth in obesity despite a rise
in dieting and exercise, that it predicts that the effect of income on obesity falls with economic development,
and that it implies that the growth in obesity may be self-limiting.
Tomas J. Philipson                                                     Richard A. Posner
Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies              Law School
Department of Economics and The Law School                             University of Chicago
University of Chicago                                                  1160 East 60th Street
1155 E. 60th Street                                                    Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, Il 60637                                                      richard_posner@ca7.uscourts.gov
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
