Optimal Monetary Impulse-Response Functions in a
Matching Model
Brett Katzman, John Kennan, and Neil Wallace
NBER Working Paper No. 7425
November 1999
JEL No. E30, E40, D82

ABSTRACT
The effects on ex ante optima of a lag in seeing monetary realizations are studied using a matching
model of money. The main new ingredient in the model is meetings in which producers have more information
than consumers. A consequence is that increases in the amount of money that occur with small enough
probability can have negative impact effects on output, because it is optimal to shut down trade in such low
probability meetings rather than have lower output when high probability realizations occur. The information
lag also produces prices that do not respond much to current monetary realizations.

Brett Katzman
Department of Economics
University of Miami
P.O. Box 248126
Coral Gables, FL 33124-6550
bkatzman@sba02.msmail.miami.edu

Neil Wallace
608 Kern
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802-3306
neilw@psu.edu

John Kennan
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jkennan@ssc.wisc.edu

Optimal Monetary Impulse-Response Functions in a Matching
Model∗
Brett Katzman†, John Kennan‡, and Neil Wallace§
December 2, 1999

Abstract
The effects on ex ante optima of a lag in seeing monetary realizations are studied using a
matching model of money. The main new ingredient in the model is meetings in which producers
have more information than consumers. A consequence is that increases in the amount of money
that occur with small enough probability can have negative impact effects on output, because
it is optimal to shut down trade in such low probability meetings rather than have lower output
when high probability realizations occur. The information lag also produces prices that do not
respond much to current monetary realizations.
JEL classification #’s: E30, E40, D82.

1. Introduction
We study the role of lags in seeing monetary realizations in a matching model. We do this by fixing
the lag and varying the fraction of the population who know about the current realization without a
lag. The background environment is a familiar discrete-time, random-matching model with divisible
and perishable produced goods, indivisible money, and a unit upper bound on individual money
holdings. The aggregate amount of money follows a finite-state, first-order Markov process. At
each date, the population is divided in a random way into a group, called the informed, who see
current realizations when they occur, and a group, called the uninformed, who see them with a
one-period lag. In this setting, we study how ex ante optima depend on the persistence of the
monetary uncertainty and on the size of the informed group. In particular, we describe how the
optimal responses of total output and the price level to monetary realizations vary with those
features of the environment. In studying an ex ante optimum, we are studying the output and
price level responses to monetary realizations for a society that cannot control its money supply
process or the asymmetric information about it. The society optimizes by choosing the way trade
will be conducted in meetings subject to individual rationality and truth-telling constraints.
Our model has three attractive features. One is its similarity to the world described by David
Hume in his attempt to describe and explain the effects on output and prices of money-supply
changes. He said,
∗
We thank Edward J. Green, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Rody Manuelli for helpful comments.
†
University of Miami.
‡
University of Wisconsin, Madison and NBER.
§
The Pennsylvania State University and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Please address communications
regarding this paper to Neil Wallace, 608 Kern, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802-3306;
e-mail:<neilw@psu.edu>.

...Accordingly we find, that, in every kingdom, into which money begins to flow in
greater abundance than formerly, every thing takes a new face: labour and industry
gain life; the merchant becomes more enterprising,... .
To account, then, for this phenomenon, we must consider, that though the high price
of commodities be a necessary consequence of the encrease of gold and silver, yet it
follows not immediately upon that encrease; but some time is required before the money
circulates through the whole state, and makes its effect be felt on all ranks of people.
At first, no alteration is perceived; by degrees the price rises, first of one commodity,
then of another; till the whole at last reaches a just proportion with the new quantity of
specie which is in the kingdom. In my opinion, it is only in this interval or intermediate
situation, between the acquisition of money and rise of prices, that the encreasing
quantity of gold and silver is favorable to industry. When any quantity of money is
imported into a nation, it is not at first dispersed into many hands but is confined to
the coffers of a few persons, who immediately seek to employ it to advantage. ...([5]
pages 37, 38)
There seem to be three explanatory ingredients in Hume’s discussion: decentralized trade, asymmetric information about the quantity of money, and an initial distribution of money that differs
from the steady-state distribution. Because our model contains versions of all three ingredients,
it provides a nice testing ground for Hume’s notion that the existence of uninformed people is
important.
A second attractive feature of the model is that the existence of uninformed people is very
natural in the matching model context. In fact, a necessary condition for money to be essential
is that people not know what is happening in all other meetings; if they did, then they would
know their current trading partner’s history and that, in turn, would eliminate an essential role for
money (see the discussions in Kocherlakota [9] and Wallace [16]). Not knowing what is happening
in all other meetings leads directly to the existence of uninformed people.
A third attractive feature, and, perhaps, the most important for the substantive results, is that
our specification breaks the tight link between who knows and who produces that appears in most
information-based models of output responses to money supply changes. In most such models, the
producers are uninformed and the consumers are informed (see Lucas [10], Eden [4], Lucas and
Woodford [11] and Wallace [15]). Barro and King [1] argue that that information pattern tends to
bias outcomes in favor of expansionary effects of money-supply increases and contractionary effects
for decreases. In our setting, the informed are a random subset of the population, some of whom
end up as producers and some as consumers.
In having some meetings with relatively informed consumers and other meetings with relatively
informed producers, our model resembles that of Jones and Manuelli [6]. There are, though, two
main differences. One is that Jones and Manuelli impose a bargaining rule, while we study an ex
ante optimum.1 The other is that they take the terminal value of money to be exogenous, whereas
we determine it within the model. In that respect, their model is a variant of standard static
models of bilateral exchange with private information about valuations which are taken as fixed.
The mechanism design problem in such settings is concerned with the extent to which trade can be
achieved when it is mutually beneficial (see e.g. Myerson and Satterthwaite [12] and Kennan and
Wilson [8]). In our model, on the other hand, the valuations depend on the mechanism, and most
of the analytical effort in the paper is devoted to the implications of that dependence.
The main limitation of the model is that an individual’s money holding is a binary variable:
1

One benefit of describing an optimum is that it endogenizes how trade is conducted.

2

money is not divisible, and individuals cannot store more than one unit. As a crude way to
control for the effects of this restriction, we interpret the effects of information lags relative to a
benchmark model which is identical except that everyone is informed about the current realization
when it occurs. However, because money is indivisible and because it enters and disappears in a
way which is a random version of lump-sum taxes and transfers, that benchmark does not display
neutrality.
The benchmark has the following features. The price level and total output at a date depend
only on the monetary realization for that date. The price level is increasing in the amount of
money, but total output can be increasing or decreasing in the amount of money. We assume that
the amount of money is never so large as to reduce the fraction of meetings in which trade occurs
(because such a crowding-out effect would arise only because of the restriction on money holdings).2
That implies that output is increasing in the amount of money at the extensive margin. However,
the amount produced in each meeting, which is governed mainly by the probability of subsequently
meeting people without money, is decreasing in the amount of money. Our characterization of
optimal trading arrangements does not depend on which of those effects dominates.
The introduction of an information lag produces relationships between money and total output
and the price level that are surprisingly complicated in view of the simplicity of the environment.
In particular, they make total output and the price level at a date depend on both the current and
previous period’s realization of the money supply. Total output relative to the benchmark behaves
in a way that depends on what happens in meetings between the informed and the uninformed. The
larger the amount of money, the larger the fraction of meetings between informed consumers and
uninformed producers in which trade can occur. Moreover, because, as we show, there is trade in all
those meetings and a level of production in each meeting which for higher than average realizations
is higher than the level that would be produced if the producer were informed, such meetings tend
to be a source of positive impact effects relative to the benchmark. However, meetings between
informed producers and uninformed consumers provide a potential offset. If a high monetary
realization is sufficiently unlikely, then the optimum has no-trade in meetings between informed
producers and uninformed consumers when such a realization occurs. When that happens and
if there are enough such meetings, then there can be negative impact effects on output. If the
high monetary realization occurs with high enough probability, then the optimum does not have
no-trade and the offset does not occur.3 The optimum, by the way, does not have no-trade when
a low probability low monetary realization occurs. Hence, impact effects can be asymmetric.
The existence of uninformed people produces price level stickiness relative to our benchmark.
When two uninformed people meet, their actions cannot depend on the current realization. In
addition, the truth-telling constraints in meetings between the informed and the uninformed turn
out to be another source of price level stickiness.
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe the environment we study. In section
3, we describe the set of deterministic mechanisms we consider and the optimum problem. In
section 4, we present our main results, a characterization of the optimum in an interesting region
of the parameter space: the region in which producer participation constraints are binding, but
consumer participation constraints are not. In section 5, we present examples which display the
effects described above. In section 6, we discuss the role of randomization. In section 7, we point
out the differences between the optimal mechanism and bargaining in which consumers, whether
informed or not, make take-it-or-leave-it offers. All the proofs appear in the Appendix.
2
Aside from that restriction, we do not attempt to choose the exogenous money supply process optimally. In our
examples, however, the support of the Markov process for the money supply straddles the constant amount of money
that is optimal given the other parameters in the model.
3
Results somewhat like these are obtained by Jones and Manuelli.

3

2. The environment
We first set out the familiar background environment. Then we describe how money supply changes
come about.
2.1. The background environment
Aside from the uncertainty about the stock of money, the environment is that in Wallace [15], which,
in turn, is essentially that in Shi [13] and Trejos and Wright [14]. Time is discrete and the horizon
is infinite. There are N distinct, divisible, and perishable types of goods at each date and there is a
[0, 1] continuum of each of N specialization types of people, where N ≥ 3. A specialization type-n
person consumes only good n and produces only good n + 1 (modulo N ), for n = 1, 2, ..., N . Each
person maximizes expected discounted utility with discount factor β ∈ (0, 1). Utility in a period is
given by u(x) − y, where x is the amount consumed and y is the amount produced. The function
u is defined on [0, ∞) , is increasing, strictly concave, and satisfies u(0) = 0 and u0 (0) = ∞.
In each period, people are randomly matched in pairs. Meetings are of two sorts: singlecoincidence meetings, those between a type n person (the producer) and a type n + 1 person (the
consumer) for some n; and no-coincidence meetings, those in which neither person produces what
the other consumes. (Because the number of types, N , exceeds two, there are no double-coincidence
meetings.) We assume that people cannot commit to what they will do in future meetings.
Money consists of perfectly durable and indivisible objects which cannot be produced and which
do not yield utility directly. We assume that each person can carry from one date to the next at
most one unit of money. We also assume that each trader in a meeting is able to see the trading
partner’s specialization type, money holdings, and whether the person is informed or not, but is
otherwise ignorant about the trading partner’s history.
2.2. How changes in the amount of money come about
The quantity of money follows an S-state Markov process. That is, there are S potential levels for
the stock of money: m1 , m2 , ..., mS where mi ∈ (0, 1) and mi < mi+1 . Here mi is the state i amount
of money per specialization type. We let πij denote the probability that the current state is j given
that the previous state is i and let Π denote the associated transition matrix. We assume that
πij > 0 which implies that Π has a unique invariant distribution which assigns positive probability
to each state.
We want changes in the money supply to come about in a way that gives no immediate information to the uninformed. That is accomplished by assuming that only informed people either
gain or lose money and by assuming the following timing. At the end of each date after meetings
have dissolved, the current amount of money is publicly announced. (Consequently, at that time,
people differ only in money holdings, not in information.) Then, a randomly chosen subset of each
specialization type, of measure λ, is selected and is informed about the new state. If the previous
state is i, then the measure of newly informed with money is mi λ and the measure without money
is (1 − mi )λ. If the new state is j > i, then a randomly chosen subset of the informed without
money, a subset of measure mj − mi , is given a unit of money. If the new state is j < i, then a
randomly chosen subset of the informed with money, a subset of measure mi − mj , loses a unit of
money. Then meetings occur and the sequence is repeated.
In order to be able to have all changes in the amount of money be experienced by those who
are informed, we need to assume that λ is large enough relative to the monetary changes. The

4

following assumptions accomplish that:
mS ≤

1
mS − m1
and λ ∈ [
, 1].
2
mS

(2.1)

The following two-by-two table contains the fraction of each specialization type according to
whether they are informed and whether they have money given that the previous state is i and the
current state is j.
Table 1. Distribution when the previous state is i and the current state is j.
0 units of money
1 unit of money
sums
informed
λ(1 − mi ) − (mj − mj ) ≡ θji λmi + mj − mi ≡ λ − θji
λ
uninformed
(1 − λ)(1 − mi )
(1 − λ)mi
1−λ
sums
1 − mj
mj
1
Lemma 1 confirms that (2.1) is sufficient to have all monetary changes impinge on the informed.
Lemma 1. If (2.1) holds, then θji and λ − θji are non-negative.
The description of the environment is now complete. As we will see, it turns out to be complicated because there are meetings in which there is asymmetric information. Such situations are
unavoidable in the following sense. While it makes sense to study the extreme in which everyone
is informed (λ = 1) and in which, therefore, there is no asymmetric information, it does not make
sense to study the other extreme in which no one is informed (λ = 0). According to (2.1), if no
one is informed, then there cannot be monetary uncertainty. More generally, it is hard to think of
formulations in which everyone is both symmetrically informed and less than fully informed about
monetary realizations.
For any λ, the monetary uncertainty has obvious incentive effects in our model. It makes those
without money, the potential producers, less willing to produce in order acquire money because
(i) they may lose the money acquired before they get to spend it; and (ii) if they do not produce,
then they may be given a unit. It also makes those with money, the potential consumers, more
willing to spend money because (i) if they do not spend it, then they may lose it; and (ii) if they do
spend it, then they may be given a unit. The magnitude of those effects depends on the monetary
uncertainty; roughly speaking, it is larger the larger is the range of monetary variation, mS − m1 ,
and the smaller is the persistence implied by Π.

3. Mechanisms and the optimum problem
In this section, we present our theory of what happens in the environment described above. We do
this in three steps. The first step is to describe a set of Markov mechanisms. The only meetings
in which anything can happen are called trade meetings, meetings which are single-coincidence
meetings in which the potential consumer has a unit of money and the producer does not. What
happens is assumed to depend on the previous realization and on announcements about the current
realization. The second step is to describe the subset of mechanisms that we call incentive-feasible.
For us, a mechanism is incentive-feasible if it satisfies two conditions: it is consistent with truthtelling and is consistent with ex post individual rationality in the sense that it gives expected
non-negative gains from trade to each person as they leave the meeting. (This last restriction
implies that production is zero except in trade meetings, which is why we can limit consideration
to trade meetings.) In particular, an uninformed person in a meeting has a chance to say no to a
5

trade after seeing the proposed trade, but the proposed trade does not in general reveal the current
state to the uninformed person.4 The third step is our selection from the set of incentive-feasible
mechanisms. Our selection is an ex ante optimum, one which maximizes the ex ante expected
utility of a representative person.
3.1. Markov mechanisms
Let S ≡ {0, 1, 2, ..., S} be the set of individual information states. If s denotes a generic element
of S, then s = 0 means uninformed about the current state and s > 0 means informed and that
the current amount of money is ms . We also let S+ ≡ {1, 2, ..., S}. A Markov mechanism is a pair
of functions that describes output and the transfer of money in trade meetings. That is, we let
y(sc , sp , i): S × S × S+ → R+ denote output in a trade meeting when the consumer announces
information state sc , the producer announces sp , and the previous money-supply realization is i.
We also let a(sc , sp , i): S × S × S+ → {0, 1} denote the money transfer (0 means no transfer, 1
means transfer) in such a meeting. We record this notion of a mechanism as a definition.
Definition 1. A mechanism is a pair (y, a) where y : S × S × S+ → R+ and a : S × S × S+ → {0, 1}.
Notice that we are not permitting randomization. We discuss the potential role of randomization
after we present our results for deterministic mechanisms.
3.2. Incentive-feasible mechanisms
One way to describe the class of mechanisms we study is as follows. At each meeting, there is
a computer that is programmed at date 0 before people go off to their meetings, but is able to
receive messages. At the beginning of a date, when the previous state is publicly announced, that
information is received by each computer. In addition, the computer at a meeting is able to see
who is informed and who is a producer and who is a consumer. If both are informed, then both
simultaneously announce to the computer an element of S+ . If one person is informed, then that
person announces to the computer an element of S+ . The uninformed person in the meeting does
not see the announcement. In all cases, the computer then proposes a trade, which may be no
trade. Then each person’s choice is either to accept or reject, where rejection by either person
implies no trade. Acceptance by both implies that the proposed trade is carried out. Whether
trade occurs or not, the meeting ends. A mechanism is incentive feasible if it induces truth-telling
and if the proposed trade satisfies individual rationality, and, therefore, induces acceptance.
Before we present the details, we can give an overview of the results. First, because we require
non-negative expected gains from trade as people leave a meeting, there are never pure transfers
between people. That is, we do not permit people to commit beforehand to the realization from a
distribution; they have to be willing to carry out each realization. Therefore, production occurs if
and only if money changes hands. And because the amount of money that changes hands is always
one unit, in meetings between the informed and the uninformed the amount produced in exchange
for money cannot depend on the current state. (If it did, then it would not be consistent with truthtelling by the informed person.) Therefore, in meetings between asymmetrically informed people,
4

Note that the ex post stage here is taken to be the situation at the end of a meeting, rather than the subsequent stage at which the current money supply is publicly announced (which is the point at which ex post welfare
comparisons would conventionally be made). If it is assumed that all information available to the participants in
each meeting is revealed in that meeting, then there are additional restrictions on the set of mechanisms. We are
indebted to Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Narayana Kocherlakota for conversations that helped steer us away from such a
more restrictive specification.

6

the mechanism has only to describe the amount produced and a partition of the set of current states
into trade and no-trade sets. Moreover, those sets have to be ordered: if the producer is informed,
then the set of states in which trade occurs has to be composed of those in which acquiring a unit
of money is most valuable; if the consumer is informed, then it has to be composed of those in
which acquiring a unit of money is least valuable.
If there were no incentive constraints, then maximization of ex ante welfare would dictate that
production occur in every trade meeting and at a level at which the marginal utility of consuming
equals the marginal disutility of producing—namely, at the solution to u0 (y) = 1, which we denote
y ∗ . For some regions of the parameter space (β near enough to unity and Π with sufficient persistence), an outcome with y ∗ produced in every trade meeting is incentive-feasible. We view that to
be an uninteresting outcome—in part because the price level would then be constant at y1∗ , not
dependent on the monetary realization. Therefore, we focus on a region of the parameter space
where output as high as y ∗ is not incentive-feasible because it fails to satisfy producer individualrationality constraints. As we show below, that is easily accomplished—for example, by assuming
that β is sufficiently far from unity.5
With output below y ∗ , ex-ante welfare is increasing in output in every kind of meeting. Therefore, if producer individual-rationality constraints were the only constraints, then an optimum
would satisfy those constraints with equality (that is, all of the gains from trade would accrue
to the consumer). However, there are also consumer individual-rationality and truth-telling constraints. If the consumer and the producer have the same information about the future value of
money, then when the level of output is such that the disutility of producing is just equal to the
value of money, the utility of consuming this output must exceed the value of money. That is, if the
producer’s individual-rationality constraint binds in this situation, then the consumer’s individualrationality constraint is slack. We build on this result and, in effect, assume that the range of the
support for the money supply, mS − m1 , is small enough to make consumer individual-rationality
constraints non-binding even in meetings with asymmetric information. In other words we assume
that the informational discrepancies are never large enough to outweigh the surplus generated when
the producer supplies enough output to make the producer’s individual-rationality constraint bind.
Under those assumptions, we show that it is optimal to have trade occur in every trade meeting
except possibly in some of the meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers.
Moreover, in all meetings, there are binding producer individual-rationality constraints. This is
the partial characterization of the optimum that we give in section 4. It is partial because it holds
only in a region of the parameter space and because it does not pin down the cut-off between trade
and no-trade states in meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers. Despite
that, the characterization makes it very simple to find solutions for examples. It also allows us to
prove that if Π displays sufficient persistence, then it is optimal to shut down trade in meetings
between informed producers and uninformed consumers whenever an increase in the amount of
money occurs.
We now turn to details. In order to express the constraints on mechanisms implied by our
specification of incentive-feasibility, it is helpful to have a notation for expected discounted utilities.
We let Vk (i) denote the expected utilities of someone who has k units money just after the previous
state i is announced (and before the determination of the new state and the new set of informed
people). We let Vk denote the S -element vector with generic component Vk (i). We also let ∆i ≡
V1 (i) − V0 (i) and ∆ ≡ V1 − V0 .
5
The possibility that output is constant at y ∗ whenever trade occurs is an artifact of the unit upper bound on
holdings. Output cannot be constant whenever trade occurs if individual money holdings are not restricted to the
set {0, 1}and if individual discounted expected utility is strictly increasing in money holdings.

7

It is also helpful to let Gk (ιc , ιp , s, i) be the gain, relative to not trading, in a trade meeting of
someone with k units of money when the current realization is s and the previous realization is i,
and when both parties announce truthfully. Here, ιc ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the consumer is
informed (ιc = 1) or uninformed (ιc = 0), and ιp ∈ {0, 1} indicates, in the same way, whether the
producer is informed. Then,
G0 (ιc , ιp , s, i) = −y(ιc s, ιp s, i) + a(ιc s, ιp s, i)β∆s
G1 (ιc , ιp , s, i) = u(y(ιc s, ιp s, i)) − a(ιc s, ιp s, i)β∆s .

(3.1)

G0 (ιc , ιp , s, i) + G1 (ιc , ιp , s, i) = z(y(ιc s, ιp s, i))

(3.2)

Notice that
where z(y) ≡ u(y) − y.
We can use these gain definitions to connect the discounted utilities to the mechanism. It is
convenient to do this in two steps. We let vk (ι, s, i) : {0, 1} × S+ × S+ → R+ denote the expected
discounted utility of someone who (i) holds k ∈ {0, 1} units of money, and (ii) is either informed
(ι = 1) or uninformed (ι = 0) when the current state is s and the previous state is i—all of this
prior to meetings but after determination of the set of newly informed people and after additions
or subtractions of money. These continuation values satisfy
N v0 (ι, j, i) = N βV0 (j) + (λ − θji ) G0 (1, ι, j, i) + (1 − λ) mi G0 (0, ι, j, i)
N v1 (ι, j, i) = N βV1 (j) + θji G1 (ι, 1, j, i) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) G1 (ι, 0, j, i).
(3.3)
In terms of them, the Vk (i) are defined by
V0 (i) =

S
X

πij [(1 − λ) v0 (0, j, i) + λv0 (1, j, i)] +

S
X

πij ηij (v1 (1, j, i) − v0 (1, j, i))

S
X

πij [(1 − λ) v1 (0, j, i) + λv1 (1, j, i)] −

i−1
X

πij ηij (v1 (1, j, i) − v0 (1, j, i)) ,

j=1

j=i

V1 (i) =

j=1

(3.4)

j=1

where
1−

mj
mi

1−

1−mj
1−mi

ηij = {

if j < i
.

It follows from (2.1) that ηij ≤ λ.

8

if j ≥ i

(3.5)

Notice that equations (3.4) with the vk (ι, s, i) replaced by their expressions in (3.3) consist
of 2S equations in V0 and V1 that are linear for a given (y, a). Moreover, with that substitution
into equations (3.4), for a given (y, a) the right-hand sides of equations (3.4) can be viewed as a
function that maps R2S to R2S . It is immediate that that mapping satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient
conditions for contraction: monotonicity and discounting. Therefore, equations (3.1)-(3.5) have a
unique solution for V0 and V1 for a given (y, a).
We next express the truth-telling and individual rationality constraints. For trade meetings
with symmetric information, the individual-rationality constraints are as follows. For producers,
they are
S
X
G0 (1, 1, s, i) ≥ 0 and
πij G0 (0, 0, j, i) ≥ 0.
(3.6)
j=1

For consumers, they are
G1 (1, 1, s, i) ≥ 0 and

S
X

πij G1 (0, 0, j, i) ≥ 0.

(3.7)

j=1

In each case, the first inequality pertains to an informed person who meets an informed person,
while the second pertains to an uninformed person who meets an uninformed person. (Of course,
for meetings between uninformed people, the condition is that there be expected gains from trade
because the trade occurs before the participants know the current state.) When both are informed,
truth-telling is always a Nash strategy (provided the mechanism proposes no-trade when it receives
mutually inconsistent reports). Hence, truth-telling in symmetrically informed meetings does not
imply additional constraints.
We next consider trade meetings between the informed and the uninformed. If the informed is
the producer, then the truth-telling constraint is
a(0, s, i)β∆s − y(0, s, i) ≥ a(0, s0 , i)β∆s − y(0, s0 , i),

(3.8)

while if the informed is the consumer, then the truth-telling constraint is
u(y(s, 0, i)) − a(s, 0, i)β∆s ≥ u(y(s0 , 0, i)) − a(s0 , 0, i)β∆s .

(3.9)

Both must hold for all (s, s0 ) ∈ S+ × S+ .
Therefore, as noted above, if a(0, s, i) = a(0, s0 , i), then the producer’s truth-telling constraint
implies y(0, s, i) = y(0, s0 , i); while if a(s, 0, i) = a(s0 , 0, i), then the consumer’s truth-telling constraint implies y(s, 0, i) = y(s0 , 0, i). Moreover, the individual-rationality constraints imply that
there is positive production if and only if the consumer surrenders his or her unit of money. Therefore, we let
S p (i) = {j ∈ S+ : a(0, j, i) = 1} and S c (i) = {j ∈ S+ : a(j, 0, i) = 1},

(3.10)

and let y(0, j, i) = Y p (i) for j ∈ S p (i) and y(j, 0, i) = Y c (i) for j ∈ S c (i). Then the truth-telling
constraints are equivalent to
max
j∈S+

−S p (i)

{β∆j } ≤ Y p (i) ≤ min {β∆j }
j∈S p (i)

(3.11)

and
max {β∆j } ≤ u(Y c (i)) ≤

j∈S c (i)

9

min

j∈S+ −S c (i)

{β∆j },

(3.12)

where we interpret the first to be vacuous if S p (i) or S+ − S p (i) is empty and the second to be
vacuous if S c (i) or S+ − S c (i) is empty. These are the truth-telling constraints with regard to
the partition of current states between the no-trade states and the trade states. They describe
precisely the sense in which the gain from acquiring money has to be ordered across trade and
no-trade states.
Finally, we have individual-rationality constraints for participants in these meetings. For an
informed producer, the individual-rationality constraint is the second inequality in (3.11), while for
an uninformed producer, it is
Y c (i) ≤

X
1
πij (λ − θji )β∆j ,
γi1 (S c (i))
c

(3.13)

j∈S (i)

where
γi1 (S c (i)) ≡

X

πik (λ − θki ).

k∈S c (i)

Here, πij (λ − θji )/γi1 is the probability that the current state is j given that j ∈ S c (i), that
the previous state is i, and that the trading partner is an informed person with money. For an
informed consumer, the individual-rationality constraint is the first inequality in (3.12), while for
an uninformed consumer, it is
X
1
πij θji β∆j ≤ u(Y p (i)),
γi0 (S p (i))
p

(3.14)

j∈S (i)

where
γi0 (S p (i)) ≡

X

πik θki .

k∈S p (i)

Here, πik θki /γi0 is the probability that the current state is j given that j ∈ S p (i), that the previous
state is i, and that the trading partner is an informed person without money. That is, the uninformed person in these meetings is calculating an expected gain from trade given the information
implied by truth-telling, which reveals the set of trade states, and the knowledge about the current
state implied by observing the money holding of someone who could have gained or lost money.
We can now record the definition of an incentive-feasible mechanism.
Definition 2. A mechanism (y, a) is incentive feasible if there exist Vk (i) that satisfy (3.1)-(3.14).
An immediate implication is that if (y, a) is incentive feasible (in particular, satisfies the
individual-rationality constraints), then V0 (i) and V1 (i) are non-negative.
3.3. The optimum problem
We now describe our selection from the above set of incentive-feasible mechanisms. Our selection
maximizes ex ante utility, denoted Z, which is defined as
Z=

S
X

ps [ms V1 (s) + (1 − ms )V0 (s)].

(3.15)

s=1

Here pi denotes the invariant probability, implied by the πij , that the amount of money is mi . This
objective corresponds to starting up the economy by drawing the previous state from that invariant
10

distribution and considering expected utility prior to such a draw and to initial assignments of
money holdings.
The following lemma expresses Z in terms of the parameters of the environment and the output
levels in an arbitrary mechanism.
Lemma 2. For any mechanism,
Z =

S
(1 − λ)2 X
pi mi (1 − mi )z[y(0, 0, i)]
(1 − β)N
i=1

+

S
S
X
X
1
pi
πis θsi (λ − θsi )z[y(s, s, i)]
(1 − β)N
i=1

+

s=1

S
S
X
1−λ X
pi mi
πis θsi z[y(0, s, i)]
(1 − β)N
i=1

s=1

S
S
X
1−λ X
+
pi (1 − mi )
πis (λ − θsi )z[y(s, 0, i)].
(1 − β)N

(3.16)

s=1

i=1

Notice that output levels, the components of y, appear in Z only by way of the function z
(z(x) ≡ u(x) − x) and that a, the money transfer variable, does not appear. Because z(y ∗ ), where
u0 (y ∗ ) = 1, is an upper bound on z((y(s, s0 , i)) and because the weight on z((y(s, s0 , i)) in (3.16) is
non-negative, an upper bound on Z is obtained by having y ∗ produced and consumed in all trade
meetings. Because one-quarter of all single-coincidence meetings, the maximum of the function
m(1 − m) for m ∈ [0.1], is an upper bound on the number of trade meetings, it follows that an
∗)
∗
upper bound on Z is 4Nz(y
(1−β) ≡ Z .
That bound on Z implies a bound on the set of incentive-feasible outputs. Let q = mins (ps ms ).
By (3.15), if (y, a) is incentive-feasible, then, by the non-negativity of the Vk (s), V1 (s) ≤ Z ∗ /q
and ∆s ≤ Z ∗ /q. By the individual-rationality constraints, it follows that each component of an
incentive-feasible y is bounded above by βZ ∗ /q. Moreover, because the Vk (s) and, therefore, ∆s are
continuous in y, and because the constraints are expressed as weak inequalities, it follows that the
optimum problem amounts to maximizing a continuous function over a non empty compact set.6
Therefore, a maximum exists.

4. A Partial Characterization of the Optimum
As noted above, we concentrate our study of optima in a region of the parameter space that is both
interesting and tractable. To be interesting, the optimum should not be the unconstrained welfare
maximum, y(s, s0 , i) ≡ y ∗ . Below (see lemma 5) we show that a simple sufficient condition implies
that if y is incentive feasible, then y(s, s0 , i) ≤ y ∗ .
i
To state the condition, let ymax
denote the unique positive solution for x to
x=

βz(x)(1 − mi )
.
N (1 − β)

6

(4.1)

Non emptiness is implied by the fact that no trade satisfies all the constraints. As will become evident later, the
Theorem of the Maximum does not apply because the constraint set is not lower hemicontinuous.

11

i
If the distribution of money is degenerate at mi , then ymax
is the largest constant output that
satisfies the producer’s individual-rationality constraint (see [3], page 110). It follows from u0 (0) =
i
i
∞ that ymax
> 0. Moreover, ymax
is decreasing in mi . We assume that
1
y ∗ ≥ ymax
.

(4.2)

1
Because y ∗ depends only on the function z and because ymax
→ 0 as β → 0 or N → ∞, (4.2),
which we maintain from now on, can always be satisfied. Under assumption (4.2), we are assured
that the objective Z is increasing in each component of an incentive-feasible y, a fact which plays
a role in our characterization.
1 —we characterize
In addition to keeping outputs below y ∗ —in fact, as we show, below ymax
the solution to the above optimum problem under one other assumption, which for now we leave
1 . Because, as we show below,
implicit: we assume that any optimum satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
1 , this assumption implies that u(β min ∆ ) ≥
(4.2) and incentive feasibility imply β maxs ∆s ≤ ymax
s s
β maxs ∆s . That, in turn, implies that consumer individual-rationality constraints are not binding
1 ,
at an optimum. Later, we present a sufficient condition for satisfaction of u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
one which holds for our examples.

4.1. The value of acquiring money
We begin by deriving some facts about ∆ ≡ V1 − V0 . We know that there is a unique ∆ for
each mechanism. We denote it ∆(y, a). The first result is about the weighted average of ∆ that
appears in the individual rationality constraint for uninformed producers in meetings with informed
consumers, (3.13). It is part of the argument for the result that the optimum satisfies S c (i) ≡ S+ .
Lemma 3. If (y, a) is incentive feasible, then ∆(y, a) satisfies,
1

X

πij (λ
γi1 (S c (i))
c
j∈S (i)

− θji )β∆j ≤

1

X

πij (λ
γi1 (S+ )
j∈S+

− θji )β∆j .

(4.3)

The proof makes use of truth-telling for informed consumers, the implied ordering of ∆ between
and S+ − S c (i).
The next lemma describes some properties of a mapping whose fixed point is ∆(y, a). The
mapping eliminates, through substitution, the continuation values that were introduced as part of
connecting the Vk (i) to the allocation (y, a). Let
S c (i)

h(x; y, a) ≡ b(y) + βC(a)x for x ∈ RS .

(4.4)

where the S × S matrix C(a) ≡ [cij (a)] and the S × 1 vector b(y) ≡ [bi (y)] are defined as
cij (a)
θji
λ − θji
1−λ
= (1 − λ)[1 −
a(0, 0, i) −
a(0, j, i) −
a(j, 0, i)]+
πij
N
N
N
(λ − ηij ){1 −

λ
(1 − λ)
a(j, j, i) −
[(1 − mi )a(j, 0, i) + mi a(0, j, i)]}
N
N

and
N bi (y) = (1 − λ)2 [(1 − mi )u(y(0, 0, i)) + mi y(0, 0, i)] +
(1 − λ)

S
X

πij [θji u(y(0, j, i)) + (λ − θji )y(j, 0, i)] +

j=1

12

(4.5)

S
X

πij (λ − ηij ) [θji u(y(j, j, i)) + (λ − θji )y(j, j, i)] +

j=1

(1 − λ)

S
X

πij (λ − ηij )[(1 − mi )u(y(j, 0, i)) + mi y(0, j, i)].

(4.6)

j=1

Lemma 4. Let h(x; y, a) be given by (4.4)-(4.6). Then (i) ∆(y, a) is a fixed point of h(·; y, a); (ii)
h(·; y, a) satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions for contraction; (iii) if h(∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a),
then ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a); and (iv) if y 0 ≥ y, then ∆(y 0 , a) ≥ ∆(y, a).
The next lemma, which uses assumption (4.2), shows that satisfaction of producer individual1
rationality constraints implies that ymax
is an upper bound on β∆i (y, a) and on output.
Lemma 5. If (y, a) satisfies producer individual-rationality constraints and has constant output
over trade states in meetings between informed and uninformed, then y(s, s0 , i) ≤ β maxi ∆i (y, a) ≤
1 .
ymax
We are now ready for the characterization.
4.2. The characterization
Proposition 1 gives the necessary conditions for an optimum that we mentioned above.
1 , then (i) S c (i) ≡ S ,
Proposition 1. If (y, a) is optimal and satisfies u(β mins ∆s (y, a)) ≥ ymax
+

Y c (i) =

X
1
πij (λ − θji )β∆j (y, a) for all i ∈ S+ ,
γi1 (S+ )

(4.7)

j∈S+

a(0, 0, i) = 1 and y(0, 0, i) =

S
X

πij β∆j (y, a) for all i ∈ S+ ,

(4.8)

j=1

a(j, j, i) = 1 and y(j, j, i) = β∆j (y, a) for all (i, j) ∈ S+ × S+ ,

(4.9)

Y p (i) = min {β∆j (y, a)} for all i ∈ S+ ;

(4.10)

and
j∈S p (i)

(ii) for each i, S p (i) is not empty; and (iii) if ∆j (y, a) = ∆k (y, a), then for each i either j, k ∈ S p (i)
or j, k ∈ S+ − S p (i).
The rather lengthy proof proceeds by contradiction. We first suppose that (y, a) is optimal,
but does not satisfy (i). Then we consider (y 0 , a0 ) given by (4.7)-(4.10), but with ∆(y, a) inserted
on the right-hand sides of (4.7)-(4.10). Then incentive-feasibility of y implies that y 0 ≥ y. The
main part of the proof involves showing that hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆i (y, a) = hi (∆(y, a); y, a), where
hi is the i-th component of the mapping defined in (4.4). Given that inequality, the third part of
lemma 4 implies that ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). It follows that (y 0 , a0 ) satisfies all the producer individual1 . Therefore, u(β min ∆ (y 0 , a0 ))
rationality constraints. Moreover, by lemma 5, β∆j (y 0 , a0 ) ≤ ymax
s s
1
≥ u(β mins ∆s (y, a)) ≥ ymax
≥ β maxs ∆s (y 0 , a0 ). It follows that (y 0 , a0 ) satisfies all the consumer
individual-rationality constraints. It also satisfies truth-telling for the informed consumer because
it has trade in every state when the consumer is informed. But (y 0 , a0 ) may or may not satisfy
1
≥ y0 ≥ y
truth-telling for informed producers. If it does, then we have a contradiction because ymax
13

and we have either increased output or replaced no-trade by trade, both of which increase Z. If
not, then there is some previous state i and some current state r such that β∆r (y 0 , a0 ) > Y p (i)0
≥ β∆r (y, a). We then consider (y 0 , a00 ), where a00 differs from a0 only in adding state r to S p (i).
We can show that ∆(y 0 , a00 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). Repetition of this argument at most S times leads to trade
in every state, which renders truth-telling vacuous. Parts (ii) and (iii) are proved using simple
versions of the same argument.
The next lemma shows that for a given specification of the S p (i) sets there is a unique monetary
mechanism (i.e., a mechanism with positive trade) that satisfies condition (i) of proposition 1.
Lemma 6. Given S p (i) for each i ∈ S+ , there exists a unique monetary mechanism that satisfies
(4.7)-(4.10).
The proof shows that a mapping whose fixed points coincide with solutions to (4.7)-(4.10) and
∆ = h(∆; y, a) has a unique positive fixed point. The proof relies on monotonicity and concavity
of the mapping (see [7]). One by-product of the proof is the result that the solution to (4.7)-(4.10)
and ∆ = h(∆; y, a) can be obtained by a simple iterative scheme that does not require solving
simultaneous equations.
Proposition 1 and lemma 6 give us a simple procedure for finding the optimum for a given
environment (that satisfies the hypotheses of proposition 1). For each specification of the S p (i)
sets, obtain the unique monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10). Discard those that are
inconsistent with truth-telling for the informed producer. Among those that remain, the optimum
is the one that gives the highest Z. Because S p (i) ≡ S+ satisfies truth-telling, there is at least one
monetary mechanism that is incentive-feasible.
We now show that the maximized objective is continuous in Π provided that πii is bounded
away from 0 for each i. We establish such continuity in two steps. First, we show that for given
S p (i) sets, the unique monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) is continuous in Π.
Lemma 7. Let S p (i) for i ∈ S+ be given. Let P = {Π : πii ≥ α > 0 for all i}. Then the unique
monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) is continuous in Π for Π ∈ P.
Now we give the main continuity result.
1 , then the maximized objective is
Proposition 2. If the optimum satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
continuous in Π for Π such that πij is positive and πii is bounded away from 0.

While the proof uses lemma 7, it must do more than appeal to the fact that the maximum of
continuous functions is continuous. The unique monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) for
given S p (i) sets may satisfy truth-telling for informed producers for some Π0 s and not others. We
can show that if Π0 is a critical point in terms of such truth-telling (truth-telling holds at Π0 but
not in the neighborhood of Π0 ), then necessary condition (iii) in proposition 1 fails at Π0 . That, in
turn, implies that the maximum cannot be at such a critical point. That and lemma 7 imply that
the maximized objective is continuous.
There is a sense in which optima are not very interesting if they always satisfy S p (i) ≡ S+ .
To see why that does not always happen, we begin with an informal argument for a simple case.
Consider S = 2 and a symmetric transition matrix,


1−ε
ε
Π=
.
(4.11)
ε
1−ε

14

When ε = 0, the model is one with a constant money supply. Then the optimum is y(ιc i, ιp i, i) =
i
ymax
(see (4.1)). Now suppose that ε > 0, but small. In this model, the current amount of money
influences the producer’s individual-rationality constraint because it influences the distribution
of the amount of money next period. Thus, if ε is near 0, then we expect that the producer’s
individual-rationality constraint is slacker the smaller is the current money supply. Now consider
meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers. If last period’s state is m1 and
if production is positive in both current states, then output has to be independent of the current
state and, therefore, low enough to satisfy the producers individual rationality constraint when the
current state is m2 . If, instead, there is no-trade when the current state is m2 , then output can be
higher when the current state is m1 . If ε is sufficiently close to 0, then it should be optimal to have
no-trade when the current state is m2 . Matters are different if last period’s state is m2 . Then in
order to get higher output in some state than output that is constant across current states, there
would have to be no-trade when the current state is m2 . But that would not be beneficial because
the conditional probability of m2 is high.
We formalize that discussion as follows.
Proposition 3. Let {Πk } → I (the identity matrix) and be such that the corresponding sequence
of stationary probability vectors {pk } converges to a strictly positive vector. Assume that the
1 . There exists
optimum for any Π in the neighborhood of Π = I satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
K such that if k > K, then the optimum for Πk has no-trade between informed producers and
uninformed consumers whenever the current state, j, exceeds the previous state, i.
The main idea for the proof is similar to the discussion given above for S = 2.
Now that we have characterized the optimum, a comment about implementing it is in order.
The optimum we have described is easy to implement, and without using the fiction of a computer
at each meeting that receives reports and is updated when the previous state is publicly announced.
At each trade meeting and conditional on the knowledge that is common to the two people in the
meeting, the optimum has a single positive trade proposal. Indeed, this is a feature of any incentivefeasible mechanism. Therefore, we can let the two people play a simultaneous move game in which
the strategies are simply {trade, no-trade}. If both say trade, then the positive trade proposal is
carried out. If either says no-trade, then there is no trade and each goes on to the next date. In
part because the optimum has positive trade in every state when the consumer is informed and the
producer is not, it is a dominant strategy for the consumer in every trade meeting to play trade.
Given that play by the consumer, it is a best response for the producer to play the strategy that
implements the optimum.
1
4.3. Sufficient conditions for u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax

Our last task in this section is to provide a sufficient condition for assuring that any optimum
1 , the hypothesis of propositions 1-3. The sufficient condition uses a
satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
lower bound on the optimal magnitude of Z, a bound we call Zmin . As part of the proof that shows
that a small enough range for the support of the money supply is sufficient to insure u(β mins ∆s ) ≥
1
ymax
(lemma 9), we provide one such Zmin . More generally, Zmin could be obtained from any lemma
6 mechanism that is incentive feasible.
We begin by constructing an upper bound on ex ante utility implied by any allocation that
1 . The idea is that violating this inequality implies that at least one
violates u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
1 ) and that this implies upper bounds on outputs and, hence
component of ∆ is less than u−1 (ymax
1 /β for j 6= k and
on ex ante utility. For each k ∈ S+ , let ∆k ∈ RS be defined by ∆kj = ymax
1 ). Then let y k be defined by
β∆kk = u−1 (ymax
15

S

k

y (j, 0, i) =

X
1
πis (λ − θsi )β∆ks
γi1 (S+ ) s=1

y k (j, j, i) = y k (0, j, i) = β∆kj , y k (0, 0, i) = β

S
X

πis ∆ks ,

(4.12)

s=1

for all i, j ∈ S+ .
Lemma 8. Let Z(y k ) be ex ante welfare implied by y k as given by (4.12). Let Zmin be the ex ante
welfare implied by some incentive-feasible mechanism. If there exists Zmin such that Z(y k ) ≤ Zmin
1 .
for each k ∈ S+ , then any optimum satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
1 , then y k is
The proof in outline is as follows. If the optimum violates u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
strictly greater than any optimal y, and, hence, Z(y k ) is strictly greater than the optimum Z .
Therefore, if Z(y k ) ≤ Zmin for each k ∈ S+ , then we have a contradiction and the optimum cannot
1 .
satisfy u(β mins ∆s ) < ymax
Lemma 8 is a crude result because the specification in (4.12) is a crude upper bound on an
1 ) for some k. Despite that crudeness, the next result
incentive feasible y given that β∆k < u−1 (ymax
says that the hypothesis of lemma 8 can always be met if the range of the support for the money
supply is sufficiently small.

Lemma 9. There exists ε > 0 such that if mS − m1 < ε, then the hypothesis of lemma 8 holds.
In the proof of this lemma, we construct a Zmin from a mechanism with constant output and
trade in every trade meeting. Then we show that as mS − m1 → 0, this constant output approaches
1 . That, in turn, guarantees that the implied Z
ymax
min satisfies the hypothesis of lemma 8.
To summarize, the following two-step algorithm permits us to determine whether a given envi1
≤ y ∗ and
ronment satisfies conditions that are sufficient to insure that any optimum satisfies ymax
1
u(β min ∆i ) ≥ ymax .
1
1
(i). Compute ymax
and y ∗ and check whether ymax
≤ y ∗ . (Then lemma 5 implies that any
1
optimum satisfies ymax ≥ β max ∆i .)
(ii). Attempt to find some Zmin (the optimum from lemma 6 and the construction in the proof
of lemma 9 are possibilities) for which the hypothesis of lemma 8 holds.

5. Examples
We present three examples designed mainly to emphasize the consequences for aggregates of whether
trade is shut down in some meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers. As
discussed in the introduction, we expect any such shutting down to affect the magnitude of the total
output response to changes in the amount of money relative to what happens in the benchmark
case of everyone informed (λ = 1).
The aggregates we study are total output and the price level. For each example, we present
the optimal Markov process for each. Let Yij and Pij denote total output and the price level,
respectively, when the previous state is i and the current state is j. For a given mechanism, total
output is the appropriate sum of outputs over meetings:
N Yij

= mi (1 − mi )(1 − λ)2 y(0, 0, i) + (λ − θji )θji y(j, j, i) +
(λ − θji )(1 − mi )(1 − λ)y(j, 0, i) + mi θji (1 − λ)y(0, j, i).
16

(5.1)

We take Pij to be total nominal output, denoted Xij , divided by Yij , the usual definition of the
total output deflator.7 Because one unit of money is traded in every meeting in which trade occurs,
for a given mechanism total nominal output is the appropriate sum of the number of trades. That
is,
N Xij

= mi (1 − mi )(1 − λ)2 a(0, 0, i) + (λ − θji )θji a(j, j, i) +
(λ − θji )(1 − mi )(1 − λ)a(j, 0, i) + mi θji (1 − λ)a(0, j, i).

(5.2)

Notice that the right-hand side of (5.2) is the right-hand side of (5.1) with y(s, s0 , i) replaced by
a(s, s0 , i). The pair (Yij , Pij ) occurs with probability pi πij , where, as above, pi denotes the stationary
probability that the state is i. Therefore, the pair (Yij , Pij ) and the exogenous probability pi πij for
each (i, j) completely describe the Markov process for total output and the price level. For each
example, we report the pair (Yij , Pij ) implied by (5.1) and (5.2) for the optimal mechanism.
The first two examples share all but one feature. Both have S = 2 and the symmetric Π given
in (4.11). We let u be the square-root function—mainly because it is a simple function that satisfies
our general assumptions. For that choice of u, y ∗ = 41 . We also let N = 3, the minimum consistent
with no double-coincidence meetings. For both examples, the support for the money supply is
(m1 , m2 ) = ( 49 , 12 ). The quantity 12 is the amount of money that maximizes the probability of trade
meetings for an economy with a constant money supply. If m2 = 12 , then m1 = 49 implies that we
are studying roughly 10% increases and decreases in the amount of money in these examples. We
81
1
2
choose β so that ymax
= y ∗ , which gives β = 27
32 . That, in turn, implies that ymax = 361 = .224.
The two examples differ regarding ε. As noted above, for S = 2 and for a symmetric Π, we expect
to have trade occur all the time if ε in (4.11) is not too close to zero and we expect to have
no-trade occur when (i, j) = (1, 2) if ε is small enough. Example 1 has ε = 0.1, which implies
that trade always occurs. Example 2 has ε = .0025, which turns out to be small enough to get
no-trade in meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers when (i, j) = (1, 2).8
For each ε, we report results for three values of λ : λ = 91 , the minimum consistent with (2.1);
11
λ = 20
, the magnitude which maximizes the probability of meetings between informed producers
and uninformed consumers; and λ = 1, the benchmark.
Before we present the results for aggregates, we present for one case the meeting-specific outputs
from which the aggregates are deduced. When everyone is informed, there is only one kind of
meeting per date and the output in that meeting depends only on the current state. In example
1 when λ = 1, y(1, 1, i) = .2270 and y(2, 2, i) = .2160. Because there is only one kind of meeting
per date, the price level is simply the inverse of meeting-specific output. Notice that even in the
1
low money supply state, output is less than ymax
= 14 . This happens for two reasons: the money
supply may increase, which would reduce the probability of meeting someone without money, and
the producer may be given money without producing. In all our examples, the persistence in the
money supply process is sufficient to imply that ∆j > ∆j+1 . In addition, in all the examples, when
7

We must use a price index because, in general, the price of output is dependent on the kind of meeting. The
price in a meeting is 1/y(s, s0 , i) for s and s0 ∈ S. Therefore, for given past and current states, the price varies with
who in the meeting is informed. Therefore, an outside observer collecting such prices would have to use an index to
compute a price level.
8
The section 4.3 sufficient condition is satisfied for examples 1 and 2. The value of Z(y k ) (see lemma 8), which
is the same for each k by the symmetry of the example, never rises above .12. This is below the values of Z shown
in tables 3 and 4 below, the values for the optima. Because ∆1 > ∆2 , the mechanism that sets a(0, 2, 1) = 0 (the
optimum when  = .0025) satisfies the producer truth-telling constraint. Also, the values of ∆1 and ∆2 imply that
u(β∆2 ) > β∆1 , so the consumer individual rationality constraints are not binding. Therefore, the value of Z we
report is a valid choice for Zmin in lemma 8.

17

λ = 1 the ordering for aggregate output is the same as that for meeting-specific output . This is
not a general result. It happens in part because our money supplies are near 12 , where the function
m(1 − m) is fairly flat.
Table 2. Meeting specific outputs for example 1 with λ = 19 .
y(j, j, i)
y(0, 0, i)
y(j, 0, i), j > 0 y(0, j, i), j > 0
j=1
j=2
i=1
i=2
i=1
i=2
.22559 .21541 .22458 .21642 .22365 .21541
.21541
Table 2 contains meeting-specific outputs for example 1 for λ = 19 . The first two columns contain
output in meetings between informed people. These differ from those in the benchmark because
λ affects ∆. The next two columns contain output in meetings between uninformed people. Here,
there is no dependence on the current state and the dependence on the previous state is weaker
than the dependence on the current state for meetings between informed people because the Markov
process gives rise to less two-period persistence than one-period persistence. The next two columns
contain output in meetings between informed consumers and uninformed producers. Here, output
does not depend on the current state because of the truth-telling requirement. Notice also that for
each i output is lower than when two uninformed people meet. This happens because uninformed
producers who meet informed people with money place more weight than π12 on the possibility
that the money supply has increased. (In fact, in this example, when the money supply decereases,
no informed person has money, so when an uninformed producer meets an informed consumer with
money, the producer is able to deduce that the current state is state 2 which implies the same
output level as for an informed producer.) The last column contains output in meetings between
uninformed consumers and informed producers. Here output depends on neither the current state
nor the previous state and is the same as in a meeting between informed people when the current
state is the high money supply state. The next two tables contain the example 1 and 2 results for
aggregates, with total output scaled up by 105 .

λ
1

11
20

1
9

Table 3. Example 1: Π
Z
j
Y1j
1
1868.57
.132033
2
1800.01
Xii0 −Xii
-3.67%
Xii
1
1820.68
.131924
2
1823.49
Xii0 −Xii
0.15%
Xii
1
1840.25
.131988
2
1868.91
Xii0 −Xii
1.56%
Xii

given by (4.11) with
Y2j
P1j
1868.57
4.405
1800.01
4.630
3.81%
5.11%
1792.335
4.521
1792.350
4.570
-0.0008% 1.09%
1779.59
4.4725
1801.75
4.4589
-1.23%
-0.30%

18

1
ε = 10
P2j
4.405
4.630
-4.86%
4.592
4.649
-1.23%
4.6249
4.6251
-0.004%

∆
.2691
.2560
-4.87%
.2654
.2545
-4.13%
.2674
.2553
-4.52%

λ
1

11
20

1
9

Table 4. Example 2: Π
Z
j
Y1j
1
2051.36
.132325
2
1869.43
Xii0 −Xii
-8.87%
Xii
1
2050.03
.132291
2
1598.42
Xii0 −Xii
-22.03%
Xii
1
2050.71
.132324
2
2055.43
Xii0 −Xii
0.23%
Xii

1
given by (4.11) with ε = 400
Y2j
P1j
P2j
2051.36
4.012
4.012
1869.43
4.458
4.458
9.73% 11.10%
-9.99%
1906.27
4.015
4.318
1869.40
4.171
4.458
1.97%
3.89%
-3.14%
1846.67
4.013
4.45691
1869.75
4.015
4.45693
-1.23%
0.03% -0.0003%
X

−X

∆
.29540
.26587
-9.99%
.29524
.26584
-9.96%
.29538
.26586
-9.99%

0
ii
In tables 3 and 4, the rows labeled iiX
contain percentage changes of switching states
ii
1
relative to not switching states, except when they pertain to ∆. For ∆, the entry is ∆2∆−∆
.
1
In addition to impact effects, the outcomes associated with any pattern of realizations for the
money supply can be identified. For example, if ε = 0.1 and λ = 11
20 and if the sequence of
money realizations starting at date t − 1 is (m1 , m1 , m2 , m2 , m1 ), then the sequence for the price
level starting at date t is (4.521, 4.570, 4.649, 4.592). Also, all the meeting-specific outputs can be
computed from the reported ∆ using the applicable conditional expectations as given in proposition
1.
As we suggested in the introduction, impact effects on aggregate output depend on whether trade
is ever shut down and on the probability of meetings between informed producers and uninformed
consumers. For ε = 0.1 when there is always-trade, there are positive impact effects on output
relative to the benchmark. That is Y12 /Y11 is larger when λ < 1 than when λ = 1. This happens
because when the money supply increases, meeting-specific output is higher in meetings between
informed consumers and uninformed producers than it is between informed people when λ = 1.
For ε = 0.0025, there is no-trade when informed producers meet uninformed consumers and the
money supply has increased. When λ = 11
20 , which maximizes the probability of meetings between
informed producers and uninformed consumers, an increase in the amount of money, through the
shutting down of trade between informed producers and uninformed consumers, produces a large
decline in output relative to what happens in the benchmark. When λ = 19 , that does not happen
because most informed people have money when the amount of money increases. In this case, there
is a large positive impact effect on output relative to the benchmark.
The price in each kind of meeting is simply the inverse of output in the meeting. The only
meeting-specific price that changes when the money supply changes is that in meetings between
the informed (see table 2, for example). That effect tends to make the (aggregate) price level
change in the same direction as the money supply. But, because it is the only price that changes,
the impact effects on the price level tend to be weaker the smaller is λ. Moreover, that effect can
even be offset by compositional effects, which happens in example 1 when λ = 19 .; there, P12 < P11 .
1
When λ = 19 and the money supply increases, only 18
of the informed are without money. Hence,
there are very few trade-meetings among the informed. The increase in the amount of money
produces fewer meetings between informed producers and uninformed consumers (because there
are few informed people without money) and more meetings between informed consumers and
uninformed producers. Under always-trade, the meeting-specific price is higher when producers are
relatively informed than when consumers are relatively informed (see table 2). Hence, the altered
composition tends to lower the price index.
As might be expected, the highest level of ex ante welfare, Z, is achieved when everyone is

19

informed. However, ex ante welfare is not monotone in λ. The prevalence of meetings between
informed producers and uninformed consumers, which depends on λ in a non-monotone way, is
one source of the non-monotonicity of welfare. In example 1, when there is always-trade, output
is minimal in such meetings because it satisfies the producer’s individual rationality constraint for
the smaller component of ∆ no matter what is the current state. In example 2, this low output is
partly overcome, but only at the cost of shutting down trade when the money supply increases.
Example 3 is designed to have non-monotone impact effects of increases in the amount of
money on output. The example has S = 3 and combines features of examples 1 and 2 so that large
increases in the amount of money produce a shutting down of trade, but small increases do not.
We continue to let u be the square-root function, and let N = 3. The support for the money supply
5 4 1
1
∗
is (m1 , m2 , m3 ) = ( 12
, 9 , 2 ) ≈ (.4167, .4444, .5000), while β = 36
43 so that, again, ymax = y . For Π,
we choose,


1 − ε1 − ε2
ε1
ε2


,
ε1
1 − 2 ε1
ε1
Π =
(5.3)


ε2
ε1
1 − ε1 − ε2
with (ε1 , ε2 ) = (.0500, .0025). Even though the range for the money supply is larger for this example,
it remains true that the hypothesis of lemma 8 holds.9 For this example, we computed results only
for λ = 1 and λ = 11
20 .
λ
1

11
20

Table 5. Example 3: Π
Z
j Y1j
Y2j
1 1953 1953
.1259 2 1858 1858
3 1751 1751
1 1874 1797
.1257 2 1870 1793
3 1542 1791

in (5.3)
Y3j
1953
1858
1751
1755
1750
1743

1
1
with (ε1 , ε2 ) = ( 20
, 400
)
P1j
P2j
P3j
∆
4.148 4.148 4.148 .2879
4.430 4.430 4.430 .2696
4.759 4.759 4.759 .2510
4.324 4.508 4.617 .2810
4.401 4.589 4.702 .2638
4.441 4.654 4.781 .2495

As in the first two examples, in the benchmark total output is decreasing in the amount of
money. When λ = 11
20 , small increases in the amount of money are expansionary relative to the
benchmark. That is, Y12 /Y11 and Y23 /Y22 are each larger than their values for the benchmark.
However, as promised, a large increase is contractionary relative to the benchmark. That is,
Y13 /Y11 is smaller than its value in the benchmark. As in the other examples, the price level is less
responsive to changes in the amount of money than it is in the benchmark. Again, welfare is lower
with uninformed people than when everyone is informed.

6. Randomization
The mechanisms studied above are deterministic. More general mechanisms would permit randomization. There are three conceivable kinds of randomization. First, there could be randomization
over outcomes, some of which include positive production and no transfer of money from the consumer to the producer. Such randomization would not satisfy our individual-rationality constraints,
9
This is shown by comparing the value of Z(y k ) = .1104 (which is the same for each k, by the symmetry of the
example) with the value of Z in the table; note that ∆1 > ∆2 > ∆3 , so that the mechanism that sets a(0, 3, 1) = 0
satisfies producer truth-telling. Also, consumer individual rationality constraints hold because u(β∆3 ) > β∆1 .
Therefore, the value of Z is a valid choice for Zmin .

20

because the producer would not accept an outcome that calls for production and no transfer of
money.10 Second, there could be randomization over outcomes in which each of several different
amounts of production exchanges for a unit of money. While such randomization could be incentive
feasible, we doubt that it could be optimal. We suspect that shifting probability toward the highest
output that occurs with positive probability would be incentive feasible and would raise ex ante
welfare. Third, there could be randomization over trade—no-trade sets. This kind of randomization is also incentive feasible and, as we show by example, can be optimal. We first present the
example and then comment more generally on such randomization.
The reasoning behind the example is as follows. Consider the S = 2 symmetric Π given by (4.11).
By proposition 3 and our examples, there is a critical value of ε at which the optimum switches
from S p (1) = {1}, trade is shut down when the money supply increases, to S p (1) = {1, 2}, alwaystrade. At that point, the mechanism varies discontinuously, but Z does not. Randomization over
whether trade occurs could smooth the mechanism and, as we now explain, is likely to raise Z. For
q ∈ [0, 1], let a(0, 2, 1) = 1 with probability q, y(0, 2, 1) = β∆2 , and y(0, 1, 1) = (1 − q)β∆1 + qβ∆2 .
For q = 0, this corresponds to S p (1) = {1}, while for q = 1, it corresponds to S p (1) = {1, 2}. Also,
if ∆1 ≥ ∆2 , then it satisfies truth-telling for the informed producer. The part of Z that depends
directly on q is proportional to
(1 − ε)θ11 z[(1 − q)β∆1 + qβ∆2 ] + εθ21 qz(β∆2 ).

(6.1)

Holding ∆ fixed, this term is strictly concave in q. Therefore, if this term has the same value at
q = 0 and at q = 1—which, by proposition 2, happens at the critical value of ε—then it takes
higher values at interior values of q. Although suggestive, this conclusion is not decisive because it
ignores the dependence of ∆ on q. Therefore, we produce an example which takes such dependence
into account.
1
The example is the same as the S = 2 examples in section 5, except that λ = 21 and ε = 200
. This
p
p
ε is very near the critical one at which the optimum switches from S (1) = {1} to S (1) = {1, 2}.
Letting Z(q) denote ex ante welfare as a function of q, we find Z(1) = .1322575, Z(0) = .1322572,
and Z( 21 ) = .1322645. Therefore, always-trade, q = 1, is slightly better than shutting down trade,
q = 0, but mixing with q = 12 is still better. Thus randomization is optimal in this example.
Despite this finding, we suspect that randomization would not drastically change the kind
of necessary conditions we found and, therefore, the kind of possibilities for the optimum that
we displayed in section 5. Although we have not carried out a complete analysis, our suspicion
is based on the following conjectures. Allowing randomization changes the individual-rationality
constraints and the expression for ex ante welfare in relatively simple ways. Therefore, for the
relaxed welfare problem in which we drop the producer’s truth-telling constraint, we suspect that
there are necessary conditions for an optimum that are very much like the conclusions in proposition
1 and that will not imply randomization except near critical values for the deterministic problem.
If the mechanism that produces the highest value of ex ante welfare for that relaxed problem turns
out to satisfy truth-telling for the informed producer, then that mechanism is the optimum. Based
on our section 4 discussion for S = 2, we suspect that the solution to the relaxed problem is likely
to satisfy producer truth-telling for many specifications in the region of the parameter space we
study.
10

See [2] for the study of such randomization in a similar model without uncertainty, but in which it is assumed
that people can commit to the outcome of randomization.

21

7. Take-it-or-leave-it offers by consumers
Matching models of the sort we are studying have often been analyzed using a bargaining rule.
Among the most commonly used, because it is simple, is take-it-or-leave-it offers by consumers:
the consumers says “I will give you my unit of money if and only if you produce the amount x.”
Our optimum resembles an equilibrium under such bargaining because, according to proposition
1, producers are being pushed to where they are on the margin between accepting and rejecting
trade. In fact, any equilibrium under deterministic take-it-or-leave-it offers by consumers is one
of the candidates for an optimum, one of the mechanisms that satisfy proposition 1. However,
the optimum is not always such an equilibrium. In particular, at an optimum, an uninformed
consumer facing an informed producer and making a take-it-or-leave-it offer leans toward an x that
shuts down trade in more states than the optimum dictates.
This tendency is easy to see if, for the moment, we ignore the dependence of ∆ on the S p (i)
sets. Then, if ∆j > ∆j+1 , the ex ante welfare gain from shutting down trade in one additional
state, r, when the previous state is i is proportional to
z(β∆r−1 )

r−1
X

πij θji − z(β∆r )

j=1

r
X

πij θji ≡ Bp (r, i).

(7.1)

j=1

The difference here represents a trade-off between the output β∆r−1 with some probability and
the lower output β∆r with a higher probability. In contrast, the net gain to the consumer from
demanding the output β∆r−1 rather than the smaller output β∆r is proportional to
r−1
X

πij θji [u(β∆r−1 ) − β∆j ] −

j=1

r
X

πij θji [u(β∆r ) − β∆j ] =

j=1

Bp (r, i) + β(∆r−1 − ∆r )

r−1
X

πij θji

(7.2)

j=1

Thus, the consumer sees an additional benefit to shutting down trade; by making the more demanding offer, the consumer avoids giving up money in state r when it has a value that would
command a higher output in state r − 1. That term does not affect ex ante welfare, because the
distribution of money at the start of the next period is not affected by whether trade occurs in
state r.
Of course, the above comparison is not the correct one because it ignores the dependence of ∆
on the S p (i) sets. Nevertheless, the comparison suggests that if the optimum has always-trade by
a small margin, then that may not be an equilibrium under take-it-or-leave-it offers by consumers.
That happens for the example presented in the discussion of randomization. There the optimum has
always-trade and implies (∆1 , ∆2 ) = (.2855514, .265532). If the uninformed consumer who meets
an informed producer demands β∆1 in exchange for surrendering money, then the consumer’s
1
27
2
expected gain is 199
200 [(β∆1 ) − β∆1 ], where, recall, β = 32 . If, instead, the consumer demands β∆2
1
1
in exchange for surrendering money, then the expected gain is (β∆2 ) 2 − 199
200 β∆1 − 200 β∆2 . The
1
1
1
2
2
difference between the former and the latter is 199
200 (β∆1 ) − (β∆2 ) + 200 β∆2 , which is positive.
Therefore, in this case, the always-trade optimum is not an equilibrium under take-it-or-leave-it
offers by consumers.
As might be suspected, an equilibrium under take-it-or-leave-it offers by consumers may not
exist unless there is randomization when the consumer is indifferent between two offers. In the above
22

example, the S p (1) = {1} mechanism that satisfies proposition 1 is an equilibrium under take-it-or1
1
1
2
2
leave-it offers by consumers. This is confirmed by showing that 199
200 (β∆1 ) − (β∆2 ) + 200 β∆2 ≥ 0
when evaluated at the ∆ implied by that mechanism—namely, (∆1 , ∆2 ) = (.294211, .265728).

8. Concluding Remarks
We have worked with what might be regarded as a minimally interesting model and a minimally
interesting class of mechanisms. In addition to considering randomization and other regions of
the parameter space, it would be desirable to check the robustness of our findings to some of our
more extreme assumptions. We have made substantial use of the indivisibility of money and the
unit upper bound. Obviously, truth-telling constraints would not have such simple implications
if the money trades could be other than surrendering 0 or 1 unit. Settings with richer individual
holdings of money would be much harder to study because in them the distribution of money
holdings depends on the mechanism. Another extension to consider is an information structure in
which the identity of the informed is not common knowledge. Such a change gives rise to additional
truth-telling constraints and to two-sided asymmetric information in meetings. A third extension
would consider lengthening the lag with which there is a public announcement of the state. Such
a version would permit the study of whether it is optimal to have people always leave meetings
symmetrically informed.
In an important sense, though, the simplicity of our model is a virtue. Our background environment was designed by others to depict in a simple way absence-of-double-coincidence problems
that are so severe that the use of money is the only way to depart from autarky. We have put
into that environment monetary uncertainty and asymmetric information about realizations in a
way that does not tie a person’s information status to the person’s money holdings. Then, despite
assuming that money holdings are either 0 or 1 unit, that public revelation of realizations occurs
after one period, that there is common knowledge about who is informed and despite assuming
that the society finds the best way of conducting trade in the presence of the uncertainty and
the implied asymmetric information, we have found that the resulting pattern of output and price
level responses is very complicated. Relative to the benchmark of everyone informed, there can
be positive or negative impact effects on output and the price level tends to be sticky. (Thus, if
Hume is interpreted as asserting that asymmetric information about monetary realizations can be
responsible for complicated patterns relative to complete information, then the model supports his
view.) Because those complicated patterns are implied by very extreme and simple assumptions, we
conclude that such patterns should no longer be regarded as mysteries. In particular, we conjecture
that further complicating the model in the directions mentioned above will further complicate the
implied patterns of aggregate output and the price level.
Finally, we are aware, of course, that models of output responses based on incomplete information are widely viewed as less applicable to modern economies than to the economy that Hume
was describing. Despite that, there are two reasons for not dismissing such models. First, no
model of output responses to money-supply shocks seems free from dependence on technological
developments that influence the spread of information. For example, it is hard to imagine that
price-setting lags, no matter what accounts for them, stay fixed in response to developments like
bar-coding that make it much easier to change and disseminate information about prices. Indeed,
after all the attempts made by economists to spell out in a coherent way the kinds of claims that
Hume made in the passage quoted in the introduction, the conclusion that seems warranted is
that output responses to money-supply changes seem dependent on messy details that cannot be
expected to remain unchanged over long periods of time. Second, although the model works with

23

a single aggregate-demand shock, the money supply, its logic seems applicable to any kind of aggregate demand shock. Therefore, the availability of up-to-date information about the ‘actions’ of
some central banks does not imply that the features at work in the model play no role in modern
economies. For that to be the case, it would have to be argued that there is complete information
about all significant aggregate demand realizations.

9. Appendix
This section contains proofs of the lemmas and propositions.
Lemma 1. If (2.1) holds, then θji and λ − θji are non-negative.
Proof. We have (1 − mi )λ ≥ (1 − mS )λ ≥ mS λ ≥ mS − m1 ≥ mj − mi , where the second inequality
follows from the first part of (2.1) and the third from the lower bound condition on λ in (2.1). This
implies that θji ≥ 0. Also, (1 − λ)mi ≤ (1 − λ)mS = mS − λmS ≤ mS − (mS − m1 ) ≤ mj , where
the second inequality follows from the lower bound condition on λ. in (2.1). This implies that
mj ≥ (1 − λ)mi , and, hence, that λ − θji , is non-negative.
Lemma 2. For any mechanism, Z satisfies (3.16).
Proof. From the definition of ηij (see (3.5)),

−mi ηij
mj − mi =
(1 − mi ) ηij

j<i
otherwise.

(9.1)

Then, if we substitute (3.4) into (3.15), we obtain

Z =

=

S
X

pi [mi V1 (i)
i=1
S X
S
X

+ (1 − mi )V0 (i)]

pi πij (1 − λ) [mi v1 (0, j, i) + (1 − mi )v0 (0, j, i)]

i=1 j=1

+

S X
S
X

pi πij λ[mi v1 (1, j, i) + (1 − mi )v0 (1, j, i)]

S X
S
X

pi πij (mj − mi ) [v1 (1, j, i) − v0 (1, j, i)].

i=1 j=1

+

(9.2)

i=1 j=1

Therefore,
Z =

S X
S
X

pi πij (1 − λ) [mi v1 (0, j, i) + (1 − mi )v0 (0, j, i)]

i=1 j=1

+

S X
S
X

pi πij [(λ − θji ) v1 (1, j, i) + θji v0 (1, j, i)].

i=1 j=1

24

(9.3)

Using (3.3), we have
Z = β

S X
S
X

pi πij (1 − λ) [mi V1 (j) + (1 − mi )V0 (j)]

i=1 j=1

+β

S X
S
X

pi πij [(λ − θji ) V1 (j) + θji V0 (j)]

i=1 j=1

+

S
S
1 XX
pi πij (1 − λ) mi [θji G1 (0, 1, j, i) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) G1 (0, 0, j, i)]
N
i=1 j=1

+

S
S
1 XX
pi πij (1 − λ) (1 − mi )[(λ − θji ) G0 (1, 0, j, i) + (1 − λ) mi G0 (0, 0, j, i)]
N
i=1 j=1

+

S
S
1 XX
pi πij (λ − θji ) [θji G1 (1, 1, j, i) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) G1 (1, 0, j, i)]
N
i=1 j=1

+

S
S
1 XX
pi πij θji [(λ − θji ) G0 (1, 1, j, i) + (1 − λ) mi G0 (0, 1, j, i)].
N

(9.4)

i=1 j=1

Then, using (3.2), this expression can be written as
Z = β

S X
S
X

pi πij [mj V1 (j) + (1 − mj )V0 (j)] +

i=1 j=1

S
S
1 XX
pi πij (1 − λ) mi [θji z(y(0, j, i)) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) z(y(0, 0, i))] +
N
i=1 j=1

S
S
1 XX
pi πij (λ − θji ) [θji z(y(j, j, i)) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) z(y(j, 0, i))].
N

(9.5)

i=1 j=1

Finally, using the definition of the invariant probabilities, the pi ,
S X
S
X

pi πij [mj V1 (j) + (1 − mj )V0 (j)] =

i=1 j=1

S
X

[mj V1 (j) + (1 − mj )V0 (j)]

j=1

S
X

S
X

pi πij =

i=1

pj [mj V1 (j) + (1 − mj )V0 (j)] = Z.

(9.6)

j=1

When this is substituted into (9.5), we get (3.16), as required.
Lemma 3. If (y, a) is incentive feasible, then ∆(y, a) satisfies,
X
X
1
1
π
(λ
−
θ
)β∆
≤
πij (λ − θji )β∆j .
ij
ji
j
γi1 (S c (i))
γi1 (S+ )
c
j∈S+

j∈S (i)

25

(9.7)

Proof. We have
D ≡
=

β

X

πij (λ
γi1 (S+ )
j∈S+

− θji )∆j −

β

β(σ − σ 0 ) X
β
πij (λ − θji )∆j + 0
0
σσ
σ
c
j∈S (i)

X

πij (λ
γi1 (S c (i))
c
j∈S (i)
X

j∈S+

− θji )∆j

πij (λ − θji )∆j ,

(9.8)

−S c (i)

where σ ≡ γi1 (S c (i)) ≤ σ 0 ≡ γi1 (S+ ). Now, let x = minj∈S+ −S c (i) ∆j . Then, by (3.12),
D≥

β
β(σ − σ 0 )
x + 0 (σ 0 − σ)x = 0,
0
σ
σ

(9.9)

as required.
Lemma 4. Let h(x; y, a) be given by (4.4)-(4.6). Then (i) ∆(y, a) is a fixed point of h(·; y, a) and
vice versa; (ii) h(·; y, a) satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions for contraction; (iii) if x ≥ ∆(y, a)
and h(x; y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a), then ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a); and (iv) if y 0 ≥ y, then ∆(y 0 , a) ≥ ∆(y, a).
Proof. From (3.4), we have
∆i =

S
X

πij [(1 − λ)δi (0, j) + (λ − ηij )δi (1, j)],

(9.10)

j=1

where δi (ι, j) ≡ v1 (ι, j, i) − v1 (ι, j, i). Also, from (3.3), we have
N δi (ι, j) = N β∆j + θji G1 (ι, 1, j, i) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) G1 (ι, 0, j, i)
− (λ − θji ) G0 (1, ι, j, i) − (1 − λ) mi G0 (0, ι, j, i).

(9.11)

Then, if we substitute from (9.11) into (9.10) and use the definition of Gk (ιc , ιp , j, i), it follows that
∆(y, a) satisfies the matrix equation,
∆(y, a) = b(y) + βC(a)∆(y, a).

(9.12)

By the definition of h(·; y, a), it follows that ∆(y, a) is a fixed points of h. Therefore, (i) is true.
As regards (ii), it follows from (4.5) that cij (a)/πij ∈ (1 − ηij )[1 − N −1 , 1], where the lower
endpoint is attained when money is always transferred and the upper endpoint when money is
never transferred. Because (2.1) implies that ηij < 1, it follows that cij /πij ∈ (0, 1]. That implies
that h(·; y, a) is monotone increasing and satisfies discounting, Blackwell’s sufficient conditions for
contraction.
Claim (iii) is an obvious consequence of contraction. That is, if h(n) (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a),
then h(n+1) (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) = h[h(n) (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ); y 0 , a0 ] ≥ h(∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a), where h(n) (x; y 0 , a0 )
is the n-th iterate of h applied to x, where the first inequality follows from monotonicity of h and the
second inequality is the hypothesis, which serves as the initial condition for the induction step. But
by the contraction property, limn→∞ h(n) (x; y 0 , a0 ) = ∆(y 0 , a0 ), which implies ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a).
From (4.6), b(y) is increasing in y. That and claim (iii) imply claim (iv).
Lemma 5. If (y, a) satisfies producer individual-rationality constraints and has constant output
over trade states in meetings between informed and uninformed, then y(s, s0 , i) ≤ β maxi ∆i (y, a) ≤
1 .
ymax
26

Proof. Let K = maxi ∆i (y, a). Then y(s, s0 , i) ≤ a(s, s0 , i)βK, for all s, s0 , i.
From equations 3.3 we have

N δi (0, j) = N β ∆j + θji z(y(0, j, i)) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) z(y(0, 0, i))
+ (1 − λ) [y(0, 0, i) − a(0, 0, i)β∆j ] + θji [y(0, j, i) − a(0, j, i)β∆j ]
+ (λ − θji ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)β∆j ]
N δi (1, j) = N β ∆j + θji z(y(j, j, i)) + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) z(y(j, 0, i))
+ λ [y(j, j, i) − a(j, j, i)β∆j ] + (1 − λ)mi [y(0, j, i) − a(0, j, i)β∆j ]
+ (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)β∆j ]

(9.13)

where ∆j = ∆j (y, a).
Let ζ = maxs,s0 ,i z(y(s, s0 , i)). Then, using the definition of θ and the producer’s individualrationality constraints,
N δi (0, j) ≤ N β ∆j + (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ) [y(0, 0, i) − a(0, 0, i)β∆j ]
+ (λ − θji ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)β∆j ]
N δi (1, j) ≤ N β ∆j + (1 − mj ) ζ
+ (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)β∆j ]

(9.14)

These inequalities can be rewritten as
N δi (0, j) ≤ (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ)y(0, 0, i) + (λ − θji ) y(j, 0, i)
+ [N − (1 − λ)a(0, 0, i) − (λ − θji ) a(j, 0, i)] β∆j
N δi (1, j) ≤ (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) y(j, 0, i)
+ [N − (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) a(j, 0, i)] β ∆j

(9.15)

Then since the coefficients of β∆j are positive,
N δi (0, j) ≤ (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ)y(0, 0, i) + (λ − θji ) y(j, 0, i)
+ [N − (1 − λ)a(0, 0, i) − (λ − θji ) a(j, 0, i)] βK
= N β K + (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ) [y(0, 0, i) − a(0, 0, i)βK]
+ (λ − θji ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)βK]
N δi (1, j) ≤ (1 − mj ) ζ + (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) y(j, 0, i)
+ [N − (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) a(j, 0, i)] β K
= N β K + (1 − mj ) ζ
+ (1 − λ) (1 − mi ) [y(j, 0, i) − a(j, 0, i)βK]

(9.16)

But then since y(0, 0, i) ≤ a(0, 0, i)βK, and y(j, 0, i) ≤ a(j, 0, i)βK,
N δi (0, j) ≤ N β K + (1 − mj ) ζ
N δi (1, j) ≤ N β K + (1 − mj ) ζ

27

(9.17)

Now from (9.10), we have
∆i =

S
X

πij [(1 − λ)δi (0, j) + (λ − ηij )δi (1, j)],

S
X



1
πij (1 − ηij ) β K +
(1 − mj ) ζ
N

j=1

≤

j=1

Then because this holds for all i, and

P

j

(9.18)

πij (1 − ηij ) ≤ 1, and 1 − mj ≤ 1 − m1 ,

K≤

ζ(1 − m1 )
.
N (1 − β)

(9.19)

1
1 , we have
By the definition of ymax
and the assumption y ∗ ≥ ymax

βz(y ∗ )(1 − m1 )
≤ y∗.
N (1 − β)

(9.20)

Then since ζ ≤ z(y ∗ ) it follows that
βK ≤

βz(y ∗ )(1 − m1 )
≤ y∗.
N (1 − β)

(9.21)

Now because the function z is increasing on the interval [0, y ∗ ] and because y(s, s0 , i) ≤ βK, it
follows that ζ ≤ z(βK). Thus (9.19) implies
βK ≤

βz(βK)(1 − m1 )
.
N (1 − β)

(9.22)

1 .
This, in turn, implies βK ≤ ymax
1 , then (i) S c (i) ≡ S
Proposition 1. If (y, a) is optimal and satisfies u(β mins ∆s (y, a)) ≥ ymax
+
p
and (y, a) satisfies (4.7)-(4.10); (ii) for each i, S (i) is not empty; and (iii) if ∆j (y, a) = ∆k (y, a),
then for each i either j, k ∈ S p (i) or j, k ∈ S+ − S p (i).

Proof. Suppose that (y, a) is optimal, but does not satisfy (i). Then we consider (y 0 , a0 ) given by
(4.7)-(4.10), but with ∆(y, a) inserted on the right-hand sides of (4.7)-(4.10) and with S c (i) replaced
by S+ .
Our first task is to show that y 0 ≥ y. For all but, Y c (i)0 , this follows immediately from the
fact that each component of y satisfies the relevant producer individual rationality constraint. For
Y c (i)0 , we use lemma 3 because we are replacing a somewhat arbitrary S c (i) set with S+ . We have,
Y c (i) ≤

X
X
1
1
π
(λ
−
θ
)β∆
≤
πij (λ − θji )β∆j = Y c (i)0 ,
ij
ji
j
1 (S )
γi1 (S c (i))
γ
+
i
c

(9.23)

j∈S+

j∈S (i)

where the first inequality is by incentive feasibility of y and where the second is lemma 3.
We next show that ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). By the third part of lemma 4, it is enough to show
that hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆i (y, a) = hi (∆(y, a); y, a), where hi is the i-th component of the mapping
defined in (4.4). Because hi is a sum of terms, we can deal one-at-a-time with the replacements
given by (4.7)-(4.10). Because y 0 ≥ y and h(x; y, a) is increasing in y, we need only concern ourselves
28

with situations in which the replacement of (y, a) by (y 0 , a0 ) involves replacing a no-trade outcome
by a trade outcome.
An informed consumer meets an uninformed producer, (4.7).
Considering only the (4.7) substitution, (9.12 ) implies that
N
[hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) − hi (∆(y, a); y, a)] =
1−λ
X
X
(1 − mi )
πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − β∆j ] +
πij (λ − θij )[Y c (i)0 − β∆j ] +
j∈S c (i)

j∈S c (i)

X

(1 − mi )

j∈S+ −S c (i)

−(1 − mi )

X

= (1 − mi )

πij (λ − θij )[Y c (i)0 − β∆j ]

j∈S+ −S c (i)

πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)) − β∆j ] −

j∈S c (i)

X

X

πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − β∆j ] +
X

πij (λ − θij )[Y c (i) − β∆j ]

j∈S c (i)

πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − u(Y c (i))] +

j∈S c (i)

(1 − mi )

X

πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − β∆j ] −

j∈S+ −S c (i)

X

πij (λ − θij )[Y c (i) − β∆j ]

j∈S c (i)

where the second equality follows from the definition of Y c (i)0 . Because (y, a) is incentive-feasible
and,
the uninformed producer’s individual-rationality constraint, we have
P in particular, satisfies
πij (λ − θij )[Y c (i) − β∆j ] ≤ 0. Therefore,
j∈S c (i)

N
[hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) − hi (∆(y, a); y, a)] ≥
(1 − λ)(1 − mi )
X
X
πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − u(Y c (i))] +
πij (λ − ηij )[u(Y c (i)0 ) − β∆j ]

j∈S c (i)

(9.24)

j∈S+ −S c (i)

The first term is nonnegative by (9.23). The second term is nonnegative because Y c (i)0 ≥ β mins ∆s
1
and u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
≥ β maxs ∆s by hypothesis and lemma 4.
An uninformed consumer meets an uninformed producer, (4.8).
Here, the replacement of no trade by trade given by (4.8) implies, according to (9.12), that
N [hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) − hi (∆(y, a); y, a)] =
(1 − λ)2 (1 − mi )

S
X

πij [u(y(0, 0, i)0 ) − β∆j ] + (1 − λ)mi

j=1

(1 − λ)2 (1 − mi )

S
X

πij [y(0, 0, i)0 − β∆j ] =

j=1

S
X

πij [u(y(0, 0, i)0 ) − β∆j ] ≥ 0.

(9.25)

j=1

The second equality follows from the definition of y(0, 0, i)0 and the inequality is implied by
1
y(0, 0, i)0 ≥ β mins ∆s and u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
≥ β maxs ∆s .
An informed consumer meets an informed producer, (4.9).
Here, the replacement of no trade by trade given by (4.9) implies, according to (9.12), that
X
N [hi (∆(y, a); y 0 , a0 ) − hi (∆(y, a); y, a)] =
πij (λ − ηij )θji [u(β∆j ) − β∆j ] ≥ 0,
(9.26)
j

29

where the summation is over some set of current states.
We now have y 0 ≥ y and ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). It follows that (y 0 , a0 ) satisfies all the pro1 . Therefore,
ducer individual-rationality constraints. Moreover, by lemma 5, ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≤ ymax
1
u(β mins ∆s (y 0 , a0 )) ≥ u(β mins ∆s (y, a)) ≥ ymax
≥ β maxs ∆s (y 0 , a0 ). This implies that (y 0 , a0 )
satisfies all the consumer individual-rationality constraints. It also satisfies truth-telling for the
informed consumer because it has trade in every state when the consumer is informed. But (y 0 , a0 )
may or may not satisfy truth-telling for informed producers. If it does, then we have a contradiction
1
because ymax
≥ y 0 ≥ y and we have either increased output or replaced no-trade by trade, both of
which increase Z.
If not, because ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a), then there is some previous state i and some current state
r such that a(0, r, i) = 0 and
β∆r (y 0 , a0 ) > Y p (i)0 ≥ β∆r (y, a)

(9.27)

where the second inequality holds because (y, a) is incentive-feasible. That is, the informed producer
would like to get money in additional states when responding to the incentives implied by ∆(y 0 , a0 )
as opposed to those implied by ∆(y, a). If so, then define a new mechanism (y 00 , a00 ) that agrees
with (y 0 , a0 ) except that
a(0, r, i)00 = 1 and y(0, r, i)00 = Y p (i)0 .

(9.28)

for all pairs r, i satisfying (9.27). Note that this increases the number of states with trade when
the producer has private information. The replacement of no-trade by trade in state r implies,
according to (9.12), that
N
[hi (∆(y, a); y 00 , a00 ) − hi (∆(y, a); y, a)] =
1−λ
πir θri [u(Y p (i)0 ) − β∆r (y, a)] + πir (λ − ηir )mi [Y p (i)0 − β∆r (y, a)] ≥ 0.

(9.29)

Therefore, by the third part of lemma 4, ∆(y 00 , a00 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). Thus (by repeating the arguments
given above for (y 0 , a0 )), the mechanism (y 00 , a00 ) satisfies all the constraints except possibly the
producer’s truth-telling constraints. If the producer’s truth-telling constraints are also satisfied
then (y 00 , a00 ) is incentive-feasible and has higher output and, therefore, higher welfare than (y, a),
contradicting the assumption that (y, a) is optimal. But, again, it may happen that (y 00 , a00 ) violates
the producer’s truth-telling constraint. If so, then we amend (y 00 , a00 ) by adding states in which
trade occurs. Since the producer’s truth-telling constraints are satisfied if S p (i) = S+ , and since
the number of states is finite, repetition of these steps must lead to a mechanism that satisfies the
producer’s truth-telling constraints, with higher output and therefore higher welfare than (y, a), a
contradiction. Thus, condition (i) is necessary for an optimum.
Now suppose (y, a) is optimal, but S p (i) is empty. Let k be such that ∆k (y, a) = maxj ∆j (y, a).
Then consider (y 0 , a0 ) that agrees with (y, a) except that a(0, k, i)0 = 1 and y(0, k, i)0 = β∆k (y, a).
Then, as was done above, it can be shown that ∆(y 0 , a0 ) ≥ ∆(y, a). It follows, as in the argument
above, that (y 0 , a0 ) gives higher welfare and satisfies all the constraints except perhaps the truthtelling constraint for informed producers. However, if it fails to satisfy that constraint, then there
are two possibilities. One is that (9.27) might hold with respect to a previous state i0 6= i and,
therefore, such that S p (i0 )0 = S p (i0 ). In that case we can apply the argument above which leads to
a contradiction. The other is that
β∆r (y 0 , a0 ) > y(0, k, i)0 = β∆k (y, a) ≥ β∆r (y, a)
30

(9.30)

where the last inequality holds because ∆k (y, a) = maxj ∆j (y, a). But this, too, is a version of
(9.27). Hence, again, we can define a new mechanism (y 00 , a00 ) that agrees with (y 0 , a0 ) except that
a(0, r, i)00 = 1 and y(0, r, i)00 = β∆k (y, a).

(9.31)

for all states r satisfying (9.30). Thus, in this case also, we can apply the argument above which
leads to a contradiction.
Finally, suppose (y, a) is optimal but does not satisfy (iii). Then the optimum is such that
S p (i) for some i partitions states in such a way that there are two current states, say j and k
with ∆j = ∆k and j ∈ S p (i) and k ∈
/ S p (i). By truth-telling, it follows that ∆j = minl∈S p (i) ∆l .
Therefore, by necessary condition (i), (y, a) has Y p (i) = β∆j . Then amend (y, a) by making the
omitted state a trade state without changing output. The rest of the argument is exactly like the
argument for necessary condition (i), and, therefore, produces a contradiction.
Lemma 6. Given S p (i) for each i ∈ S+ , there exists a unique monetary mechanism that satisfies
(4.7)-(4.10).
Proof. We will use the following result (see [7]):
Suppose f = (f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f n ) is a function from Rn to Rn such that
(i) f is increasing
(ii) for each i, f i is a strictly concave function from Rn to R
(iii) f (0) ≥ 0
(iv) there is a positive vector xa such that f (xa ) > xa
(v) there is a vector xb > xa such that f (xb ) < xb .
Then there exists a unique positive vector x such that f (x) = x. Moreover, x ∈ (xa , xb ).
The proof proceeds by defining a mapping that satisfies conditions (i)-(v) and each of whose
fixed points is a monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10). Let f from RS to RS be defined
as follows. For ∆ ∈ RS let y = g(∆) be the mapping defined by the equations
y(j, j, i) = β∆j for all (i, j) ∈ S+ × S+ ,
y(0, 0, i) = β

S
X

πij ∆j for all i ∈ S+ ,

(9.32)
(9.33)

j=1

y(0, j, i) = a(0, j, i)β min {∆k } for all (i, j) ∈ S+ × S+ , and
k∈S p (i)

(9.34)

S

y(j, 0, i) =

X
β
πik (λ − θki )∆k for all (i, j) ∈ S+ × S+ .
γi1 (S+ )

(9.35)

k=1

Then define f (∆) ≡ b(g(∆)) + βC(a)∆, where the vector b and the matrix C are as defined in
(9.12). It follows that if ∆ is a fixed point of f , then g(∆) and the associated money transfers is a
mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) and vice versa. Therefore, for existence and uniqueness, the
claims in the lemma, it is enough to show that f (∆) satisfies conditions (i)-(v).

31

The mapping g is increasing and b is also increasing. Therefore, f is increasing. Because the
min function is concave, it follows that g is concave. And because b is concave in y, b(g(∆)) is the
composition of two increasing concave functions, which is concave. Also, f i (∆) can be written in
the form
f i (∆) =

S
1 X
πij (λ − ηij )θji u(y(j, j, i)) + Ψ(∆),
N
j=1

where Ψ is a nonnegative concave function, πij (λ − ηij )θji is positive, and y(j, j, i) =
u is strictly concave, this implies that f i is strictly concave.
Let ∆a be the constant vector with ∆aj = βε , j ∈ S+ . Then

∆j
β .

Because

S

f i (∆a ) ≥

u(ε) X
u(ε)
u(ε)
πij (λ − ηij )θji ≥
πii λθii =
πii λ2 (1 − mi ).
N
N
N

(9.36)

j=1

Because u0 (0) = ∞, the ratio

u(ε)
ε

becomes arbitrarily large as ε → 0. Choose ε so that
u(ε)
N
>
.
ε
βπii λ2 (1 − mi )

(9.37)

Then

ε
= ∆a .
(9.38)
β
Thus ∆a satisfies assumption (iv) of the fixed point theorem.
∗
Let ∆b be the constant vector with ∆bj = yβ , j ∈ S+ . (Recall that u0 (y ∗ ) = 1.) Then f i (∆b ) <
f i (∆a ) >

y∗
β

by essentially the argument in the proof of lemma 5. Therefore, ∆b satisfies assumption (v) of
the fixed point theorem.
Finally, because the mapping f satisfies condition (iii) with equality, f has a unique positive
ˆ
fixed point ∆.
Lemma 7. Let S p (i) for i ∈ S+ be given. Let P = {Π : πii ≥ α > 0 for all i}. Then the unique
monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) is continuous in Π for Π ∈ P.
Proof. Let ∆∗ (Π) be the unique positive fixed point of f (∆; Π), where, for a given Π ∈ P, f is
the mapping defined in the proof of lemma 6. That is, f (∆; Π) ≡ b(g(∆)) + βC(a)∆, where g is
defined by (9.32)-(9.35). We now restrict the domain of f to ∆ ∈ [∆a , ∆b ], where ∆b is the bound
given in lemma 6 and where ∆a is given by (9.38), but with πii in (9.37) replaced by α. So defined,
the interval [∆a , ∆b ] does not depend on Π. For a given ∆, f is continuous in Π, because it is
a composite of two functions. each of which is continuous in the components of Π. And with ∆
limited to the compact domain [∆a , ∆b ], it follows that f is uniformly continuous in Π. That is, for
any ε > 0, there exists a δ1 > 0 such that if ||Π1 − Π2 || < δ1 , then ||f (∆; Π1 ) − f (∆; Π2 )|| < 3ε for
all ∆.
Let Πn be a sequence converging to Π. Because the sequence ∆∗ (Πn ) lies in a compact set,
ˆ be the limit of this subsequence. Then there
it has a convergent subsequence ∆∗ (Πk ). Let ∆
ˆ < ε . Also, because f is
exists a δ2 > 0 such that ||Πk − Π|| < δ2 implies ||f (∆∗ (Πk ); Πk ) − ∆||
3
concave in∆ , and, therefore, continuous in ∆, there exists a δ3 > 0 such that ||Πk − Π|| < δ3
ˆ Π)|| < ε . And by uniform continuity in Π, ||Πk − Π|| < δ1 implies
implies ||f (∆∗ (Πk ); Π) − f (∆;
3
∗
∗
||f (∆ (Πk ); Πk ) − f (∆ (Πk ); Π)|| < 3ε . Thus, if k is such that ||Πk − Π|| < min(δ1 , δ2 , δ3 ), then
ˆ Π) − ∆||
ˆ ≤ ||f (∆;
ˆ Π) − f (∆∗ (Πk ); Π)||+
||f (∆;
32

ˆ < ε.
||f (∆∗ (Πk ); Π) − f (∆∗ (Πk ); Πk )|| + ||f (∆∗ (Πk ); Πk ) − ∆||

(9.39)

ˆ Π) = ∆.
ˆ And because f (∆;
ˆ Π) has a unique positive fixed
Because this holds for any ε > 0, f (∆;
∗
ˆ
point, it follows that ∆ = ∆ (Π). Finally, if that original sequence ∆∗ (Πn ) does not converge
to ∆∗ (Π), then it must have a subsequence that is bounded away from ∆∗ (Π). But that subsequence must in turn have a convergent subsequence. By the argument just given, the limit of that
subsequence can only be ∆∗ (Π). Thus, ∆∗ (Π) is continuous.
1 , then the maximized objective is
Proposition 2. If the optimum satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
continuous in Π for Π such that πij is positive and πii is bounded away from 0.

Proof. For a given transition matrix Π, let Ω(Π) be the set of mechanisms identified in Lemma
6. Also, let Ω∗ (Π) be the subset of Ω(Π) that is incentive-feasible. Because the always-trade
mechanism (S p (i) ≡ S+ ) is incentive-feasible and is in Ω(Π), Ω∗ (Π) is not empty.
Let Πn → Π0 , and let Zn∗ be the optimal welfare for Π = Πn , with Zn∗ = ζ(y(Πn ), a(Πn )), where
the function ζ is defined by equation 3.16 ; also let Z0∗ be the optimal welfare for Π = Π0 , with
Z0∗ = ζ(y(Π0 ), a(Π0 )).
Suppose lim supn→∞ Zn∗ > Z0∗ . Then there is a positive number ε and a subsequence Zn∗j such
that Zn∗j > Z0∗ + ε for all j, with Zn∗j = ζ(y(Πnj ), a(Πnj )). Because the set of possible a0 s is finite
(there is a finite number of possible specifications of the set S p (i) for each i ∈ S+ ), there must be at
least one a that occurs infinitely often in this subsequence. Denote such an a by â . Then we have,
ζ(ŷ(Πnj ), â) > Z0∗ + ε for all j, where ŷ(Πnj ) denotes the unique lemma 6 mechanism for a = â.
Then, by lemma 7, ζ(ŷ(Π0 ), â) > Z0∗ . Therefore, the optimality of Z0∗ implies (ŷ(Π0 ), â) ∈
/ Ω∗ (Π0 ).
∗
But since (ŷ(Πnj ), â) ∈ Ω (Πnj ), we have ∆r (ŷ(Πnj ), â) ≤ ∆s (ŷ(Πnj ), â) for all i, r, s such that
r ∈
/ Ŝ p (i) and s ∈ Ŝ p (i), where Ŝ p (i) is the set S p (i) that corresponds to â. Because, again by
Lemma 7, these inequalities are preserved in the limit as Πnj → Π0 , we have (ŷ(Π0 ), â) ∈ Ω∗ (Π0 ),
a contradiction. Therefore, lim supn→∞ Zn∗ ≤ Z0∗ .
Let a = ã be optimal at Π = Π0 . By part (iii) of Proposition 1 we know that, for all i ∈ S+ ,
r∈
/ S̃ p (i) and s ∈ S̃ p (i) implies ∆r (ỹ(Π0 ), ã) < ∆s (ỹ(Π0 ), ã), .where ỹ(Π) denotes the unique lemma
6 mechanism for a = ã. Lemma 7 then implies that (ỹ(Πn ), ã) ∈ Ω∗ (Πn ) for n sufficiently large.
Thus Zn∗ ≥ ζ(ỹ(Πn ), ã), which implies lim inf n→∞ Zn∗ ≥ Z0∗ .
It follows that limn→∞ Zn∗ = Z0∗ .
Proposition 3. Let {Πk } → I (the identity matrix) and be such that the corresponding sequence
of stationary probability vectors {pk } converges to a strictly positive vector. Assume that the
1 . There exists
optimum for any Π in the neighborhood of Π = I satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
K such that if k > K, then the optimum for Πk has no trade between informed producers and
uninformed consumers whenever the current state, j, exceeds the previous state, i.
Proof. Let {Πk } → I be given and let {pk } → p0 . For Π = I, define the function, Z(I), to be Z
with p = p0 .
i
The maximum of Z(I) over incentive-feasible (y, a) is y(ιc i, ιp i, , i) = ymax
. (When Π = I, the
maximum is obtained state by state and for each state, the result is given in [3]. Denote that
maximum Z ∗ (I).
Now let S p (i)0 = {1, 2, ..., i} for each i. Also, let y k and ∆k denote the unique monetary mechanism that satisfies (4.7)-(4.10) of proposition 1 when S p (i) = S p (i)0 and Π = Πk . Finally, let y ∞
i
i
and ∆∞ denote y k and ∆k for Π = I. Then, y ∞ (ιc i, ιp i, , i) = ymax
and ∆∞
i = ymax /β. (This is
verified by inserting these expressions into (4.7)-(4.10 ) and (9.12) and noticing that they hold.)
i
i
Then, by lemma 7, limk→∞ y k (ιc i, ιp i, , i) = ymax
and limk→∞ ∆ki = ymax
/β. That, in turn, implies
0
that if k is sufficiently large, then yk is incentive feasible. (This follows because the limit result
33

implies that if k is large, then ∆ki > ∆ki+1 . Now let Z ∗ (Π) denote the maximized objective. It
follows that for any ε > 0, there exists K such that k > K implies Z ∗ (Πk ) > Z ∗ (I) − ε. We now
show that if Πk is close enough to I, then a mechanism which has trade when the current state j
and previous state i satisfy j > i gives a value of the objective that is less than Z ∗ (I) − ε, and,
therefore, cannot be optimal.
If (y, a) satisfies producer individual-rationality constraints, then
i
lim ∆i (y, a; Π) ≤ ymax
/β.

Π→I

(9.40)

This follows by taking the limit of ∆i (y, a) as given by (9.12) and noting two things: only terms of
the form lim y(ιc i, ιp i, i) and lim[a(ιc i, ιp i, i)β∆i ] appear and the individual-rationality constraints
imply lim y(ιc i, ιp i, i) ≤ lim[a(ιc i, ιp i, i)β∆i ]. Now suppose by contradiction that the no-trade claim
is false. Then there exists a subsequence of the given sequence {Πk }, call it {Πn }, such that
{Πn } → I and for each n the optimum has trade in some current state j, where j > i, the previous
state. Let Z 00 (Πn ) denote the implied value of Z. The producer truth-telling constraint and (9.40)
j
imply that for sufficiently large n, either a(0, i, i)n = 0 or y(0, i, i)n ≤ ymax
+ ε0 , where j > i and
j
i
i
where ε0 > 0 but is otherwise arbitrary. (Recall that ymax
< ymax
if j > i and that ymax
depends
c
p
n
i
on mi , but not on Π.) But (9.40) also implies that for sufficiently large n, y(ι i, ι i, i) ≤ ymax
+ εi ,
where, again, εi > 0 but is otherwise arbitrary. Because a component of y appears with a nonvanishing coefficient in limn→∞ Z(Πn ) if and only if it has the form y(ιc i, ιp i, i), it follows that
lim sup{Z 00 (Πk )} < Z ∗ (I), a contradiction.
Lemma 8. Let Z(y k ) be ex ante welfare implied by y k as given by (4.12). Let Zmin be the ex ante
welfare implied by some incentive-feasible mechanism. If there exists Zmin such that Z(y k ) ≤ Zmin
1 .
for each k ∈ S+ , then any optimum satisfies u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
1 , then for some k ∈ S , β∆ < u−1 (y 1 ).
Proof. If the optimum violates u(β mins ∆s ) ≥ ymax
+
k
max
1 ) < y 1 .) If so, then y k is strictly greater than any optimal y. For y k (j, 0, i),
(Notice that u−1 (ymax
max
this follows from lemma 3. For y k (j, j, i) and y k (0, 0, i), it follows directly from the respective
producer individual rationality constraints. Finally, for y k (0, j, i), consider the second inequality in
(3.11), which is the individual rationality constraint for informed producers. If j ∈ S p (i), then the
minimum is no greater than β∆kj . If j ∈
/ S p (i), then y(0, j, i) = 0. In either case, we get y(0, j, i) ≤
y k (0, j, i). Therefore, Z(y k ) is strictly greater than the optimum Z . But if Z(y k ) ≤ Zmin for each
1 .
k ∈ S+ , then we have a contradiction and the optimum cannot satisfy u(β mins ∆s ) < ymax

Lemma 9. There exists ε > 0 such that if mS − m1 < ε, then the hypothesis of lemma 8 holds.
Proof. Let (yx , 1) denote an always-trade mechanism with yx (s, s0 , i) ≡ x, a mechanism in which
trade occurs in every trade meeting and output is the same in every trade meeting. For such a
mechanism,
1
cij (a) = (1 − )πij (1 − ηij ),
(9.41)
N
and
X
N bi (yx ) = (1 − λ)
πij [(1 − mj )u(x) + mj x]+
j

X

πij (λ − ηij )[(1 − mj )u(x) + mj x] =

j

X

πij (1 − ηij )[(1 − mj )u(x) + mj x],

j

34

(9.42)

where the first equality in (9.42) comes from using the definition of θji to combine, in turn, the
first two lines and the last two lines of the expression for N bi (y) (see (4.6)). If u(x) ≥ x, which is
1 , then
implied by x ≤ ymax
N bi (yx ) ≥ [(1 − mS )u(x) + mS x]Φ(i)
where Φ(i) ≡

P

j

(9.43)

πij (1 − ηij ). Now let L = mini ∆i (yx , 1). Then by (9.12), L satisfies
N L ≥ N min bi (yx ) + (N − 1)βL min Φ(i).
i

i

(9.44)

Therefore, by (9.43), L satisfies
N L ≥ [(1 − mS )u(x) + mS x]Φ + (N − 1)βLΦ

(9.45)

where Φ ≡ mini Φ(i). Suppose, then, that we take for x the positive solution to x = βL and (9.45)
at equality—namely, the unique positive solution for x to
x=

βΦz(x)(1 − mS )
.
(1 − βΦ)N

(9.46)

S
S
(Notice that this solution is less than ymax
because Φ < 1. In fact, it is ymax
for an economy with a
0
discount factor β = βΦ < β.) By construction, then, (yx , 1) with x given by the positive solution
to (9.46) satisfies producer individual-rationality constraints. We next have to satisfy consumer
individual-rationality constraints.
Let K = maxi ∆i (yx , 1). Then by (9.12), K satisfies

N K ≤ N max bi (yx ) + (N − 1)βK max Φ(i).
i

i

(9.47)

Therefore, by the same reasoning that led to (9.43), K satisfies
N K ≤ [(1 − m1 )u(x) + m1 x] + (N − 1)βK,

(9.48)

where we have taken unity to be an upper bound on Φ(i). With x given by the positive solution to
1 /β. Therefore, it is sufficient for satisfaction of consumer individual(9.46), it follows that K ≤ ymax
rationality constraints for the mechanism (yx , 1) with x given by the positive solution to (9.46) that
1 .
u(x) ≥ ymax
Because truth-telling is vacuous for the mechanism (yx , 1), that mechanism is incentive-feasible
1 , which is a condition that is easy to check. If it holds, then Z(y ) is a possible
provided u(x) ≥ ymax
x
magnitude for Zmin .
1
To complete the proof, we first show that x → ymax
as mS − m1 → 0. From (3.5) it follows that
ηij → 0 as mS −m1 → 0. Therefore, Φ(i) → 1 as mS −m1 → 0. It follows that as mS −m1 → 0, Φ → 1
1 . That is, as Φ → 1 and m → m in (9.46), then
and, hence, by the definition of x that x → ymax
1
S
the unique positive solution to (9.46) approaches the unique positive solution to (4.1) for mi = m1.
1 , we have u(x) ≥ y 1 . Finally, for x sufficiently close to y 1 ,
Now, for x sufficiently close to ymax
max
max
it follows that the hypothesis of lemma 8 holds.

35

References
[1] R.J. Barro and R.G. King, Time-separable preferences and intertemporal-substitution models
of business cycles. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99 (1984) 817-839.
[2] A. Berentsen, M. Molico, and R. Wright, Indivisibilities, lotteries, and monetary exchange,
Manuscript,University of Pennsylvania, December 1998.
[3] R. Cavalcanti and N. Wallace. “A model of private banknote issue.” Review of Economic
Dynamics 2 (February, 1999), 104-136.
[4] B. Eden, The adjustment of prices to monetary shocks when trade is uncertain and sequential.
Journal of Political Economy, 102 (1994) 493-509.
[5] D. Hume, On money. In Writings on Economics. Edited by E. Rotwein. (Madison, University
of Wisconsin Press. 1970)
[6] L. Jones and R. Manuelli, Volatile policy and private information: the case of monetary policy.
NBER Working paper 7072, May 1999.
[7] J. Kennan, An elementary fixed point theorem for increasing concave functions on Rn .
http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/˜jkennan/research/fixedpoint.pdf., 1999.
[8] J. Kennan and R. Wilson, Bargaining with private information. Journal of Economic Literature, 31 (1993), 45-104.
[9] N. Kocherlakota, Money is memory. Journal of Economic Theory, 81 (1998) 232-251.
[10] R.E. Lucas Jr., Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of Economic Theory, 4
(1972) 103-124.
[11] R.E. Lucas Jr. and M. Woodford, Real effects of monetary shocks in an economy with sequential
purchases. 1994, University of Chicago working paper.
[12] R. Myerson and M. Satterthwaite, Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of Economic Theory, 28 (1983), 265-281.
[13] S. Shi, Money and prices: a model of search and bargaining. Journal of Economic Theory, 67
(1995) 467-498.
[14] A. Trejos and R. Wright, Search, bargaining, money and prices. Journal of Political Economy,
103 (1995) 118-141.
[15] N. Wallace, Short-run and long-run effects of changes in money in a random-matching model.
Journal of Political Economy, 105 (1997), 1293-1307.
[16] N. Wallace, Introduction to modeling money and studying monetary policy, Journal of Economic Theory, 81 (August 1998), 223-231.

36

