                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            LIQUIDITY RISK, LIQUIDITY CREATION
                                AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY:
                                   A THEORY OF BANKING


                                         Douglas W. Diamond
                                          Raghuram G. Rajan


                                          Working Paper 7430
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7430


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 1999




We acknowledge helpful comments from an anonymous referee, Patrick Bolton, Michael Brennan, Phil
Dybvig, Ron Giammarino, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstrom, Oliver Hart, and Bruce Smith. We thank Heitor
Almeida for valuable research assistance. We are grateful for financial support from the Center for
Research in Security Prices and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan . All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial Fragility:
A Theory of Banking
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7430
December 1999
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58


                                                ABSTRACT


        Both investors and borrowers are concerned about liquidity. Investors desire liquidity because they
are uncertain about when they will want to eliminate their holding of a financial asset. Borrowers are
concerned about liquidity because they are uncertain about their ability to continue to attract or retain
funding. Because borrowers typically cannot repay investors on demand, investors will require a premium
or significant control rights when they lend to borrowers directly, as compensation for the illiquidity
investors will be subject to. We argue that banks can resolve these liquidity problems that arise in direct
lending. Banks enable depositors to withdraw at low cost, as well as buffer firms from the liquidity needs
of their investors. We show the bank has to have a fragile capital structure, subject to bank runs, in order
to perform these functions. Far from being an aberration to be regulated away, the funding of illiquid loans
by a bank with volatile demand deposits is rationalized in the context of the functions it performs. This
model can be used to investigate important issues such as narrow banking and bank capital requirements.


Douglas W. Diamond                                                    Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business                                           Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                                         University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street                                                 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60657                                                     Chicago, IL 60657
                                                                      raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu
          Banks perform valuable activities on either side of their balance sheets. On the asset side,

they make loans to difficult, illiquid borrowers, thus enhancing the flow of credit in the economy.

On the liability side, they provide liquidity on demand to depositors. We know from Diamond

and Dybvig [1983] that banks can transform illiquid assets into more liquid demand deposits.

But there seems to be a fundamental incompatibility between the two activities -- the demands

for liquidity by depositors may arrive at an inconvenient time and force the fire-sale liquidation

of illiquid assets. Furthermore, because depositors are served in sequence, the prospect of fire

sales may precipitate self-fulfilling runs that further jeopardize bank activities. In country after

country, an army of regulators supervises banks to protect them from their own fragility. And

after every banking crisis, economists point to how risky the combination of bank activities is,

and how it makes sense to legislate the separation of banking activities. But is there logic,

hitherto unnoticed, for the bank's choice of activities?           Is financial fragility a desirable

characteristic of banks?

          Our paper suggests yes. Assets are illiquid in our framework because the best users of

the asset cannot commit to employ their specialized human capital on behalf of others. So, for

example, an entrepreneur with a project can threaten to quit at an interim stage. This gives him

bargaining power over the surplus generated, no matter what contract he signs at the outset with

financiers, hence he cannot promise to pay out surplus fully. Thus real assets are illiquid. They

cannot be sold or borrowed against for the full value they generate due to this limited ability to

commit.

          Of course, lenders can be given control rights such as the right to seize assets and put

them to alternative use (i.e., liquidate). This will give them some bargaining power over the

surplus that the entrepreneur generates. Also, as a lender sees the entrepreneur's modus operandi

over the course of the financing relationship , she will understand the entrepreneur's business

better and thus will be able to liquidate assets for more. So is illiquidity no longer an issue if a



                                                                                                         1
lender develops specific skills over the course of the relationship that give her a sufficiently

strong liquidation threat to extract full repayment?

        The answer is no if the "relationship" lender is likely to face a need for liquidity. After

having made the loan, the lender may need money for a new business or for consumption and she

may not be able to raise money elsewhere to finance this need. She will have to sell the loan, or

use it as collateral, to raise money to meet either of these liquidity needs. The amount raised will

be unavoidably low if her specific ability to collect future loan payments from the entrepreneur is

lost when she undertakes the opportunity. Even if her loan collection skills persist after she

undertakes the new business or consumption opportunity, there is a potential problem. Because

she typically cannot commit to using her skills to extract repayment from the entrepreneur on

behalf of others, her loan to the entrepreneur is illiquid -- she cannot sell it or raise money against

it to the full value of the repayment she expects to extract from the entrepreneur.

        The lender’s inability to sell, or borrow against, a loan for the full present value of what

she could extract in the future, when faced with a need for liquidity, affects the initial terms of

her loan, and her interactions with the entrepreneur. Even though the loan is riskless when held

to maturity, its low sale price makes it risky for one with potential liquidity needs. Since the loan

does not repay much when she has the highest use for money, the lender may demand a premium

from the entrepreneur, and may incorporate contractual terms that allow her to liquidate the

entrepreneur's project when she is in need of liquidity. Thus the lender's need for liquidity creates

liquidity risk for the entrepreneur, and the lender may even refuse to lend if her likelihood of

having a liquidity need is high enough.

        The adverse consequences of illiquidity could be avoided if a relationship lender with

persistent loan collection skills could borrow the full value of the loan to the entrepreneur when

she faces a need for liquidity. She can do this only if she can commit to deploy her extraction

skills for free in the future on behalf of the new lender(s). One way to commit is for the



                                                                                                          2
relationship lender to borrow using demand deposits: a fragile capital structure that is subject to a

“run”. If the relationship lender threatens to withdraw her specific collection skills as a ploy to

get more rents, she will precipitate a run by depositors, which will drive her rents to zero. Fearing

this outcome, she will not attempt to renegotiate any pre-committed payments, and will be able to

pass through to depositors all that she extracts from the entrepreneur. So the fragility of her

capital structure enables the relationship lender to borrow against the full value of the illiquid

loan she holds. This then enables her to lend up front without demanding an expected return

premium for illiquidity, and without liquidating the entrepreneur when faced with a liquidity

shock. Financial fragility allows liquidity creation.

        More generally, we can extend this idea to explain financial intermediaries such as

banks. Suppose no single lender has the wealth to fully finance an entrepreneur's project. If

lenders have to club their money together, it makes sense for one of them to become an

intermediary whom we shall call the banker. The banker can issue demand deposits to the other

lenders. The fragile deposit structure allows persistent relationship building to be delegated to

the banker (much as in Diamond [1984] where the intermediary monitors on behalf of investors),

because the banker can commit to pay depositors what she can extract from the entrepreneur

based on her specific loan collection skills. If initial depositors have liquidity needs at an interim

stage, the banker can refinance by issuing fresh demand deposits and can thus meet their needs.

New depositors will be willing to replace old depositors who withdraw since new depositors will

be confident the bank will repay. As a result, the bank’s deposits are a desirable asset for

investors who have need for liquidity, and are liquid even though loans made by the bank are

illiquid. Moreover, the bank shields entrepreneurs from the liquidity needs of depositors, thus

creating liquidity on both sides of the balance sheet.

        The rest of the paper is as follows. We present the framework in section I, and derive the

nature of the optimal financing contract in section II. In section III we explain how a bank can



                                                                                                         3
achieve the second best outcome. Our model has a number of implications which we explore in

section IV, we relate the paper to the literature in section V, especially Diamond and Dybvig

[1983] and Calomiris and Kahn [1991], and we conclude with a description of some of the many

extensions that are possible to this model.

                                         I. The Framework.

A. Projects.

Consider an economy with entrepreneurs and potential financiers. The economy lasts for two

periods and three dates -- date 0 to date 2. All agents have linear utility of consumption. Each

entrepreneur has a project, which lasts for two periods. The project requires an investment of up

to $1 at date 0. If an entrepreneur works on his project, it produces a riskless cash flow of Ct at

date t (all amounts are per dollar invested). Investment in the project is observable and

contractible—the entrepreneur cannot divert the funds to another use. There is also a storage

opportunity that returns $1 for every dollar invested.

B. Financing.

        Entrepreneurs do not have money to finance their projects. There are many potential

financiers with an endowment of one unit at date 0, and arbitrarily many other financiers with

smaller endowments at each date. The exact distribution of endowment is not critical.

        The entrepreneur can raise money by issuing contracts (which for convenience only we

will call loans). We assume very little about the form of the contract other than there is a

required payment on particular date(s) and the lender gets control rights over the asset if the

entrepreneur defaults. This specification subsumes a contract where the lender always has

control rights since that is obtained by setting the required payment to ∞. So, a contract only

specifies repayments P t that the borrower is required to make at date t (with repayments possibly

contingent on the liquidity shock to the lender that we will shortly describe).




                                                                                                      4
C. Relationship Lending.

         The date-0 lender to a project, whom we will call the relationship lender, develops

specific skills in identifying the liquidation value of the assets -- she has been in a relationship

with the entrepreneur at an early enough stage to know how the business was built, knows which

markets personnel were hired from and where assets were bought, and knows what alternative

strategies were considered. So she can identify the second best use(r) of the asset more precisely

than anyone else. Formally, before date t, she can take the asset away from the entrepreneur and

put it in alternative use to generate a present value Xt. This is the “liquidation value” of the

assets. After date 2, the liquidation value collapses to zero. There is symmetric information about

cash flows and liquidation values.

         Because other lenders who come in later do not have her specific skills in finding the

next best alternative use, they can generate only βXt where 0≤β<1 from the asset. Since

educating the initial lender takes time and effort, we assume that an entrepreneur can borrow

from only one such lender. 1 We will discuss various other interpretations of the relationship

lender's skills later.

D. Limited Commitment.

         There are two limitations on the willingness of financiers to lend. First, at any date an

agent can commit to work on the specific venture only for that date (as in Hart and Moore [1994]

and Hart [1995]) – the law prevents him from irrevocably selling himself into bondage. This

implies that after borrowing and investing at date 0, the entrepreneur could threaten to quit

before cash flows are due to be produced at date 1 unless the terms of financing are renegotiated.

He can do this again before date 2. Similarly, the relationship lender cannot commit to others that

she will use her specific skills on their behalf at any future date.

         This implies that loans can be renegotiated. For simplicity, we assume that the

entrepreneur has all the bargaining power; if the entrepreneur defaults on a scheduled payment,



                                                                                                       5
he can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer with a revised menu of payments, and can commit not to

work for that period if an impasse is reached. We show later that our qualitative results hold

when the lender has some additional bargaining power. If the lender accepts the revised

schedule, the entrepreneur produces that date’s cash flow, makes the spot payment required by

the revised schedule, and continues in possession of the asset. If the lender rejects the revised

schedule, the cash flow is not produced that period; the lender takes possession of the asset and

does as she chooses with it (see Figures 1 and 2).

E. Liquidity Shock.

         The second limitation on the willingness to lend up front is that with probability θ at date

1, the relationship lender could get a liquidity shock -- a highly valued investment or

consumption opportunity -- which makes her impatient (we denote this type of lender by

superscript I). The shock increases her personal rate of time preference, making one unit of date-

1 goods worth R units of date-2 goods to her. We refer to a lender who does not get a liquidity

shock as patient or ~I. We assume that the realization of the liquidity shock is the relationship

lender’s own private information – outsiders have no way to find out how strong her desire to

consume is, or how good the investment opportunity really is. This specification of liquidity

shocks is similar to that in Bryant [1980] and Diamond and Dybvig [1983], but without the

introduction of risk aversion.

         Apart from those who get the liquidity shock described above, no one discounts future

consumption: the discount rate is zero. We assume endowments are sufficiently large relative to

projects, and there are enough investors who do not get a liquidity shock that storage is always in

use at the margin at each date. So there is no aggregate shortage of liquidity of the type in

Diamond [1997], and at any date a claim on one unit of consumption at date t+1 sells in the

market for one unit at date t.



1
 The banker’s specific skills in our model resemble the relationship specific information bankers get in
Greenbaum, Kanatas and Venezias [(1989)], Sharpe [(1990)] and Rajan [(1992)].
                                                                                                           6
         We assume

                                                    C1 + C2                                            (A1)
                                    Min[C1 + C2 ,           ] > R >1
                                                      X1

                                                  C2 > X 2                                             (A2)

                                              Max[ X 1 , X 2 ] ≥ 1                                     (A3)

Assumption A1 indicate the project produces greater returns, C1+C2, viewed from both the date 0

investment and the date 1 opportunity cost of X1, than the relationship lender’s discount rate,

even when hit with a liquidity shock. This ensures that it is always efficient for the entrepreneur

to continue his project. A2 indicates the project is worth continuing at date 2. Condition A3

ensures that the project can be financed if the lender does not suffer liquidity shocks, because it

will turn out that entrepreneur can commit to pay the relationship lender an amount equal to X             1 at


date 1 or X 2 at date 2, the liquidation value of his assets.

         The time line of events thus far is:

Date 0                               Date 1                                Date 2
1. Entrepreneur offers loan          1. Lender suffers (or does not        1. Entrepreneur makes any
terms to lender.                     suffer) a private liquidity           required payment or offers
2. Loan is made if lender            shock.                                alternative schedule.
accepts.                             2. Entrepreneur makes any             2. If alternative schedule
3. Amount invested.                  required payment or offers            offered, lender accepts or
4. Lender acquires specific          alternative schedule.                 takes possession of asset.
expertise in liquidation             3. If alternative schedule
through the relationship.            offered, lender accepts or
                                     takes possession of asset.
                                     4. Loan may be sold to
                                     another lender.


                                         II. Optimal Contracts.

         The amount invested in each project can be anywhere between 0 and 1. It turns out that

in this world of certainty, the entrepreneur will always optimally invest everything he raises at

date 0, and not store any cash. 2 If the lender finds the terms acceptable for any specific amount


2
  The contract space is rich enough that the entrepreneur does not need to store cash to protect himself
against unnecessary liquidation by the lender. Moreover, the entrepreneur's incentive to protect himself
                                                                                                             7
raised, linearity implies she will find them acceptable (suitably scaled) for any other amount.

Taken together, this implies that we can focus, without loss of generality, at situations where the

entrepreneur borrows $1 and invests it entirely in the project.

A. The Entrepreneur's Optimization Problem.

         In offering to borrow using a particular loan contract up front, the entrepreneur wants to

maximize his expected payoffs. If it is to be rational for the relationship lender to make the loan

at date 0, she should expect to get at least (1 − θ ) + θ R , which is her expected utility, given the

probability of a liquidity shock, using her alternative of storage. Because there is no shortage of

funds at date 0, we assume the entrepreneur can borrow by matching the expected utility from

this outside option of storage. We now examine the optimal outcomes given the limits of the

entrepreneur’s ability to commit to payments derived above. Two principles are clear:

(a)      Because the returns from continuation exceed R, the entrepreneur would like to ensure

that his project does not get liquidated unless this is absolutely necessary for the lender to make

the loan – unless liquidation is the only way to satisfy the lender’s Individual Rationality (IR)

constraint.

(b)      Since the entrepreneur values cash flows the same in either state and at either date

(because his discount factor is 1), he would like to commit up front to give the relationship

lender as much as possible at date 1 when she is impatient and needs liquidity. Define the

illiquidity premium as the increase in expected payments the entrepreneur has to make over and

above the expected payments the lender would receive if she had invested in storage at date 0
                                                                                                                3
(which pays $1 for sure at date 1 regardless of the lender’s type). Then the illiquidity premium is

                       θ ( R − 1)[1 −    Date-1 cash flow to impatient l ender ]                         (1)




against necessary liquidation by holding cash can be dealt with by setting the date-1 payment high enough.
3
  Let V be the expected payment in all other states and V 1I be the Date-1 cash flow to the impatient lender.
The illiquidity premium is V + θV1 − 1 . For the lender to lend, V + θ RV1 = (1 − θ ) + θ R . Solving for
                                    I                                        I


V, substituting in the illiquidity premium and rearranging, we get the simplified expression.

                                                                                                                8
where θ is the probability of the lender getting the liquidity shock and the cash flow to the

impatient lender includes any payments by the entrepreneur, and any proceeds from loan sale or

project liquidation. We call an asset with a zero illiquidity premium "liquid". An asset with a

positive illiquidity premium is one where more is paid in expectation over time to the holder

because it does not pay as much when she is impatient at date 1 as storage. Thus a relationship

lender is willing to pay less at date 0 for such an asset than the present value of its future

repayments discounted at the gross market interest rate (of 1). It is "illiquid". Moreover, we will

see that the reason for the illiquidity premium is that the impatient relationship lender will realize

less from the loan at date 1 than the present value of payoffs if she held the loan to maturity and

discounted at the market interest rate. Relationship loans can be an unbreakable bundle of state

contingent claims (in states where lender type differs). Thus a loan is illiquid because it has poor

state contingent payoffs, and it has poor state contingent payoffs because it cannot fetch as much

in times of need as the present value of what the holder could realize if she did not have the need.

         Finally, note that if the amount that an impatient lender can realize at date 1 exceeds 1

(and consequently the total payment to a patient lender is less than 1), the loan provides the

lender liquidity insurance. In this case, the expected return premium required is negative (i.e.,

the loan has a lower expected return than a liquid asset). We will see that because the need for

liquidity is private information, no such “more than liquid” asset exists.

    Taking (a) and (b) together, the entrepreneur’s first priority in the contract he offers is to

minimize the probability of liquidation, following which he will focus on reducing the illiquidity

premium by ensuring the contract pays the maximum possible to the lender if she turns out to be

impatient at date 1. We will show in a wide variety of circumstances that the loan from the

relationship lender to the entrepreneur will be illiquid because of their inability to commit their

specific skills to others.

B. Contract Renegotiation.



                                                                                                         9
        There are limitations on how much the entrepreneur can commit to pay because he can

always threaten to quit and thus bargain his payments down. Let us describe what happens when

a contract is renegotiated. Suppose that at date 2, the loan has not been previously sold. The

entrepreneur has to renegotiate with the relationship lender. The entrepreneur may refuse to

make the pre-specified payment P2 and, instead, may make an offer of a lower payment. In

response, the relationship lender can accept the offer or reject it and liquidate the assets to obtain

X2 (see figure 1). Thus if P2 exceeds X2, the entrepreneur will renegotiate knowing that the

lender will be satisfied with an offer of           X2. Thus at date 2 the entrepreneur will

pay Min{P2 , X 2 } .

        Now consider what happens at date 1 if the relationship lender is patient (i.e., has not

received a liquidity shock). If the entrepreneur initiates re-negotiation, the lender can accept the

entrepreneur's offer. Alternatively she can liquidate and get X1, or hold on to the asset and get X2

at date 2 (see figure 2). Since the relationship lender has the best extraction skills, selling when

patient is a weakly dominated option. So she will accept any offer that makes payments

amounting to Max{ X 1 , X 2 } over dates 1 and 2 where any payment left for date 2 should be

enforceable, i.e., should be less than X2.          If the promised payments P 1 + P2 exceed

Max{ X 1 , X 2 } , they will be renegotiated down to this level (note that if a state contingent

contract had been written, P 1 and P2 would be the payments given the relationship lender has no

need for liquidity).

        Suppose, instead, the lender does receive a liquidity shock at date 1 and becomes

impatient. If the borrower attempts to renegotiate, the lender can liquidate the asset and get     X1,

                            X2
or get a present value of      by waiting till date 2.
                            R

        There is another option. A number of potential lenders at date 1 have endowments but

have not received a liquidity shock. So they can substitute for the relationship lender, albeit


                                                                                                       10
imperfectly because they do not have her specific skills. So a third option for the relationship

lender is to sell the loan contract at date 1 to an unskilled lender who has not suffered a shock.

All claims and rights of the initial lender pass on to the loan buyer. Let S be the maximum that

the loan buyer can collect on the loan at date 2. For now, we take S as exogenous. We discuss its

determination in section II.D, below. Since the buyer will be from the large pool of lenders who

have not suffered a liquidity shock, and since the prevailing interest rate is zero, he will be

willing to buy the claim at date 1 for what he expects to recover from the loan at date 2, i.e., S.

Since at most X2 can be recovered from the entrepreneur at date 2, S ≤ X 2 .

        In summary, the maximum date-1 present value the impatient relationship lender can

                                                                                      X2
extract (i.e., the largest renegotiation proof amount) is E I = Max{ X 1 , S ,           } while the
                                                                                      R

maximum amount she can extract if patient is E ~ I = Max{ X 1 , X 2 } .

C.       Optimal financial arrangements and the consequences of illiquid loans

        The next question is how much can actually be paid to the relationship lender at date 1,

i.e., what is the cash or liquidity available for her to consume or invest elsewhere?                The

maximum the lender can get at date 1 if she does not liquidate is if she collects all the date 1 cash

flow generated by the entrepreneur, and she sells date-2 promised payments for the maximum

they could fetch. In this case, she can get up to C1 + S . She will get, at maximum, C1 if the loan

is not sold and the project not liquidated. If she liquidates the project, she can be paid   X1 .

        These limits on extractability and liquidity bound the maximum possible payments by

the entrepreneur. If it is possible for him to offer a contract to the relationship lender with terms

contingent on the realization of the lender’s date-1 liquidity need, then these limits can be

achieved. Even so, as Lemma 1 indicates, the entrepreneur may be forced to pay liquidity            premia

or be liquidated solely to meet the needs of the lender.




                                                                                                        11
Lemma 1: If the initial loan contract between the entrepreneur and the relationship lender can

be directly contingent on the relationship lender's type (i.e., contingent on whether she receives a

liquidity shock or not)

(i)       The entrepreneur will be financed at date 0 and will provide the lender liquidity

          insurance,    with      the     loan       carrying     a      negative      illiquidity   premium,     if

          Min{C1 + S , E I } > 1 .

(ii)      The entrepreneur will be financed at date 0 and the loan will be a liquid asset with a

          zero illiquidity premium if Min{C1 + S , E I } = 1 .

If Min{C1 + S , E I } < 1

(iii)     The entrepreneur will be financed at date 0 but the loan will be illiquid and he will have

          to pay a positive illiquidity premium if either

                                                                   θ                                        (2)
                        C1 + S < E I        and E ~ I ≥ 1 +              R (1 − (C1 + S ) )
                                                                (1 − θ )

          or

                                                                         θ                                  (3)
                             C1 + S ≥ E I     and       E ~I ≥ 1 +             R(1 − E I )
                                                                      (1 − θ )

          or

                             θ
                                 (
                                R(1 − Min{C1 , E I }) − Min{Max{( E I − C1 ) R, 0}, X 2 }             )
                                                                                                            (4)
               E ~I ≥ 1 +
                            1−θ



(iv)      If none of (3), (4), or (5) hold, the entrepreneur will be financed at date 0 but only with

          the asset being liquidated when the lender is impatient if

                                                        θ                                                   (5)
                                        E ~I > 1 +            R (1 − X 1 )
                                                     (1 − θ )

(v)       The entrepreneur will not be financed at all at date 0 otherwise.

Proof :


                                                                                                                12
Consider the mechanism design problem the entrepreneur faces, keeping in mind that the

contract can be renegotiated at date 1 after the lender's liquidity needs are determined (her type is

revealed).          We characterize the contract in terms of the payments it draws forth from the

entrepreneur. Define Vt j as the cash paid by an entrepreneur when the relationship lender is of

type j (where j ∈ {I , ~ I } ) at date t. We can restrict attention to renegotiation-proof contracts,

where the entrepreneur can and will make the payment                          Vt j . The entrepreneur’s goal is to

maximize Φ w.r.t. Vt s where

 Φ ≡ θ [C1 + C2 − V1I − V2I ] + (1 − θ )[ C1 + C2 − V1~ I + V2~ I )] if V1I , V1~ I ≤ C1                       (no liquidation)
                θ [ X 1 − V1I ] + (1 − θ )[ X 1 − V1~ I ]                    if V1I ,V1~ I > C1 ,    (liquidation in all states)
θ [ X 1 − V1I ] + (1 − θ )[C1 + C2 − V1~ I − V2~ I ]        if    V1I > C1 ,V1~ I ≤ C1 ,   (liquidation when len der is type I)
 θ [C1 + C2 − V1I − V2I ] + (1 − θ )[ X 1 − V1~ I ]         if     V1I ≤ C1 ,V1~ I > C1 . (liquidation when lend er is type ~I)

            Subject to:

Payments renegotiation-proof and individually rational:

V1 j ≤ Max[ X 1 , C1 ]                         (maximum feasible date-1 payment )
V 2
   ~I
        ≤ X2                                    m
                                                ( aximum date-2 payment enforceable by type ~I)

If the date 2 portion of the loan, V2I , is sold at date 1 by type I (impatient), then
V2I ≤ S                                         (maximum date-2 payment enforceable by buyer)
                                 X2
V1I + V2I ≤ Max[ X 1 , S ,          ]                  (maximum total payment enforceable if sold)
                                 R
θ [(V1I + V2I ) R ] + (1 − θ )(V1~ I + V2~ I ) ≥ θ R + (1 − θ )    (Lender's Individual Ra tionality, when V 2I is sold)



If the date 2 portion of the loan, V2I , is kept at date 1 by type I (impatient), then

V1I R + V2I ≤ Max[ X 1 R, X 2 ]                         (maximum total payment enforceable)
V2I ≤ X 2                                         m
                                                  ( aximum date-2 payment enforceable by original lender )
θ (V1 R + V ) + (1 − θ )(V1 + V ) ≥ θ R + (1 − θ )
        I
               2
                I               ~I
                                       2
                                        ~I
                                                                  (Lender's Individual Rat ionality when V 2I is kept)


Contingent payments other than at date 1 to the impatient lender enter the objective function and

the Individual Rationality (IR) constraints in the same way, and all combinations that satisfy the

                                                                                                                  13
IR constraint are equally good, so long as there is no liquidation. The conditions in the lemma

follow simply by substituting the maximum feasible date-1 payment to the impatient lender into

the IR condition, and solving for the required payment to the patient lender. So long as that

payment can be extracted, it will be made -- since the patient lender is indifferent between

payments at either date, the timing of cash payments is not relevant.

         The optimal contract will have the impatient lender always selling the loan at date 1 if

the IR constraint can be satisfied when she does so, for this minimizes the illiquidity premium.

However, the required payments to the patient lender may be so high that they cannot be

extracted. There are two possibilities left. Since the relationship lender can extract more than the

loan buyer, it may be necessary for her to keep the loan even when impatient instead of selling it,

and extract enough to meet her IR constraint. Of course, she has to extract enough to compensate

for the higher illiquidity premium she will now need. Condition (4) ensures this is feasible. If

not, the entrepreneur may be able to borrow by allowing himself to be liquidated if the lender

suffers a shock (see Lemma I (iv)). This can reduce the required payment to the patient lender to

an extractable level. If not, it is not individually rational for the lender to make the loan in the

first place (Lemma I (v)).                                                             Q.E.D.

         Lemma 1 shows the loan may have an illiquidity premium and liquidation may arise even
                                                                          4
when the lender's liquidity need can be directly contracted on.               However, unlike what is assumed

in Lemma 1, the lender’s liquidity need is private information. Therefore, the best the

entrepreneur can do is to offer a contract that has a menu of possibilities at date 1, and allow the



4
 If liquidity needs were verifiable, were not an aggregate risk, and if agents other then the entrepreneur
have no limit on commitment to pay, both storage and the loan payments could be transformed into type-
contingent insurance contracts. For example, the lender could store, and sell off the payment of 1 in states
where she does not get a liquidity shock in return for additional payments when she does get a liquidity
shock. In this case, the lender’s outside option is   V1I = θ1 , V1~ I = V2~ I = V2I = 0 . Unless the loan offers
at least the same possibilities, i.e., unless it offers at least a payment of 1 that can either be consumed at date
1 or can be assigned to others in states when the lender is not in need of liquidity, it will require a premium
expected return. Thus the condition for the loan to be illiquid (and the entrepreneur not liquidated)
remains Min{C1 + S , E         } < 1.
                           I

                                                                                                                  14
lender to select her preferred option based on her type. This will introduce additional self-

selection restrictions on what is possible in Lemma 1.

Corollary 1: When the relationship lender's need for liquidity is private information,

(i)       The loan will be liquid (with a zero illiquidity premium) under the conditions of Lemma

          1 (i) and (ii).

(ii)      The loan will be illiquid, the illiquidity premium will be weakly higher, and the loan will

          be sold in weakly fewer circumstances than under the conditions of Lemma 1 (iii). There

          will be no increase in liquidation relative to the case when the lender's type can be

          directly contracted upon.

Proof :

Since the lender’s type is not observable, we have to add incentive compatibility constraints to

the mechanism design problem.

Payments Incentive Compatible:

V1I + V2I ≤ V1~ I + V2~ I                  (IC1: Incentive compatibility of type j=~I)
V1I R + V2I ≥ V1~ I R + V2~ I      (IC2: Incentive compatibility for type j=I, if type I keeps loan)
(V1I + V2I ) R ≥ V1~ I R + V2~ I   (IC3: Incentive compatibility of type j=I, if type I sells loan)

          IC1 indicates the patient type must get (weakly) more in market value if she claims to be

patient. Therefore, an incentive compatible contract can, at best, pay both patient and impatient

types the same total market value. Liquidity insurance is thus ruled out for that would require the

impatient type to be paid more than 1 at date 1, and the patient type less than 1 in total. However,

fully liquid contracts are incentive compatible since they pay both types $ 1 at date 1. Hence

Corollary 1 (i).

          Self-selection for the impatient type (IC2 and IC3) can typically be achieved by back-

loading payments to the patient type and front loading payments to the impatient type. A

straightforward check of the various scenarios shows that IC2 (incentive compatibility for the

impatient lender when she keeps the loan) imposes no additional constraints on the optimal type-


                                                                                                       15
contingent payments but IC3 can in one situation. If the cash available to the impatient

relationship lender after a loan sale, C1 + S , is small, the amount the patient type has to be paid

has to be disproportionately large to meet the IR constraint. The higher the probability of the

liquidity shock, the higher this amount. But then even if this amount is backloaded, the impatient

lender may prefer it to receiving C1 + S . Thus incentive compatibility may bind. In this case, we

get payments to be incentive compatible for the impatient type only by having her retain, rather

than sell, the loan at date 1. The set of parameters for which loans are designed to be sold is

smaller than in the full information case, and the illiquidity premium will be higher, because the

impatient type does not receive the proceeds from the loan sale at date 1. However, it is easily

shown that the lender can always be paid the additional premium, so liquidation does not

increase.                           Q.E.D.

          Finally, let us pinpoint the source of the illiquidity.

Corollary 2: If the maximum loan sale price, S, equals X2, the optimal contract will always be

liquid.

                                              X2
Proof : If S = X 2 , E I = Max{ X 1 , S ,        } = Max{ X 1 , X 2 } . Thus the maximum that can be
                                              R

paid at date 1 to the impatient lender in the absence of self-selection constraints is

Min{Max{ X 1 , X 2 }, C1 + X 2 } . But this is also the maximum a patient lender can extract, so it

cannot be less than 1 for lending to occur. Self-selection constraints (Corollary 1) will limit the

amount paid to 1, hence the optimal contract will be liquid but will not provide insurance.

Q.E.D.

D. The Sources of Illiquidity.

          Lemma 1 indicates that illiquidity premia and liquidation arise even with optimal

contracts under perfect information because the entrepreneur cannot commit his human capital to

the project. Corollary 1 indicates that, in general, when the lender's liquidity shock is private



                                                                                                     16
information, the required illiquidity premium will increase. The optimal contract under private

information can, at best, provide full liquidity (zero illiquidity premium) to the lender, but cannot

provide liquidity insurance (negative illiquidity premium).

         As Corollary 2 indicates, the source of the illiquidity premium -- which leads to

liquidation and even denial of credit -- is that the maximum loan sale price, S, is lower than the

present value of the amount obtainable by the patient relationship lender, X 2. To see why this is

so, we consider two cases.

Case 1: Upon selling the loan, the relationship lender loses her liquidation skills and is not
available to collect at date 2.
         The assumption here is that by selling the loan, the relationship lender loses contact with

the entrepreneur, and the business changes fast enough that she needs contact to keep her specific

liquidation skills honed. Alternatively, if the liquidity shock is a profitable opportunity that takes

the lender away from her existing ventures, it need not be the sale itself, but rather, the

refocusing on the new opportunity that destroys collection abilities. For example, consider a firm

offering trade credit. It can do so, in part, because it can repossess the goods it supplies and sell

them elsewhere. If the firm starts a new business and drops the old business, it will lose the
                                                                5
leverage it had with all those it had offered credit to.            With the relationship lender having lost her

skills, the loan buyer can extract a payment from the entrepreneur of, at maximum, β X 2 at date 2

where β < 1 . So S = β X 2 . There is nothing the relationship lender can do to increase the sale

price above βX2, and lemma 1 then describes the best available financing outcomes.



Case 2: The relationship lender retains liquidation skills even after selling the loan and can

collect on the buyer's behalf at date 2.



5
 Note that according to this interpretation, the lender who chooses to retain the project loan and stay in the
old business does not have the time to fund the profitable new opportunity. This interpretation changes the
IR constraint if the loan is not sold. It is now
θ (V1I + V2I ) + (1 − θ )(V1~ I + V2~ I ) ≥ θ R + (1 − θ ) . Qualitatively, the results are unchanged.
                                                                                                                 17
         Case 2 is particularly appropriate if we think of the project’s characteristics as relatively

static, and the relationship lender as one whose primary business is lending (e.g., a financial

institution), and who acquires permanent liquidation skills relevant to the entrepreneur’s business

(such as knowledge of secondary markets for the borrower's assets) to extract payment. This is

in contrast to case 1 where the liquidation skills are related to the lender’s business.

        What would a buyer pay now for the loan at date 1, given that he can hire the

relationship lender to collect on his behalf at date 2? To determine this, suppose at date 2 the

entrepreneur tries to negotiate down the amount to be paid. The sequence of all such negotiations

will be as follows (see figure 3); The entrepreneur will make an opening offer to the current

lender, in this case, the unskilled date-1 loan buyer. The buyer can accept the offer (in which

case the bargaining ends), or reject it in which case the offer is off the table. At this point, the

buyer can negotiate with the relationship lender about who will hear the last offer from the

entrepreneur and exercise control rights. After these negotiations, the entrepreneur makes his last

and final offer to whomsoever it is decided will respond, and the offer is either accepted, or

rejected and the project liquidated by the responder.

        The negotiations between the loan buyer and the relationship lender take a simple form

(see figure 4). The relationship lender offers to take over the loan collection for a fee. If the offer

is rejected, it is the loan buyer who responds to the entrepreneur’s last offer; if accepted, the

relationship lender responds.

        Even though the relationship lender still possesses specific skills at date 2, it turns out

that all the loan buyer will get at date 2 is β X 2 , so he will only pay S= β X 2 at date 1. The

reason is instructive. Following backward induction, when the entrepreneur makes a final offer to

the buyer, he will offer to pay β X 2 and the buyer cannot do better than accept. Folding back to

when the relationship lender makes her offer to the buyer, she will offer to pay           β X 2 from the

X 2 she hopes to collect from the entrepreneur if chosen to respond to his last offer. Again,

                                                                                                       18
anticipating that he cannot do better by rejecting the offer, the buyer will accept. Folding back

again, the entrepreneur’s opening offer to the buyer will be β X 2 and the buyer will accept. The

                                                                                   6
relationship lender’s rents will be zero despite her retaining her skills.

         The relationship lender's skills do not get used despite her retaining them and being

better at collecting. Note that this is not a socially inefficient outcome, ex post, because all that

her skills are used for at date 2 is in forcing a transfer from the entrepreneur. The reason she does

not get a slice of the pie is that the buyer owns the loan and any control rights emanating from it,

so the buyer can, and does, conclude a deal with the entrepreneur without reference to the

relationship lender.

         We thus come to the precise reason for illiquidity: If the loan buyer had the same skills

as the relationship lender, then β = 1 and S = X 2 in both cases. So a necessary condition for

both the illiquidity of the real asset (the project) and the financial asset (the loan) is specific

skills. In the case of the project, it is the entrepreneur's greater ability to run it relative to a

second best operator (as, for example, in Shleifer and Vishny [1992]), in the case of the loan it is

the relationship lender's better ability to recover payments relative to someone who buys the

loan.

         Case 2 highlights a further requirement: that the relationship lender not be able to

commit at date 1 to using her specific skills at date 2 on behalf of the loan buyer. In other words,

the loan is illiquid not just because the relationship lender’s human capital is specific but also

because she cannot explicitly commit to deploy it on behalf of others in the future.

E. An Example.

         Let X 1 = 0.9, X 2 = 1.1, C1 = 0, C2 = 1.5, R = 1.4, S = 0.8. Note that the date 1 cash

flow, C 1, is zero in this example. Because Max[ X 1 , X 2 ] = 1.1 , the entrepreneur cannot commit



6
 The precise split of the surplus between the loan buyer and the relationship lender when they negotiate
does not alter this result, except if the loan buyer has all the bargaining power. In that case, the loan buyer
gets all the surplus from bargaining, and it is as if we are back in a world with full commitment.
                                                                                                                  19
to paying more than $1.1 even though he generates $1.5 from the project. Moreover, when hit by

a liquidity shock, the relationship lender gets more in present value by liquidating (    X 1 = 0.9 )

                                                                   X2
than by selling the loan ( S = 0.8 ) or holding it to maturity (      = 0.79 ).
                                                                   R

        When the probability of the liquidity shock, θ, is low, the relationship lender will sell the

loan when hit by the shock in preference to retaining it. We have V1I = V1~ I = 0 , V2I = S = 0.8 ,

and V2~ I = P2 , where P 2 is set to satisfy the lender's IR constraint, and will rise from 1 to 1.1 as θ

increases from 0 to 0.26. Since, the entrepreneur cannot commit to paying the relationship lender

more than P 2=1.1, when θ increases beyond 0.26, the only way the entrepreneur can satisfy the

lender's rationality condition is by allowing her to liquidate at date 1 and get 0.9 if she suffers the

shock. So if θ > 0.26, the entrepreneur will offer V1I = V1~ I = 0 , V2I = 0.9 , and V2~ I = P2 ,

where P 2 is again set to satisfy the lender's IR constraint. Since liquidation generates more than a

loan sale, the relationship lender will again find it rational to lend for the range 0.26< θ<0.42. But

when θ>0.42, P2 exceeds 1.1 and is again not collectible. At this point, the probability of a

liquidity shock for the lender is so high that lending is not individually rational.

         We plot in figure 5, V2~ I (the date-2 payment required to be made by the entrepreneur)

and the expected net income for the entrepreneur, and in figure 6, the illiquidity premium. Both

the date-2 payment and the illiquidity premium rise with θ, fall discontinuously once the project

is liquidated, and rise again with θ until lending is infeasible. The entrepreneur's expected net

income falls initially with θ because he pays a higher illiquidity premium, falls discontinuously

once the project is liquidated conditional on a shock, and then falls again with θ not only because

of the rising illiquidity premium but also the increasing liquidation.

        Finally, what is the interpretation of the contracts that implement the outcomes described

above? When θ<0.26, the contract is a standard long term debt contract, and the lender will sell



                                                                                                        20
the date 2 payment if liquidity is needed. When 0.26< θ<0.42, the contract is a callable loan with

face value V2~ I that has to be repaid on the demand of the lender, and where the lender does not

get more than V2~ I from the collateral if the assets are liquidated. If the lender gets a liquidity

shock, she demands immediate payment, and since this cannot be made in full, she liquidates.

Otherwise, she continues and accepts a payment of V2~ I at date 2.

F. Summary.

        If the relationship lender’s loan collection skills do not persist beyond her liquidity

shock, loans are unavoidably illiquid, with attendant consequences. Even if these skills do

persist, however, the relationship lender cannot write explicit contracts committing to use her

skills on behalf of buyers. This makes the loan illiquid if sold. But could she somehow devise a

setting where she can effectively commit to use her skills to recover payments from the

entrepreneur and pass them on?

                                  III. Financial Intermediation

        We now argue that if the relationship lender “borrows against the loan” by setting up as a

financial intermediary with a fragile capital structure (one subject to a run), she can commit to

pass through everything she extracts from the entrepreneur. This allows her to raise up to X2 at

date 1 from investors, which is the same as having S= X 2. As a result, the intermediary can drive

the illiquidity premium in the loans she makes to zero. Entrepreneurs will not have to suffer

liquidation, or be unable to borrow, simply because of the liquidity needs of the intermediary.

This is what we now show.

A. The Basic Argument

        Suppose the loan made to the entrepreneur (henceforth "project loan") is in default at

date 2. What we showed in the previous section is that if the unskilled lender owns the project

loan and all the control rights associated with it, he can reach a deal directly with the

entrepreneur without the consent of the relationship lender. The entrepreneur will pay          βX2,

                                                                                                   21
giving the relationship lender nothing.             By contrast, if the relationship lender's consent is

necessary to any overall agreement, for example if she owns the project loan, she can collect X                        2


from the entrepreneur. So if the relationship lender wanted to borrow from an unskilled lender at

date 1 (instead of selling the project loan), ideally she would retain ownership of the loan at date

2 and thus all rights to collect it so long as she makes a pre-specified payment, say X 2, to the

unskilled lender. 7 If a smaller payment were offered, the unskilled lender would have the right to

seize the project loan with the attendant loss of rents to the relationship lender.

            Unfortunately this will not work. Before dealing with the entrepreneur at date 2, the

relationship lender can threaten to not collect the loan for the unskilled lender. As in figure 4,

the single unskilled lender will accept an offer from the relationship lender, where the latter asks

to retain loan collection rights in return for making a payment of βX2.

            The role of demand deposits issued to multiple unskilled lenders (i.e., the fragile capital

structure) is to deter unskilled lenders from accepting such an offer. The reason they refuse is

that they have the unilateral right to demand immediate payment of their full claim with

depositors being paid in the order they show up for payment, until the relationship lender has

nothing left. Thus a subset of depositors can be made whole if they run to demand payment,

even when the collective cannot. Furthermore, in order to satisfy these depositors, the

relationship lender will either have to sell the project loan to raise cash to pay them or give them

the project loan (or fractional pieces thereof). In either case, the depositor run will transfer the

ownership of the project loan to the unskilled, with the attendant loss of rents to the relationship

lender. Anticipating the run and the loss of rents, the relationship lender will not attempt to

renegotiate, and can thus commit, by issuing demand deposits at date 1, to paying out up to X                     2   at

date 2. Thus the role of the first-come, first-served constraint in demand deposits is to create a

collective action problem that forces a transfer of the ownership of the project loan whenever the

relationship lender attempts to renegotiate. Let us now elaborate.

7
    If weak preference is insufficient, then substitute, X 2-ε, where ε is an arbitrarily small rent that goes to the
                                                                                                                    22
B. The Demand Deposit Contract.

         Suppose at date 1 the relationship lender (henceforth called the "banker") borrows

against the project loan by issuing demand deposits to a large number, n, of unskilled lenders,

each depositing 1/n of the amount. Let P        2   be the amount owed at date 2 by the entrepreneur,

where P 2≤X2 without loss of generality. If the banker can commit to pay this out to depositors,

the total promised to depositors will be d2, which equals P2, and the amount promised each

depositor will be d 2/n. It will be convenient to think of values with the project loan as the unit, so

each depositor holds 1/n units.

         A depositor who did not previously withdraw, and is not paid the promised amount on

demand, can withdraw if assets remain in the bank. To be concrete, we assume that withdrawing

amounts to seizing financial assets (i.e., the project loan) with market value equal to the promised

amount of the deposit. We assume depositors seize assets though it is identical in outcomes to

depositors forcing the lender to sell assets and paying them the realized cash until they are made

whole. Note that the market value of the project loan is Min{P2 , β X 2 } if the entrepreneur has

not defaulted and βX2 if he has. Once seized or sold, the ownership of the project loan transfers

away from the banker. This effectively “disintermediates” the bank.

C. Negotiations with a Banker.

         Suppose the banker tries to renegotiate deposit payments down at date 2 and makes an

offer (see figure 7). The banker’s threat to withdraw her human capital unless depositors accept

lower payment is non-trivial because the entrepreneur will be faced with unskilled lenders if the

banker does not provide her services, and he will pay less.

         Each depositor must simultaneously choose whether to accept the banker's offer or to

withdraw. By accepting the offer, the depositor forfeits his right to demand payment, and must

receive payments from bank assets that have not been seized by other depositors. If the depositor

runs to withdraw, he will be paid so long as there are enough assets in the bank to pay all those


relationship lender to make her strictly prefer honoring her commitments to having the loan seized.
                                                                                                      23
who demand payment. However, if the total promised payment to those who run exceeds the

market value of bank assets the bank's assets will have to be rationed.

        Rationing takes the form of a first-come first-served mechanism. Those who run are

                                                                                                            d2
assigned a place in a line by a fair lottery. Each depositor in the line seizes a fraction                      of
                                                                                                           β X2

the defaulted project loan per unit held until the bank runs out of assets. A depositor’s right to his

share of the bank’s assets is ensured only when he physically withdraws it. The depositors who

run will thus get paid in full or get nothing except, perhaps, for one depositor who will get only a

fraction of his claim paid before the bank runs out. The banker cannot unilaterally prohibit

seizure implying she cannot suspend convertibility of deposits to cash.

        After the banker and depositors have determined who holds the project loan (perhaps

through a run), the entrepreneur negotiates with the holder and makes the negotiated payment.

The sequence of events is as follows:

        |-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|

Banker makes offer to           Depositors either accept or                       Entrepreneur negotiates with
depositors                      withdraw. If they withdraw, they                  whoever holds loan (banker as in
                                receive a random place in line if                 figure 1 or, if disintermediated,
                                rationed. Those who withdraw                      depositor or loan buyer as in
                                seize assets with a market value                  figure 3)
                                equal to the face value of their
                                deposit.


D. Response to the Banker's Offer to Negotiate.

        Unless the market value of the bank's assets is sufficient to pay all depositors, any offer

that the banker makes that imposes losses on depositors will lead to a run where all depositors

queue to demand payment. To see this, suppose that the entrepreneur has attempted to

renegotiate the loan and the banker offers depositors a net payment of                           d 2' ≤ d 2 per unit.

Following the notation in Diamond and Dybvig [1983 ], let f denote the fraction of depositors

who run to withdraw. Each depositor gets d 2 per unit held if sufficient assets remain in the bank.


                                                                                                                  24
                            d2
This requires a fraction        of the loan to be seized per unit held. If f, the fraction who run,
                           β X2

          )    β X2
exceeds f =         , all the bank's assets will be seized, and depositors must be rationed based on
                d2

their (random) place in line. Let          f j be the fraction of deposits withdrawn before depositor j.

                                                                            d 2 if f j ≤ βdX 2
                                                                 ρ( f j ) = 
                                                                                             2
The realized payoff, per unit held, from running is                                        β X2
                                                                                                 . Taking the
                                                                              0 if f j >  d2



expectation over the place in line, the expected payoff, per unit held, from running is

                   d 2 if f ≤      β X2

                  
                                     d2
         ρ( f ) =  β X             β X2
                                           .
                  
                        2
                          if f >     d2
                     f

         The payoff from accepting the banker’s offer d 2' must be paid from assets that remain

after depositors who run are paid off. So the payment to the depositors who do not run is

                                    1- f βdX2              β X2
                                              2
                                                 X 2 if f ≤
                                     1- f                   d2
Max{d 2' , λ ( f )} where λ ( f ) = 
                                                           β X2
                                           0         if f >
                                    
                                                            d2

        For any offer , d 2' < d 2 , requiring concessions, either a depositor can make himself

                             β X2
whole by running, or f >      d2    , and the payoff from running is positive while that from accepting

the banker’s low offer is zero.            Therefore running is a dominant strategy since at best the

depositor will be at the head of the line and come out whole, while at worst he will be at the end

of the line and in the same position as if he had not run.

        The payoff from running never exceeds d 2 for all values of withdrawals, f. Therefore, if

at date 2, the banker commits to paying d2, there will be no run. 8


8
  Because the banker can commit to d 2, and those who currently store can replace depositors who withdraw
their money, it is reasonable that there will be no panic-based runs.
                                                                                                        25
        In fact, we prove a stronger result in the lemma. Suppose, as is more realistic, the first-

come first-served mechanism does not assign the project loan to depositors. Instead, it gives them

a position in a real queue in front of the bank window, where they have the right to seize assets

or waive their right when they reach the window, in response to fresh offers the banker may

make. If a depositor waives his rights, more depositors further back in line will be able to

withdraw. Can the banker’s original offer of less than full value (that triggered the run), be

followed by a sequence of offers to those in line that persuades them to not seize assets? The

answer is no. If there is sufficient market value of assets in the bank to pay a given depositor's

claim in full, the depositor will make no concession -- he can simply withdraw and be made

whole. So long as there are depositors behind him who will not get paid in full, the depositor

cannot accept a promised payment out of future loan collections. A depositor further back in line

would seize the assets, leaving nothing for this depositor. As a result, any original offer that gives

depositors less than full value results in total disintermediation.

        Once the bank is disintermediated by a run, the project loan is in other hands than the

banker’s. Following the discussion in the previous section, the entrepreneur will make offers

that the new holders of the loan will accept without hiring the banker to collect. As a result, the

run drives the banker's payoff to zero. Anticipating this outcome, the banker will not try to

renegotiate the original deposit claims. Folding back to date 1, the banker can commit to pass

through the full amount that she can collect at date 2 from the entrepreneur to unskilled

depositors, and thus can raise d2 = P2 at date 1.

        This argument is essentially a sketch of the proof that banks can create liquidity by

borrowing more than the market value of their illiquid loans.

Lemma 2: (i) If the number of depositors, n, is large enough, a banker gets a zero payoff from an

attempt to offer depositors less than full value d2/n per depositor at date 2. Even if n is small, the




                                                                                                     26
banker's payoff is bounded above by the rent that an intermediary could obtain in bilateral

negotiation with a single lender over collecting loans equal in market value to d2/n.

         (ii) A bank can commit to pay out all that it can collect at date 2 by issuing demand

deposits to sufficiently many depositors such that the total promised payment equals the amount

that it can collect.

Proof: See appendix.

         The lemma implies that if, at date 1, the entrepreneur offers to pay P 2=X2 at date 2, the

banker can immediately borrow S=X 2 against this promise by issuing demand deposits with face

value d 2=X2. By Corollary 2, this implies the banker can make a loan to the entrepreneur at date 0

that entails no illiquidity premium, and that requires no liquidation. Thus the banker, by

committing her future collection skills using demand deposits, creates liquidity for the

entrepreneur.

E. More Generally.

         Let us describe mo re generally what we have shown so far. Ownership of an asset is the

transferable right to make decisions on the use of the asset. Contracts are mechanisms that assign

ownership in a particular way, perhaps contingent on payments. 9 Each period, each contract can

be renegotiated. Once there is an assignment of ownership in a period, the owner has the right to

make a decision about the use of the asset. We assume that while contracts assign ownership,

they cannot directly enforce decisions. In other words, after ownership is assigned, negotiations

also take place over the decisions that will be made. During the negotiations, the entrepreneur

and the relationship lender can commit to current payments and decisions, but not to future ones.

They can also reassign ownership, and write contracts over the future. Thus, every decision is

subject to negotiation.

9
  More generally, contracts only assign temporary claims on ownership , that is, they assign certain (and not
all) rights of ownership for a specific period. For example, having paid off this period’s interest, the
entrepreneur only has the right to operate his asset over the period. He does not have the right to sell it if
debt maturing in the future is secured by it. He also may lose ownership if he cannot pay future debt. None
of this is germane to the discussion at date 2, but it is important to qualify the term “ownership” if we
                                                                                                             27
         When there is a single lender, negotiations over the assignment of ownership and

negotiations over decisions on the use of the asset collapse into one. When there are multiple

lenders, there are two sets of negotiations, one where ownership is assigned (who gets to bargain

with the entrepreneur) and one where decisions are made (is the asset liquidated or not).

         It is easy then to see that a fragile capital s tructure, by itself, is insufficient to increase

the payment by the entrepreneur. Suppose the entrepreneur directly issues demand deposits –

where lenders establish ownership only by seizing the asset or a direct claim to it -- without
                                    10
going through an intermediary.           If the entrepreneur attempts to renegotiate, depositors will run

and some depositors will seize ownership of the asset. But once ownership is established over the

asset, the entrepreneur can ask each depositor not to liquidate in return for a per-unit payment of

βX2 , and they will accept. More generally, since ownership can only be assigned to unskilled

lenders, we have

Lemma 3: If the entrepreneur borrows from unskilled lenders at date 1, he will pay only up to

βX2 at date 2.

         This implie s that a fragile capital structure by itself does not enhance the entrepreneur’s

ability to commit to pay. Contrast this with a bank, which is a set of contracts where if the

entrepreneur commits to pay P 2, he owns the project. If the entrepreneur does not commit to that

payment, and the relationship lender commits to pay d         2   per unit to each of many unskilled

lenders, then the relationship lender owns the project asset. If neither makes a commitment, each

unskilled lender has the right to seize d 2 per unit he holds. Even though contracts can be

renegotiated so the relationship lender can offer unskilled lenders a lower payment in return for

leaving ownership in her hands, unskilled lenders crucially suffer from a collective action

problem that deters them from accepting a low offer from the relationship lender. Therefore,                 a

default by the relationship lender leads to a transfer of ownership to the unskilled lenders. It is


discuss earlier periods.
10
   Since we have assumed for simplicity that the physical asset is indivisible, depositors seize ownership

                                                                                                                 28
the prospect of the actual transfer of ownership from the relationship lender to the unskilled

lenders in a bank that disciplines the relationship lender, and forces her to pay out up to X 2.

         In summary, the problem of illiquidity cannot be solved solely by introducing a

collective action problem among the entrepreneur's creditors or solely by having a relationship

lender. Instead, it requires both.

F. Liquidity creation for depositors over two periods.

         Thus far, we have explained how a relationship lender can meet a need for liquidity at

date 1 by issuing demand deposits. But this suggests a more general point. The banker herself

may or may not need liquidity, but she can specialize in acquiring relationship lending skills, and

can make potentially illiquid loans. She can meet the liquidity needs of her financiers by issuing

fresh demand deposits to replace any amount they may want to withdraw. This then suggests an

additional role for demand deposits. At date 0, the bank can rely exclusively on funding from

unskilled investors who may have privately observed and uncertain needs for liquidity at date 1,

decoupling the scale of the bank from the banker’s own wealth. By issuing deposits to them,

which they can withdraw whenever they have a liquidity need, a bank can offer totally liquid

claims to investors despite funding loans that are illiquid. Thus deposit claims play a dual role in

a bank. They offer an ex ante assurance of liquidity to investors who may have a demand for it,

and the first-come first served mechanism offers a practical way to meet unverifiable needs. Ex

post, the first come first-served mechanism enables the bank to actually provide this liquidity by

allowing the it to raise new deposits based on the implied commitment to pass through the value

it can extract. It is not inconceivable that the economic elegance of this mechanism explains its

historical persistence.




certificates to portions of the asset.
                                                                                                     29
         Specifically, the bank offers demand deposits with the option to withdraw d 1=1 at date 1

or d2=1 at date 2, per unit held. 11 This matches the returns and liquidity of storage and it satisfies

the incentive compatibility constraint imposed by the private information about the need for

liquidity. 12

Proposition 1: A bank offering demand deposits to a sufficiently large number of depositors

with the following features:

(i)      the deposit contract promises equal amounts at both periods (d 1=d2=1)

(ii)     the depositors can seize financial assets of market value equal to the promised payment

         on a first-come-first-served basis if the bank does not pay

will commit the banker to collect the loan on behalf of depositors; i.e., all cash flows extracted

by the bank from entrepreneurs can be paid out to depositors. The deposits are liquid, although

they finance otherwise illiquid loans.

Proof: See Appendix.

         Thus putting Lemma 2 and Proposition 1 together, the bank creates liquidity on both

sides of the balance sheet, shielding entrepreneurs from the liquidity needs of depositors, and

offering depositors a liquid claim even though they finance illiquid assets.

G. Alternative Assumptions on Bargaining.

         Before we detail the implications, we should point out the bargaining games we have

assumed can be generalized without any qualitative change in the results. We have assumed that

each lender has no bargaining power and receives just his or her outside option, the liquidation



11
   In the Jacklin[1987] analysis of the Diamond and Dybvig [1983] model (also see Bhattacharya and Gale
[1987], Jacklin and Bhattacharya [1988] ), a result of this type would suggest that banks could not create
liquidity. This is not the case in our model because the specific illiquidity of financial assets implies that a
bank can enhance liquidity without offering depositors a return that differs from market rates of return.
12
   The one difference between date 2 and date 1 is that if the banker can set up a bank again after a run, the
entrepreneur may not be able to commit to pay depositors as much at date 1 as the banker can in the
aftermath of a run. If the entrepreneur calls for renegotiation at date 1 after the bank seeks to negotiate with
depositors, the entrepreneur would end up negotiating with the bank even if the bank is run, and would (at
best) gain nothing (see proof of proposition 1). Therefore, if the banker threatened not to use his skills on
behalf of the depositors at date 1, the entrepreneur would simply make the scheduled payment, and the
banker’s skills would not be needed.
                                                                                                                 30
value. In principle, we could allow each lender some bargaining power, and also allow for

different ways by which bargaining leads to a division of surplus. All that is important for our

results is that the amount a borrower can commit to pay is an increasing function of the value the

lender can get from the collateral assets, which is true of both the commonly used outside option

bargaining and Nash bargaining solutions. All our results will go through (except in the non-

generic case where lenders have all the bargaining power--and take all surplus--in which case the

borrower's specific ability is not an issue) simply by replacing the payoff from rejecting an offer

with the payoff from the alternative bargaining game.

        Similarly, the result that a run on a bank will result in full disintermediation is

independent of the bargaining game since it is the requirement that property rights be perfected

that makes depositors seize the loan or force its sale. Finally, the result that the banker's rents are

driven down when she is disintermediated depends primarily on the banker no longer having

control rights over the loan, rather than the sequence or structure of the bargaining. So long as

disintermediation changes the ownership of the loan, our results that runs can provide discipline

continue to hold.

                                        IV.      Implications

        Even though our model has looked at banks somewhat traditionally as making loans and

offering demand deposits, its implications hold more generally in distinguishing various kinds of

financial institutions today. Loans are a metaphor for positions (whether on- or off-balance sheet)

that are complex so that the bank’s skills are needed to manage them to maturity. Demand

deposits are a metaphor for guarantees of liquidity, whether they are loan commitments,

irrevocable letters of credit, or demand deposits. Our paper then says that the bank has a

comparative advantage in both holding complex positions and offering guarantees of liquidity

because the guarantees pre-commit the bank to not absorbing too much of the rents created by its

ability to manage complex positions. The complementarity is highest when the bank’s value



                                                                                                          31
addition is largely already embedded in its positions, and its skills are used mainly in effecting

transfers rather than in creating new value. The bank's rents are then most threatened by a run,

and it can thus enjoy cheap financing by issuing demandable claims.      Let us now consider some

implications from the model.


A. Distinguishing Financial Institutions.

        In relating the institutional structure of the bank to its function, our model also explains

how other kinds of financial intermediaries are different. Unlike commercial banks, money

market mutual funds do not create liquidity. In a money market mutual fund, each depositor has

the right to seize a proportion of assets equal to his proportion of total deposits. In other words,

depositor holdings are marked to market so the mutual fund is run proof. If indeed mutual fund

assets required active intervention by the fund manager, depositors would not be able to

discipline her, and the manager would capture a rent. Partly as a consequence, money market

funds avoid illiquid assets that have to be managed actively and hold liquid assets passively.

Money market mutual funds cannot create liquidity. Depositors get liquidity simply because of

the underlying liquidity of the money market fund's holdings and not because the fund adds any

liquidity of its own.

        Also, unlike commercial banks that provide liquidity on demand, insurance firms provide

large payments conditional on some observable and verifiable events such as death. Insurance

companies can provide considerable amounts of insurance -- their contracts correspond to those

that emerge from the mechanism design problem in Section II when liquidity needs are

observable. Banks, on the other hand, are limited to a milder form of insurance because the

liquidity demand they service is inherently unobservable or unverifiable. Of course, some life

insurance companies have partly demandable claims that allow withdrawal of a fixed amount

even without the insurable event occurring (and runs do sometimes occur). To the extent that




                                                                                                     32
they hold illiquid “relationship” assets, our ideas may be relevant to understanding such life

insurance contracts.

        Commercial banks are different from investment banks because the latter’s value is

largely in future transactions rather than embedded in current positions. Venture capitalists also

play an extensive on-going managerial role in the start-ups they finance. Because investment

bankers and venture capitalists continue to provide valuable services after the initial financing,

they cannot efficiently be cut out of the deal. A coalition without the investment banker or

venture capitalist generates less total surplus. As a result, demand deposits are unlikely to

provide discipline. This is a potential reason why the capital structure of investment banks and

venture capitalists is usually different from that of commercial banks.

B. Narrow Banking, Bank Capital, and Deposit Insurance.

        Our paper suggests that financial fragility built in through demand deposits allows the

bank to fund itself at low cost, disciplines bank rent extraction, and enables it to provide liquidity

to both depositors and borrowers. Our view contrasts with the more traditional view that

resurfaces every few years (e.g. Simons [1948], Bryan [1988]) that financial fragility is

unnecessary in banks and can be legislated away by requiring "narrow" banks, so that illiquid

assets are funded with long term liabilities and money raised from demand deposits is invested in

liquid paper. Our model suggests that such legislation would kill bank liquidity creation, and

result in less credit being available to borrowers.

        Of course, by only examining a world with no aggregate uncertainty, we have not

investigated the adverse consequences of financial fragility. When we introduce uncertainty, the

bank will be run and disintermediated in some circumstances when the project cash flows or

project loan values are too low. In deciding her capital structure, the banker now has to trade-off

liquidity creation against the cost of bank runs. It may be optimal for the bank to partly finance

itself with a softer claim like capital, which has the right to liquidate, but does not have a first-



                                                                                                        33
come-first-served right to cash flows (see Diamond and Rajan (2000a)). While this allows the

banker to extract some rents, thus reducing her ability to create liquidity, it also buffers the bank

better against shocks to asset values. These ideas are also relevant to the discussion of whether

developing economies rely too heavily on short-term debt, see Diamond and Rajan (2000b).

           What if the government insures private bank deposits? Complete deposit insurance,

where all depositors are insured, will remove the commitment value of deposits. Insured

depositors will not run, and there will be no threat of even partial disintermediation. Unless the

deposit insurer has special negotiation or commitment skills, a fully insured bank does not create

liquidity (implying that if banks raise deposits in excess of the market value of loans, the excess

will be a subsidy provided by the deposit insurer). A fully insured bank has no more commitment

ability than an “all capital” bank: one where there is no collective action problem among claim

holders.

           However, a less-than-fully insured system with some discretion in the ex-post

government guarantee of deposits may still provide commitment to bankers. In practice, most

medium and large banks have many uninsured deposits or deposit-like liabilities, such as large

deposits, commercial paper, and inter-bank borrowing. Since runs by large creditors can bring

most banks down, the thrust of our results should hold. Moreover, if the insurer takes time

coming to the bank's aid, or is committed to punishing an undercapitalized a bank’s management

(perhaps by closing or merging the bank), we could get very similar effects to those in the model.

Seen in this light, legislative requirements that regulators take "prompt corrective action" when a

bank gets into trouble could improve the efficiency with which banks intermediate credit, if they

succeed in making regulators play more of a disciplinary role.

           For the threat of disintermediation to provide full commitment, all depositors must have

the option to withdraw (or at least enough depositors to fully disintermediate the bank), and not

just those who need to withdraw for liquidity purposes. This makes it difficult to use suspension



                                                                                                        34
of convertibility of deposits to cash to stabilize a bank. If a bank can suspend convertibility of

deposits into cash at will, it cannot pay investors any more than an all-capital bank. This gives a

new perspective on suspension: it may be a transfer to the bank (effectively, a re-capitalization)

from depositors, who are now forced to negotiate. Historically, however, banks were only

allowed to suspend convertibility when they agreed to do so as a collective, because the

borrowers in the region could not pay immediately, or because aggregate liquidity was scarce,

due to crop failure or panic. This requirement of regional ( clearing house) agreement may serve

as a way of dealing with aggregate uncertainty (that is absent from our model but is present in

Diamond and Rajan (2000a)) without eliminating the commitment role of deposits for individual

banks. More work is needed to examine the implications of this view of suspension.

                             IV.      Relationship to the Literature

        It is useful to contrast our model with the existing literature to get a better understanding

of its contribution. Two aspects are particularly important -- how the model relates to other

papers explaining the structure of banks, and how it relates to other papers where short-term

creditors play a disciplinary role.

A. The Structure of Banks

        A number of papers suggest a bank is an intermediary that structures its contracts to

minimize the risk it shares with outside investors when it possesses private information about the

value of its portfolio (for example, see Boyd and Prescott [1986], Diamond [1984] and Gorton

and Pennachi [1990]). We show that a short-term non-renegotiable claim can be important even

without an uncertain portfolio value.

        There could be other synergies between deposits and loans than the ones we focus on.

Flannery [1994] views the bank’s lending as inherently opaque and sees short term demand

deposits as the low cost way to prevent bank moral hazard. Bank capital structure is different

from that of firms in his model primarily because their moral hazard problems are worse. Myers



                                                                                                        35
and Rajan [1998] argue that too much asset liquidity can aggravate moral hazard problems, and

claim that, historically, the bank’s illiquid lending business arose to offset the inherent liquidity

of the assets it needed to hold to service deposit demand. Kashyap, Rajan and Stein [1998]

suggest that because takedowns on various kinds of loan commitments occur in different states

than takedowns on deposits, the store of liquid assets held to meet liquidity demand       can be

optimally used. They thus find a synergy between loan commitments and deposits. Finally,

Nakamura [1988] argues the information from customer deposit accounts can be used by banks

to make better credit decisions while Qi [1998] assumes that the information from credit

decisions helps depositors (who are also borrowers) evaluate the bank's competence. All these

potential synergies are clearly different from the one we model, but the theories are not mutually

inconsistent.

        While some of these papers also emphasize the bank's role in lending to difficult credits ,

Diamond and Dybvig [1983] do not. They focus on the liquidity the bank provides depositors,

taking the illiquidity of real assets as given. We provide an alternative foundation, based on

illiquid financial assets, for the assumed illiquidity in their paper. In addition, the bank does more

than redistribute the returns from real assets across states and over time; it is also critical in

enhancing the returns from real assets over and above what would be available if investors tried

to manage them directly. Thus the institutional alternatives that Jacklin [1986] proposes to a bank

would not be able to carry out the functions a bank performs in our model.

        It is useful to contrast our notion of banks from the recent view put forward by

Holmström and Tirole [1997, 1998]. In their model, as in ours, firms may be liquidated or denied

funding because too small a fraction of their future returns can be paid to outsiders. In their

model, ex post unprofitable wealth transfers (provided by an explicit state contingent contract) to

these firms can help them survive. While individuals are assumed to not be able to commit to

honor promises to make the state contingent payments, an intermediary can hold collateral ex



                                                                                                        36
ante (though any source of ex post wealth would do) and thereby commit to making the

payments. The pooling of such asset holdings in an intermediary ensures that the collateral assets

are used optimally and not left idle ex post.

        While the bank in our model also has a role in providing reliable funding (by providing

continuity and buffering the firm from the demands of direct investors), its value to firms comes

from the ability to make (or continue) loans that are unprofitable to others but privately

profitable. In a sense, the bank enhances the collateral value of the entrepreneur's date-2 asset

from β X 2 to X 2 and passes it through. The bank therefore does not merely utilize the economy's

collateral better but also enhances it. It provides liquidity because of its ex post ability, and not

because of its ex ante state contingent pledges.

B. The Role of Multiple Creditors and Short term Debt

        Bolton and Scharfstein [1996] argue that multiple creditors can reduce the entrepreneur’s

incentive to default strategically because once an entrepreneur has reached agreement with one

creditor, he has a greater incentive to reach a deal with the second, and pays out more (also see

Gertner [1990]). Bolton and Scharfstein assume a Shapley value outcome for bargaining, and

complementarity, between assets to establish this result. Under our assumption that the borrower

can make a take-it-or-leave it offer to every creditor, he will not lose bargaining power when

dealing with multiple creditors, even if assets are complementary, so their effects are not seen.

        Berglof and Von Thadden [1994] rely on the inaccessibility of later creditors to construct

a staggered debt structure that will extract more from the entrepreneur. This will not work in our

framework because everyone is present to negotiate. As Lemma 3 indicates, no matter what a

firm's capital structure, it cannot pay unskilled lenders more than β X 2 at date 2.

        This then points to an essential difference between our work and its closest counterpart:

Calomiris and Kahn [1991]. They describe demand deposits with sequential service as a way to

provide incentives for outside investors to monitor a borrower. In their paper, depositors who are


                                                                                                        37
the first to withdraw their capital get paid in full, and will have an incentive to anticipate actions

of the borrower that would reduce the value of the borrower’s assets. Their rush to withdraw

prevents a “crime in progress” from occurring and alerts passive outside investors that the

borrower will act against their interest. Because demand debt is used in their model when, at a

cost, one can predict value reducing self-interested actions of management, it should be as

effective in industrial firms as in banks. Our model, by contrast, emphasizes their special role in

bank liquidity creation. In addition, we focus on the ex-post disciplinary role of deposits in

disintermediating the banker whenever some asset losses are revealed or anticipated. In this

view, unlike in Calomiris and Kahn, depositors are not required to undertake detailed monitoring

of the bank to anticipate future problems. They need only commit to a sufficiently harsh

punishment once problems are revealed. While both roles may be important, ours is more

relevant if depositors do not get much more than public information by monitoring or if the

punishment provided to bankers by depositors also punishes depositors.

                                            V. Conclusion.

When a lender makes loans that can be collected only with her specific collection skills, the loans

are illiquid. This is because the lender’s specialized human capital cannot be easily committed to

collecting the loans hence they will sell at a discount, or will be poor collateral. Mechanisms that

commit the lender to collecting the loans create liquidity. A bank is structured to be such a

mechanism. If the lender finances using demand deposits, she cannot hold up depositors and,

instead, has to pay them the promised amount. Intuitively, the sequential service constraint

creates a collective action problem among depositors, which makes them run on the bank

whenever they think their claim is in danger. When the bank has the right quantity of deposits

outstanding, any attempt by the banker to extort a rent from depositors by threatening to withhold

her specific collection abilities will be met by a run, which disintermediates the banker and




                                                                                                         38
drives her rents to zero. Thus the banker will not attempt to extort rents, and can commit her

human capital to collecting the loans.

           An important contribution of this paper is to tie the notion of illiquidity of financial

assets to the specific skills a lender may have. These skills may have to do with the knowledge

the lender acquires about a particular borrower or with expertise acquired by repeated interaction

with a certain class of borrower or with a certain type of contract. If these skills are not widely

available, the lender's financial assets are illiquid, with attendant consequences to the borrower.

This notion of illiquidity could be useful in other contexts also.

           We have largely focussed on situations where the lender's acquired lending skills persist

even after a liquidity shock. The lender we have in mind in this situation is a specialized

financial intermediary whose main line of business before and after the shock is likely to be

credit. In fact, we also examine situations where such a relationship lender need not get a shock

of her own but creates liquidity for other who do.

           In addition, however, we have explored situations reminiscent of trade credit, where a

firm in a business has an advantage in lending to buyers because it can sell repossessed goods

better. It will lose this advantage if it gets a shock that forces it to leave the business. One

example of such a shock is an adverse one like bankruptcy. In these situations, we have two

possibilities. Those who have obtained credit may stop repaying the firm because it has little

ability to sell what it repossesses. The outstanding credit will not come down quickly for such a

distressed firm, and we will have the seemingly paradoxical situation of the distressed financing

others. Alternatively the firm may be forced to liquidate credits because it has little extraction

ability in the future. In either case, realizations will be low when the firm is distressed , implying

the illiquidity premium associated with trade credit (and other business to business credit) should

be high.




                                                                                                       39
        Our simple model can be enriched in a number of other directions to provide more policy

implications. One obvious direction is to introduce uncertainty about asset values, which will

create a role for bank capital (see Diamond and Rajan (2000a)). Another is to explore what

would happen if there were an aggregate shortage of liquidity. This could introduce a role for

bank reserves, which is absent in our model thus far. Preliminary work indicates that an

investigation along these lines could help identify a set of policies to deal with financial crises

that seem far more nuanced that the conventional wisdom. One could go on, but this should be

enough to suggest there is much to be done.




                                                                                                      40
                                                       Appendix


Proof of Lemma 2:

The argument in the text uses functions that implicitly require depositors to be small. Nothing

depends on this, however, and if depositors decide simultaneously whether to run, then any offer

from the banker seeking concessions will lead to a run (with full disintermediation and f=1). We

now generalize this. The banker can make an initial offer. If the offer is for less then d                2    per unit,

a run will start (using the same logic as in the text), and each deposit will be assigned a place in

line. We now allow the banker to make a second offer to each depositor as the depositor comes

up to the bank to withdraw based on his place in line. If the banker makes an offer that deters a

given depositor from withdrawing (seizing or forcing sale of loans), then the loan will remain in

the bank for possible seizure or forced sale by a depositor behind him in line, who has not yet

reached an agreement.

          The banker must offer each depositor his out side option given the number of loans

remaining in the bank that have not yet been seized or sold. The outside option is the smaller of

the full value of the deposit and the market value of the remaining loans. If a fraction                          f j of

                                                                                    d2
deposits have withdrawn before depositor j arrives to withdraw                         , the outside option per unit
                                                                                    n

                                                d 2 if f j ≤ βdX2 2 − 1n
                                                               βX          βX
of deposits is: ρ ( f j ) =  β X 2 (1 − d 2 f j −1 ) if f j ∈ ( d 2 2 − n1 , d 2 2 ).
                             
                                                 0 if f j > βdX2 2

          Any offer that the banker makes must be payable using assets that remain in the bank

after all depositors in line have had the chance to withdraw. Consequently, the outside option is

non-increasing function of place in line. If any depositor is to make a concession, the last in line

                                                                                                        β X2
must have an outside option below d 2/n. Anticipating this, all depositors with f j ≤                    d2    − 1n will

withdraw, since their outside option to take assets is worth d 2/n. Let m be the number of

                                                                                                                     41
depositors who can withdraw in full. The total units of loan seized or sold to meet the needs of

                            md 2
these depositors will be          . What remains should be less than what is needed to fully satisfy
                           nβ X 2

                            md 2   d2                            nβ X 2
one depositor, so 1 −            <       . This implies that m =        − 1 where                 is an
                           nβ X 2 nβ X 2                          d2

operator that gives the smallest integer greater than the argument.

        Once m depositors have withdrawn, the banker can ask the next depositor, for whom

there are not enough assets to be made whole, to make a concession. But in order for this

depositor to leave the remaining assets in the bank, the bank should be able to convince

depositors who follow him not to withdraw. All these depositors should be paid at least the

market value of the collateral that is left (since that is their outside option). The total that can be

paid to all non-withdrawing depositors, even with the banker’s superior collection skills, is 1/ β

times the market of the value of the assets remaining at the end of the line. So at most 1/ β

                                                                               1
depositors can be given offers that deter them from withdrawing. Let             denote the greatest
                                                                               β

integer less than or equal to 1/ β. Then for the banker to convince the remaining depositors not to

                                         1
withdraw, it must be that n − m ≤          . So a run does not fully disintermediate the bank if
                                         β

     nβ X 2      1
n−          −1 ≤   . Since the left hand side is increasing in n, there is an n* such that the
      d2         β

bank is fully disintermediated if n>n*. Even if the bank is not fully disintermediated, the banker’s

rent is small because the bank’s remaining assets have a market value of less than the amount of

one depositor’s deposit. The rent is at most the amount of added value that the banker can

collect from one depositor: 1 − β times the full value of the assets remaining in the bank after

the run (and less when there is more than one depositor at the end of the line who does not

withdraw and must be paid by the banker). Q.E.D.

                                                                                                      42
Proof of Proposition 1: The entrepreneur offers the bank the lowest cost loan contract that will

induce the bank to make the loan, and we prove below that the bank can pass through all that it

collects to depositors. As a result, the bank will break even on its lending, and collect a total

market value of payments from the entrepreneur of 1, offering depositors the chance to withdraw

for 1 at date 1 or 2 (d1=d2=1). No matter what is the fraction, θ, of its depositors who will

withdraw for liquidity purposes at date 1, the bank can meet the withdrawal because there is no

aggregate liquidity shortage: there is storage in use from date 1 to 2 after all profitable projects

have been funded. Either the bank can borrow 1+ θ units at date 0, and store θ in cash until date

1, or it can borrow 1 unit at date 0 and issue new deposits of θ at date 1 to finance withdrawals.

It is also clear that if the bank does not meet the depositor demand, or is anticipated not to meet

demand, it will precipitate a run on the assets. All that remains to be shown is that the bank

prefers to make pre-committed payments rather than trying to renegotiate and precipitating a run.

        We know from lemma 2 that the bank is disintermediated and gets zero rents if it tries to

renegotiate at date 2. So it will prefer to make pre-committed payments, and can commit to pass

through all date-2 collections to depositors.

        Similarly, if the banker should seek concessions from depositors at date 1, a run will

start. This follows because d 1=d2, and even a depositor who otherwise planned to hold until date

2 would seek to seize assets at date 1 by running. Following the logic used in proving lemma 2,

all depositors will run. The consequences of a run at date 1 are only a little more complicated

than at date 2. Assume first that the banker cannot re-establish a liability structure with demand

deposits immediately after a run. In the aftermath of a run at date 1, if the depositors and the

entrepreneur have a first chance to reach a deal (before depositors negotiate with the bank at date

1), the depositors have the option to hire the bank at date 2. The entrepreneur can make current

payments up to C 1 and can commit to make date 2 payments equal to what depositors can enforce

on their own. Since this is also equal to the greatest amount that the bank can commit to pay



                                                                                                    43
them without re-establishing the bank, the depositor will, in fact, deal directly with the

entrepreneur, the banker will be dis-intermediated after a date 1 run, and will extract a zero rent.

Thus the banker will not want to precipitate a run by demanding to renegotiate what she owes

depositors.

         If instead the banker could reestablish the demand deposit structure after a date 1 run,

she could commit to pay depositors up to the amount the bank itself can collect at date 2. This is

more than the entrepreneur can unilaterally commit to pay at date 2. If so, it is possible that the

entrepreneur may not be able to commit to pay depositors as much at date 1 as the banker can in

the aftermath of a run. If the entrepreneur calls for renegotiation at date 1 after the bank seeks to

negotiate with depositors, the entrepreneur would end up negotiating with the bank, and would

(at best) gain nothing. 13 Therefore, if the banker threatened not to use her skills on behalf of the

depositors at date 1, the entrepreneur would simply make the scheduled payment, and the

banker’s skills would not be needed. As a result, the banker’s threat to not negotiate at date 1

would not cause the value of bank assets to fall, and no run would occur.

         So depending on our assumption, the banker’s threat to withdraw her human capital at

date 1 unless depositors make a concession either precipitates a run and she is disintermediated,

or does not precipitate a run, but the threat has no bite since the entrepreneur makes scheduled

payments. Q.E.D.




13
  This assumes that the loan contract need not be renegotiated if the banker is there to negotiate. We know
that there exists a renegotiation-proof loan contract between the entrepreneur and the bank, conditional on
the entrepreneur and the bank being the parties who negotiate, if the bank can commit to pay all collected
funds to depositors: this is the contract from lemma 1 with S=X 2.
                                                                                                              44
                                          References

Berglof, Erik and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden [1994], Short-Term versus Long-Term Interests:
  Capital Structure with Multiple Investors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1055-1084.

Bhattacharya, S. and D. Gale [1987], "Preference Shocks, liquidity and Central Bank Policy", in
  New approaches to monetary economics, edited by W. Barnett and K. Singleton, Cambridge
  University Press: Cambridge.

Bolton, Patrick and David Scharfstein [1996], Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of
  Creditors, Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1-25.

Boyd, John and Edward Prescott [1986], “Financial Intermediary Coalitions, ” Journal of
  Economic Theory.

Bryan, Lowell [1988]. Breaking Up The Bank : Rethinking an Industry Under Siege , Dow
Jones-Irwin, Homewood, IL.

Bryant, John [1980], “A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance,” Journal of
  Banking and Finance, 4: 335-344.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn [1991], “The Role of Demandable Debt in
  Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements” The American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3.
  (Jun., 1991), pp. 497-513.

Diamond, D. W. [1984], “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring, ” Review of
  Economic Studies 51 (July): 393-414.

Diamond, D. W. [1997], “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 105
  (October): 928-956.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig [1983], “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
  Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan [2000a], “A Theory of Bank Capital,” University of Chicago
  working paper, forthcoming Journal of Finance, December 2000.

Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan [2000b], Banks, short term debt and financial crises: Theory,
  policy implications and applications, Working paper, University of Chicago, March.

Flannery, M. [1994], Debt maturity and the deadweight cost of leverage: Optimally financing
   banking firms, American Economic Review, 84, 320-331.

Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi [1990]"Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation",
Journal of Finance 45: 49-71.

Gertner, Robert [1990], “Inefficiency in three person bargaining,” University of Chicago working
  paper.

Greenbaum, Stuart, Kanatas, George, and Itzhak Venezia [1989], Equilibrium loan pricing under
  the bank client relationship, Journal of Banking and Finance 13, 221-235.

                                                                                                  45
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, v109 n4 (November 1994), pp. 841-79.

Hart, Oliver, Firms, contracts, and financial structure, Oxford and New York: Oxford University
  Press, Clarendon Press, 1995.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole [1997], “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
  Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 52 (August): 663-692.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole [1998], “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
  Political Economy 106 (February): 1-40.

Jacklin, C. J. [1987], “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing,” in: E. C.
   Prescott, N. Wallace (eds.), Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, Minneapolis:
   University of Minnesota Press, 26 -47

Jacklin, C. and S. Bhattacharya [1988], "Distinguishing Panics and Information-based Bank
   Runs: Welfare and Policy Implications", Journal of Political Economy, 96 (3) 568-592.

Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein [1999], “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation for
  the Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit Taking”, mimeo, University of Chicago.

Myers, Stewart and Raghuram Rajan [1998], “The Paradox of Liquidity”, Quarterly Journal of
 Economics , August 1998, vol 113: (3), pp 733-771.

Nakamura, L. [1988], Loan Workouts and Commercial Bank information: Why banks are
  special,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 1988.

Qi, Jianping [1998], “Deposit Liquidity and Bank Monitoring”, forthcoming, Journal of
  Financial Intermediation.

Rajan, R. [1992], “Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and arm's length debt”,
  Journal of Finance 47, 1367-1400.

Sharpe, S. [1990], "Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A stylized
Model of Customer Relationships", J ournal of Finance, Vol 45, 1069-1088.

Shleifer A , and R. Vishny [1992], “Liquidation Values And Debt Capacity - A Market
  Equilibrium Approach,” Journal Of Finance 47: (SEP 1992): 1343-1366.

Simons, Henry [1948]. Economic Policy for a Free Society , University of Chicago Press
Chicago, IL.




                                                                                                 46
  Figure 1


  Bargaining at date 2 between a relationship lender and
  entrepreneur



  Entrepreneur offers an alternative current payment, P2' < P2 .
  He will supply current human capital and make the alternative
  current payment if and only if agreement is reached.




  Relationship lender accepts.       Relationship lender rejects, liquidates for X 2 .
  Payoff of Entrepreneur,
                                     Payoff of Entrepreneur, Relationship lender (0, X 2 ) .
  relationship lender
  (C2 − P2' , P2' ) .



Outcome: Entrepreneur offers P2' = X 2 if P2 > X 2 and relationship lender accepts. If instead
the lender is an unskilled lender and can liquidate for βX2, rejecting the offer leads to payoffs to
the entrepreneur, and unskilled lender of (0, β X 2 ) respectively. In this case the entrepreneur
offers P2' = β X 2 if P2 > β X 2 and unskilled lender accepts .




                                                                                                   F1
                                   Figure 2


                                   Bargaining at date 1 between a
                                   patient relationship lender and
                                   entrepreneur



                                   Entrepreneur offers an alternative
                                   current payment P1' and date 2
                                   renegotiation-proof payment P2' . He
                                   will supply current human capital and
                                   make the alternative current payment
                                   if and only if agreement is reached.




  Relationship lender           Lender rejects the offer and current         Lender rejects the offer, liquidates
  accepts, cash                 cash is not produced. Lender retains        for X1. This destroys all future
  produced, current             liquidation rights to liquidate for X 2     output and gives a zero payoff to
  payment made.                 Negotiations begin again at date 2,         entrepreneur. Payoff of
  Payoff of                     see figure 1. Payoff of Entrepreneur,       Entrepreneur, relationship lender:
  Entrepreneur,                 relationship lender: (C2 − X 2 , X 2 ) .    (0, X 1 ) .
  relationship lender:
   (C1 + C2 − P1' − P2' ,
                            .
   P1' + P2' )


Outcome: Entrepreneur offers P1' + P2' = max{ X 1, X 2 } if P1 + P2 > max{ X 1, X 2 } . If the
lender is unskilled on both dates, replace max{ X 1, X 2 } with β max{ X 1, X 2 } . This figure
does not apply if the relationship lender gets a liquidity shock; see the discussion in the text.




                                                                                                 F2
Figure 3.

Bargaining at date 2 between the entrepreneur (E) and an unskilled lender (U) who owns the loan,
when there is a relationship lender with persistent loan collection skills .


                                             E offers   P2' to U



U accepts                                                                  U rejects and negotiates with R
                                                                           about who will negotiate with E
                                                                           as in figure 4.

                                                                           Payoffs (E,R,U)=
Payoffs (E,R,U)=                                                           (C2 − X 2 , X 2 (1 − β ), β X 2 )
(C2 − P , 0, P )
        2
         '
              2
               '
                                                                           (see figure 4).




Outcome: Entrepreneur offers   P2' = β X 2 and unskilled lender accepts.




                                                                                                       F3
Figure 4.

 Bargaining at date 2 between the relationship lender (R) and the unskilled lender (U) over who will
collect payment from the entrepreneur (E).

                                 R offers a net payment P2' (equal to a fee
                             of X 2 − P2' ) to U, committing not to represent U
                             in negotiation with E if rejected.




                                        U accepts               U rejects


              R negotiates with E as in                      U negotiates directly with E as
              figure 1, and makes net                        in figure 1.
              payment to U.

              Payoff s( R, U)=                               Payoffs( R, U)= (0, β X 2 )
              (X2 − P , P )
                       2
                        '
                            2
                             '




Outcome: The relationship lender will offer P2' = β X 2 , and the unskilled lender will accept.




                                                                                                 F4
                  Figure 5 : Date 2 Face Value when Patient and Entrepreneur's Net Income

1.2

1.1

 1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
                                                              Face value
0.5                                                           Entrepreneur's Net Income
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1
                                                                                     θ , the probability of a liquidity
 0                                                                                   shock.
      0    0.05   0.1   0.15    0.2      0.25   0.3    0.35    0.4      0.45   0.5
                                           θ
          No Liquidation, only premium          Region of Liquidation          Region of No Lending




                                                                                                               F5
                            Figure 6: Illiquidity Premium
0.025




 0.02




0.015




 0.01

                                                                        Illiquidity Premium

0.005




   0
        0     0.05    0.1    0.15    0.2    0.25   0.3    0.35    0.4        0.45


            θ , The probability of a liquidty shock


                The illiquidity premium is defined in the text and is in units of output
                (not percent).

                The face value is V 2~I (see proof of Lemma 2) while the entrepreneur’s
                net income is given by the objective function in the entrepreneur’s
                maximization problem (see proof of Lemma 2). Both values are in units
                of output.




                                                                                              F6
               Figure 7. Depositors (D) response to banker’s (B) offer of d2`<d2


                                              B offers D d 2`<d2




D accepts, does not join a bank run, and              D rejects, joins a bank run                      D rejects, does not join a bank run
receives payment from portion of loan         (simultaneously with other depositors) to                and enters into negotiation with B
that remains in the bank after                seize specified amount of loans and                      about who will negotiate loans that
completion of run by other depositors.        negotiate directly with entrepreneur.                    remain in the bank after completion of
                                                                                                       run by other depositors. D’s payoff
B negotiates the portion of the loan left     Expected depositor payoff from run (per unit             per unit deposited is bounded above
after run with E.
                                              deposited) is ρ ( f ) given by:                          by βλ ( f ) (where λ ( f ) is defined
                                                                                                       under the payoff from accepting the
D payoff per unit deposited is                                        β X2
                                                         d 2 if f ≤ d
                                                                                                       offer).
Min{d , λ ( f )} , where λ(f) is given
          '
          2                                             
                                               ρ( f ) = 
                                                                         2
by:                                                                                   (see below).
         1- f       d2                                  β X 2 if f > β X 2
                    β X2    β X2                         f
                X 2 if f ≤                                             d2
          1- f              d2
λ( f ) =                                     where f is the fraction of depositors that run.
                           β X2
               0     if f >
         
                            d2
                                                                   The run:
                                                             D learns place in line


                                                                                                                            β X2
                                 β X2                                                                Probability =1- Min{        ,1}
.             Probability = Min{      ,1}                                                                                     f
                                   f
                                                                                                     Depositors ahead in line seize all
         Assets still in the bank when D                                                             bank assets, D gets a zero payoff.
         reaches front of line , D seizes
         assets worth d 2 per unit held.

      E makes an offer to D.


D accepts                                                                                                        D rejects
Payoffs (E, B, D) =                                                                                    Enters into negotiation with B about
(C2 − β X 2 , 0, β X 2 )                                                                               who will negotiate with entrepreneur
                                                                                                       (see figure 4). Payoffs (E, B,D)
                                                                                                       = (C2 − X 2 , X 2 (1 − β ), β X 2 )

               The payoffs are for a depositor if a fraction f of depositors run. The tree assumes that there are an infinite
               number of small depositors (for simplicity), but the proof of Lemma 2 covers the finite depositor case.




                                                                                                                            F7
