                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  A THEORY OF BANK CAPITAL


                                         Douglas W. Diamond
                                          Raghuram G. Rajan


                                          Working Paper 7431
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7431


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 1999




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1999 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Bank Capital
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7431
December 1999
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58


                                               ABSTRACT


        Banks can create liquidity because their deposits are fragile and prone to runs. Increased
uncertainty can make deposits excessively fragile in which case there is a role for outside bank capital.
Greater bank capital reduces liquidity creation by the bank but enables the bank to survive more often and
avoid distress. A more subtle effect is that banks with different amounts of capital extract different amounts
of repayment from borrowers. The optimal bank capital structure trades off the effects of bank capital on
liquidity creation, the expected costs of bank distress, and the ease of forcing borrower repayment. The
model can account for phenomena such as the decline in average bank capital in the United States over the
last two centuries. It points to overlooked side-effects of policies such as regulatory capital requirements
and deposit insurance.


Douglas W. Diamond                                                 Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business                                        Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                                      University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street                                              1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60657                                                  Chicago, IL 60657
                                                                   raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu
         Does bank capital matter, and if so, what should its level be? This question has exercised

economists, regulators, and bank managers. On the one hand, some suggest that bank capital

structure is irrelevant in a full information, complete contract world, and to a first order of

approximation, also in the more imperfect "real" world (see Miller (1995), for example). At the

other extreme, economists appeal to the large literature on the high costs of equity issuance for

industrial firms to argue that banks will have similar difficulties in issuing long term equity (see

Stein (1998), for example), and greater bank capitalization will only be obtained at some cost. But

bank assets and functions are not the same as those of industrial firms.1 How do we know that

they will face similar costs of issuance? And does capital really play the same role in banks as in

industrial firms? What we really should do is to start by modeling the essential functions banks

perform, and then ask what role capital plays. This will help us answer whether capital issued by

banks should, in fact, be deemed “costly”. Moreover, such a model of banking can then help us

understand a variety of issues such as disintermediation, or the impact of regulations, better.

         To analyze the role capital plays in the bank's activities, we start with the model of

relationship lending in Diamond and Rajan (1999). A number of entrepreneurs have projects

where the cash flows that each entrepreneur can generate from his project exceeds the value

anyone else can generate from it. An entrepreneur cannot commit his human capital to the project,

except in the spot market. Outside financiers can extract repayment only by threatening to

liquidate the project (taking away the project from the entrepreneur and selling it to the next best

user), but because of the entrepreneur's specific abilities, they can extract only a fraction of the

cash flows generated. Thus projects are illiquid in that they cannot be financed to the full extent of

the cash flows they generate.




1
 In fact, one strand of the banking literature suggests banks have a role precisely because they reduce
asymmetric information costs of issuance (see Gorton and Pennachi (1990)).

                                                                                                          1
         In this world, we assume an outside financier who invests at an early stage can develop

specific abilities in that he can learn how best to re-deploy the project's assets, and become a

relationship lender. While these specific abilities enable the relationship lender to lend more to the

firm -- because the lender has a stronger threat with which to extract repayment -- they can

make the financial claim he holds against the entrepreneur illiquid; The relationship lender will not

be able to sell his loan (or equivalently, borrow against it) for anywhere near as much as the

payments he expects to extract from the entrepreneur, precisely because he cannot commit to

using his specific abilities on behalf of less capable outsiders. Thus the source of illiquidity of the

real asset (the project) and the financial asset (the loan to it) are the same: an agent's specific

abilities, which lead to non-pledgeable rents. In the case of the project, it is the entrepreneur's

greater ability to run it relative to a second best operator, in the case of the loan it is the

relationship lender's better ability to recover payments relative to someone who buys the loan (or

lends against it).

         The illiquidity of the financial asset spills over to the entrepreneur. Since the initial outside

financier cannot borrow money against his loan when in need, he will liquidate the entrepreneur at

such times, or demand an excessive liquidity premium.

         Since an asset is illiquid because specialized human capital cannot be committed to it,

devices that tie human capital to assets create liquidity. We show in Diamond and Rajan (1999)

that a bank is such a device. When the initial financier is structured as a bank -- financed by

demand deposits with a sequential service constraint where depositors get their money back in the

order in which they approach the bank until the bank runs out of money or assets to sell -- the

banker can commit to pass through the entire amount that that he expects to collect using his

specific abilities, to depositors. The reason the bank does not extract rents, thereby making the

financial assets it holds, and the claims against them, illiquid, is because it has a fragile capital



                                                                                                          2
structure. The sequential service constraint, where depositors must be fully repaid in the sequence

that they appear to withdraw from the bank, creates a collective action problem among depositors.

It makes them prone to run on the bank whenever they think their claim is in danger. This enables

the banker to commit. When the bank has the right quantity of deposits outstanding, any attempt

by the banker to extort a rent by threatening to withdraw her specific abilities will be met by a run,

which disintermediates the banker and drives her rents to zero. Thus the banker will not attempt to

extort rents and will pass through all collections directly to depositors.

         In this way, the bank creates liquidity both for the depositor and the entrepreneur.2 We do

not focus explicitly on an uncertain need for liquidity (as in Diamond-Dybvig [1983]), but it does

turn out that demand deposits will provide liquidity to depositors or the relationship lender. When

some of the depositors want their money back in the ordinary course of business (in contrast to a

run), the bank does not need to liquidate the entrepreneur. It simply borrows from new depositors

who, given the strength of their claim, will refinance up till the full value of the amount the bank

can extract from the entrepreneur. The bank can thus repay old depositors. In sum, the bank

enters into a Faustian bargain, accepting a rigid and fragile capital structure in return for the ability

to create liquidity. 3

         In Diamond and Rajan (1999), we examined a world of certainty where rigidity was not a

problem, and it is first best to structure the bank as a complete pass through, financed fully with



2
 The idea that banks provide liquidity on both sides of the balance sheet is also explored in Kashyap, Rajan
and Stein (1998). Their argument, which complements ours, is that there is a synergy between lines of credit
and demand deposits in that the bank can better use existing sources of liquidity by offering both. They
provide empirical evidence consistent with their argument.

3
 Unlike Allen and Gale (1998) who suggest bank runs are optimal from a risk sharing perspective, bank runs
in our model have good incentive effects for the banker (as in Calomiris and Kahn (1991)) but could well be
harmful ex post. However, we do not model these harmful effects. Our model has some of the features of
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) but departs from it in trying to model the illiquidity of the bank’s financial
assets rather than taking the illiquidity of bank assets as exogenous. Others such as Flannery (1994) also
rationalize the coexistence of illiquid loans and demand deposits.


                                                                                                          3
deposits. This maximizes liquidity creation. Once we introduce uncertainty that is observable but

not verifiable and thus cannot be used in contracting, we introduce the other side of the trade-off.

The rigid capital structure could lead to runs when real asset values fall. The banker now has to

trade-off liquidity creation against the cost of bank runs. It may be optimal for the bank to partially

finance itself with a softer claim like capital, which has the right to liquidate, but does not have a

first-come-first-served right to cash flows. Capital (or its fiduciary representatives), unlike

depositors, cannot commit not to renegotiate. While this allows the banker to extract some rents,

thus reducing his ability to create liquidity, it also buffers the bank better against shocks to asset

values. That bank capital is a buffer against the costs of bank distress is, to some extent, well

known. More novel is the cost; the reduced liquidity or credit creation.

         A simple example may help fix ideas. Consider an entrepreneur with a project yielding

substantial cash flows next period (say 2 in every state). Assume that an experienced relationship

lender can liquidate the project's assets for 1.4 in the high state next period and only 0.8 in the low

state next period. Both states are equally likely. Finally, assume the discount rate is zero in this risk

neutral world, and outside inexperienced lenders cannot obtain anything from liquidating the

project, regardless of state.

         If any outsider could run the project as well as the entrepreneur, the liquidation value of

the project next period would be 2. Now consider a contract that transfers ownership to the

financier if the entrepreneur defaults next period. In the event the entrepreneur defaults, the

financier would be able to realize 2 by seizing the project and employing one of the reserve army

of outsiders to run the project. Hence she would be willing to lend 2 up front. The project would

not be illiquid.

         The project, however, requires the entrepreneur's specific skills, which is why its value,

even when the experienced relationship lender can liquidate (i.e., pick the best outsider to run it), is



                                                                                                         4
either 1.4 or 0.8 depending on state. If the entrepreneur threatens not to repay, the relationship

lender can extract repayment only by liquidating assets. Assuming the entrepreneur can make

take-it-or-leave-it offers, the relationship lender can extract expected payments up to

0.5*1.4+0.5*0.8=1.1 which is less than the $2 the entrepreneur generates. The project is illiquid

because it requires the entrepreneur's specific abilities.

           Even though the relationship lender can extract payments worth 1.1 from the entrepreneur

next period, he cannot raise this much by issuing capital (i.e., non demandable claims) today. This

is because the relationship lender's specific skills are needed to extract repayment from the

entrepreneur. Without the relationship lender, outsiders (holders of capital) cannot extract anything

from the entrepreneur since their value from liquidating the project, and hence their threat point, is

zero. So by threatening to quit next period, the relationship lender can, and will, appropriate a rent

for his specific skills. Assuming that he extracts half the additional amount he recovers from the

entrepreneur, the relationship lender will keep a rent of 0.55 and only pass on 0.55 to outside

financiers. Thus the loan to the entrepreneur is also illiquid in that the relationship lender can only

borrow a fraction of the cash flows he hopes to generate from it.

           Now let the relationship lender (henceforth the banker) finance partly by issuing demand

deposits. If the banker attempts to renegotiate these next period, he will trigger off a run which is

costly to the banker (we will derive all this). The banker will always pay deposits if feasible, so the

only downside of financing via deposits is that there will be a run with attendant costs if the banker

cannot pay. Assume half the amount that can be extracted from the entrepreneur is lost if there is

a run. 4




4
 This could be because the entrepreneur is inefficiently liquidated after a run or because the entrepreneur is
confronted by less powerful lenders to whom he pays less.


                                                                                                             5
        Now let us see how financing through demandable deposits alters the amount that can be

raised today. Suppose the level of deposits is set at 1.4. In the low state, the banker can force the

entrepreneur to pay only 0.8, and anticipating this, depositors will run and recover only 0.4. In the

high state, the banker will be paid 1.4, which he will pass on to depositors. Thus by setting deposits

at 1.4, the banker can commit to paying out 0.5*1.4+0.5*0.4 = 0.9. This exceeds what the banker

could raise by issuing only capital -- the banker can raise more with demandable deposits because

he does not extract as much in rents.

        Of course, there is a cost of issuing too many deposits -- the run in the low state. Can the

banker raise more by issuing fewer deposits? Clearly, the cost of the run will be incurred with

some probability whenever deposits exceed 0.8. Suppose deposits are set at this level. In the low

state next period, the entrepreneur will pay the banker 0.8, which will be passed on to the

depositors. In the high state the banker will extract 1.4 from the entrepreneur, pay depositors 0.8,

and share the remaining equally with capital. So the banker's expected rent is 0.5*0.5*[1.4-

0.8]=0.15, capital gets the same amount, and deposits are safe and are paid 0.8. Thus, the banker

can raise 0.95 by issuing a combination of safe deposits and capital. Therefore, by increasing

financing through capital and reducing deposits to a safe level, the banker eliminates the costs of

distress without increasing the rents he extracts excessively, and such a capital structure enables

him to raise the maximum from outsiders.

        But there is yet another, and more subtle, effect of capital which we have finessed in the

example by looking at a one period problem where the entrepreneur is not liquidity constrained. In

the model we will examine shortly, a bank’s capital structure influences the amount that the bank

can extract from a liquidity constrained entrepreneur, by altering the bank’s horizon when it

bargains with its borrowers. This effect is reminiscent of Perotti and Spier (1993) who argue that

a more levered capital structure enables equity holders to extract more from workers, but the



                                                                                                        6
rationale is quite different. The bank's ability to extract does not change monotonically in its

deposit leverage and it depends on the entrepreneur's project characteristics (such as the interim

cash flows it generates).

        In summary, the optimal capital structure for a bank trades off these three effects of

capital -- more capital increases the rent absorbed by the banker, increases the buffer against

shocks, and changes the amount that can be extracted from borrowers. The optimal ex ante bank

capital structure, as we will argue, depends on the degree of competition in banking, the nature of

the available pool of borrowers, and the amount of own capital the banker can bring to the

business. We offer some characterizations.

        Our model explains why bank capital can be costly, not just in the traditional Myers-Majluf

sense of the asymmetric information costs of issuing new capital, but in the more recurring cost of

reducing liquidity, and the flow of credit. It can then be used to understand a variety of

phenomena. For example, by characterizing the kinds of firms that benefit most from bank

finance, it can explain the pattern of disintermediation as a financial system develops. As another

example, because financial fragility is essential for banks to create liquidity, our model highlights

some of the costs (in terms of lower credit and liquidity creation) of regulatory interventions that

attempt to make the banking system safe.

        The rest of the paper is as follows. In section I, we lay out the framework and analyze

events at date 2 in our two period model. We discuss some empirical implications of the basic

trade-off of costs of bank distress versus liquidity creation. In section II, we examine the effects

at date 1, and in section III, we consider how capital should be set optimally at date 0.

                                           I. Framework

1.1. Agents, Projects, and Endowments.

        Consider an economy with entrepreneurs and investors. The economy lasts for two



                                                                                                        7
periods and three dates -- date 0 to date 2. All agents are risk neutral and the discount rate is zero.

Each entrepreneur has a project that lasts for two periods. The project has a maximum scale of 1,

but can be funded with an investment i at date 0 where i ∈( 0,1] . It returns a random cash flow

with realizations C1s in state s at date 1 and C2 s' in state s' at date 2 per dollar invested if the

entrepreneur contributes his human capital. For every dollar invested, the assets created through

the initial investment have a random value in best alternative use without the entrepreneur’s

human capital (also termed “liquidation value”). This has realization X1s immediately after

investment until cash flow C1s is due to be produced, and realization X2s' from then till C2s' is due to

be produced. After that, the value of the assets collapse to zero. Funds can also be invested at any

date in a storage technology that returns $1 at the next date for every dollar invested.

         Entrepreneurs do not have money to finance their projects. There is a large number of

investors, each with $1/m of endowment at date 0 who can finance entrepreneurs. We assume

                                    ~ ~
                       ~ ~          C1 + C2
                Min[ E[C1 + C2 ], E[ ~ | X1 ] ] > 1 for all realizations of s
                                            s
                                                                                                        (1)
                                       X1

so that the entrepreneur’s initial project produces greater total cash flow returns viewed from both

the date 0 investment and the date 1 opportunity cost of X1s than storage. We will assume, for

simplicity, that the project generates sufficient cash flow in the long run, i.e., C2s'>X2s' so that

illiquidity ever prevents an entrepreneur from paying at date 2. We also assume that the

aggregate endowment exceeds the number of projects by a sufficient amount so that storage is in

use at each date, implying that there is no aggregate shortage of capital or liquidity. As a result, at

any date a claim on one unit of consumption at date t+1 sells in the market for one unit at date t.

The exact distribution of endowment is not critical, and one useful alternative assumption about

endowments is that there are many new investors at date 1 who invest in storage at the margin.




                                                                                                         8
1.2. Relationship-Specific Collection Ability.

         As in Diamond and Rajan (1999), the initial lender acquires the specific skills to put

assets to their best alternative use and obtains Xts per initial dollar invested, while outsiders or

later financiers can generate only β Xts where β < 1.

         Since educating the initial relationship lender takes time and effort, we assume that there

can be just one lender for each entrepreneur. We assume that if the loan is seized from, or sold

by, the relationship lender, he loses his specific skills at the next date. In other words, the

relationship lender needs constant close contact with the borrower to maintain his advantage.

While this assumption is not only plausible, it also simplifies the analysis and has no qualitative

impact on the results.5

1.3. Intermediation.

         We can motivate the existence of intermediaries by assuming that m>1, and more than

one investor is required to fully fund the project. If so, investors have no option but to delegate the

acquisition of specific collection skills to an intermediary, say a bank. Diamond and Rajan (1999)

show that even when m=1 and a single individual can finance the project, so long as the individual

has high enough probability of a need for liquidity at an intermediate date, financing through a bank

can dominate financing directly from the individual investor. Because loans are illiquid, it can be

undesirable to hold them directly (as in Diamond-Dybvig [1983]). However, when the bank can

commit to repay new date-1 depositors at date 2, it can issue these deposits to raise money to

repay date-0 depositors who come for their money at date 1, thus providing them liquidity. As a


5
  The assumption certainly affects the outside options of various parties to the bargaining but is important
to the results only in that a bank run (see later) serves to discipline the bank even at intermediate dates. It is
plausible, if for instance, the bank's specific abilities come from the special information it gets from the
relationship (see Rajan (1992), for example). Bank runs would always discipline even if we assumed the other
extreme, that the relationship lender never loses his skills. In the intermediate cases, we can show that a
bank run at interim dates always disciplines the banker when it is faced by a cash rich borrower, but when
the borrower is cash-poor a run will not always be fully disciplinary (i.e., the banker will always be hurt by a
run, but may not get zero).

                                                                                                                9
result, we do not explicitly consider the possibility that a fraction of depositors will need liquidity,

but such a need is fully consistent with our results because there is no aggregate shortage of

liquidity—banks can always raise new funds by offering a competitive rate of return. The reasons

for intermediation and the details of the need for liquidity are orthogonal to the issues explored

here, so for reasons of space we will not discuss them. The reader should, however, be assured

that there is a natural motive for intermediation.



1.4.Contracting.

We assume that contracts between borrowers and lenders can specify payments and can make

the transfer of ownership of the assets contingent on these payments. Furthermore, we assume

the existence of accounting systems that can track cash flows once they are produced. However,

a borrower can commit to contributing his human capital to a specific venture only in the spot

market. Human capital cannot be bought or sold. This implies that borrowers will bargain over the

surplus that is created when they contribute their human capital, as in Hart and Moore (1994). Ex

ante contracts over payments and ownership will constrain this bargaining.

        In order to raise money, a borrower has to give the lender some, possibly contingent,

control rights. We consider contracts which specify that the borrower owns the asset and has to

make a payment to the lender, failing which the lender will get possession of the asset and the

right to dispose of it as he pleases. The realized values of cash and liquidation values are not

verifiable or contractible. So a contract specifies repayments Pt the borrower is required to make

at date t, as well as the assets the lender gets if the borrower defaults. For much of our analysis,

allowing the lender to get only a fraction of the proceeds from liquidating the assets even if he is

owed more does not add much insight. So in the rest of the analysis, we assume that on liquidation,




                                                                                                           10
the lender gets all the proceeds. Also, for simplicity, partial liquidation is not possible. Finally, the

entrepreneur can liquidate himself for as much as the relationship lender.

1.5. Bargaining with the Entrepreneur.

         Since the entrepreneur can commit his human capital only in the spot market, he may

attempt to renegotiate the terms of the contract (henceforth the loan) that he agreed to in the past.

We assume bargaining at date k takes the following form; the entrepreneur offers an alternative

sequence of Ptk from the one contracted in the past. He can also commit to making a current

payment if his offer is agreed to, as well as commit to contribute his human capital this period. The

lender can (1) accept the offer, or (2) reject the offer and liquidate the asset immediately or (3)

reject the offer and forego liquidation this period but reserve the right to do so next period (4)

reject the offer and sell the assets to a third party. The game gives all the bargaining power to the

entrepreneur, apart from the lender’s option to liquidate. This is for simplicity only, and modified

versions of our results hold when there is more equal bargaining power. If the entrepreneur’s

offer is accepted, current payments are made, the entrepreneur contributes his human capital, and

assumes control of the assets until the next default (if any). The sequence is summarized in figure

1. To fix ideas, let us start with a world of certainty.

Example 1: Suppose that it is date 2, and the entrepreneur has promised to pay P2=X2. If the

entrepreneur bargains with the initial lender, he knows that the lender can obtain X2 through

liquidation. As a result, he pays X2 since, by assumption, he generates enough cash flow to do so.

1.6. Hold up by an intermediary

         The initial lender in this model is an intermediary who has borrowed from other investors.

In the same way as the entrepreneur can negotiate his repayment obligations down by threatening

not to contribute his human capital, the intermediary can threaten to not contribute his specific

collection skills and thereby capture a rent from investors. The intermediary, by virtue of his



                                                                                                            11
position in the middle, can choose whom to negotiate with first. As in Diamond and Rajan (1999),

centrality will be an important source of power for the intermediary. The intermediary will

negotiate first with outside investors before concluding any deal with the entrepreneur (else his

threat to withhold his collection skills is without bite). So he will open negotiations with investors by

offering a different schedule of repayments. The negotiations between an intermediary and

investor(s) take much the same form as the negotiations between the entrepreneur and a lender

(see Figure 2). The investor can either (1) accept the proposed schedule (2) reject it and bargain

directly with the entrepreneur as in figure 1 (this is equivalent to the investor seizing the "asset" --

the loan to the entrepreneur -- from the intermediary), or (3) bargain with the intermediary over

who will bargain with the entrepreneur. It is best to see the effect of this potential hold up by the

intermediary in our example.

Example 1 Continued

        Suppose the intermediary finances his loan to the entrepreneur by borrowing from several

investors. Assume for now that there are no problems of collective action among the investors. At

date 2, the intermediary can threaten to not collect on the loan to the entrepreneur, and instead

leave the investors to collect it. The investors, because of their poorer liquidation skills, can expect

to extract only βX2 from the entrepreneur. The intermediary’s threat can thus allow him to

capture some of the extra amount that only he can collect. If the intermediary and investors split

                                                                 1+ β
the additional amount extracted evenly, the investors will get        X 2 and the intermediary will
                                                                  2

                        1− β
get the remainder, or        X 2 . Thus, at date 1, the intermediary's inability to commit to employ
                         2

his specific collection skills at date 2 prevents him from pledging to repay more than a fraction

1+ β
     of what he collects from the entrepreneur.
 2



                                                                                                      12
1.7. Depositors as Investors.

         Thus far we have examined investors who do not suffer from collective action problems.

The intermediary cannot raise the full amount he expects to extract from the entrepreneur from

these investors because they know he will appropriate a rent for his specialized human capital. If

X2 is not stochastic as of date 1, however, Diamond and Rajan (1999) show that an intermediary

can offer demand deposits to investors, and this commits the intermediary to fully collect the loan

and pass it through to depositors.

         The difference between a generic intermediary financed by ordinary investors (described

above) and a bank financed by demand deposits is that the sequential service nature of demand

deposits creates a collective action problem that prevents the banker from negotiating depositors

down.

         To sketch why, we have to first specify the terms of the deposit contract. The deposit

contract allows the investor to withdraw at any time. He forms a line with other depositors who

decide to withdraw at that time. If the banker does not pay him the full promised nominal

repayment dt, the depositor has the right to seize bank assets (cash + loans) equal in market value

(as determined by what an ordinary investor would pay for the assets -- see above) to the

promised repayment dt. Depositors get paid or seize assets based on their place in line.6

Therefore if bank assets are insufficient to pay all depositors, the first one in line gets paid in full

while the last one gets nothing.

         Suppose the banker announces that he intends to renegotiate and makes an initial offer.

Depositors can (1) accept the new terms, or (2) join a line, with positions allocated randomly, to

seize the bank’s assets of loans and cash based on what is due to them in the original contract–


6
 An equivalent assumption to depositors seizing loans is that they demand cash and the bank is forced to
sell loans at their market value to third parties to meet cash demands. The net effect is the same -- unskilled
parties are in possession of the loans after the run.


                                                                                                             13
which we call a run, (3) refuse the offer but negotiate without seizing bank assets (see figure 3).

All depositors choose between these alternatives simultaneously. At the end of this stage, either

the banker or the depositor will be in possession of the loan to the entrepreneur. If depositors have

seized the loan, the banker is disintermediated, and the entrepreneur can directly initiate

negotiations with depositors by making an offer. The subsequent steps follow the sequence that

we have already documented above, and in figure 1.

         Thus there is an essential difference between an intermediary bargaining with investors

who simply have ordinary debt or equity claims on the intermediary, and the bank bargaining with

demand depositors. If the bank attempts to renegotiate, the latter can (and will) choose to run in

an attempt to grab a share of the bank's assets and come out whole. As we will argue shortly, the

run, by disintermediating the banker, will destroy his rents even though he will continue to have

specific skills in the short run. Fearing disintermediation, the bank will not attempt to renegotiate

and will pass through the entire amount collected from the entrepreneur to depositors.

Example 1 Continued

         How much can the banker commit to pay from the loan with face value P2=X2? Let the

banker issue demand deposits with face value d2=X2 in total, raising the money from many

depositors.7 A depositor with claim αd2 is permitted to take cash, or loans with market value,

equal to αd2 (or to force this amount of loans to be sold to finance the payment of the deposit).

                                (1 + β ) X 2
The market value of loans is                 < X 2 , so not all the depositors will be paid in full if they
                                     2

run. If the banker should offer depositors less than d2=X2, then each depositor has the unilateral

incentive to run to the bank to get paid in full, whenever other depositors have not done so first.

Therefore, when other depositors have not run on the bank, a given depositor will not make any


7
 The case where the bank has cash reserves can be easily handled by assuming d t is the level of deposits
net of cash reserves.

                                                                                                            14
concessions, preferring to run instead. Finally, once a run has fully disintermediated the bank

loans, the depositors and the entrepreneur can negotiate about how much will be paid to each

depositor. Both the entrepreneur and depositors know that the banker can be hired to collect the

                       1− β
full X2 for a fee of        X 2 . But since the entrepreneur is now in direct contact with depositors,
                        2

                       1+ β
he can offer to pay         X 2 directly to the depositors who hold the bank’s loans, and the banker
                        2

will receive zero. Consequently, a bank run drives the banker’s rents to zero, and the threat of a

run acts as a disciplinary device that allows the banker to commit at date 1 to pay the depositors at

date 2 the entire amount P2 = X2 extracted from the firm.

          Demand deposits thus allow the bank to create liquidity: allow it to borrow more (i.e., X2)

                                                                               1+ β
from depositors than the market value of the loan to the entrepreneur (i.e.,        X 2 ). They
                                                                                2

work by creating a collective action problem. Depositors are individually better off refusing to

enter into a renegotiation with the banker (even though collectively, depositors are weakly better

off renegotiating with the bank than seizing assets). Therefore, depositors grab assets first, and

negotiate later, but the later negotiations cut out the banker. Despite the possibility of efficient

bargaining after a run, the banker is disciplined by a run. Hence the banker does not attempt to

renegotiate, and pays out the full amount collected, taking only an infinitesimal rent for his specific

skills.

1.8. Financing through a mix of deposits and other claims.


          We have seen that investors holding non-deposit claims are negotiated down by the

intermediary, while depositors are not. What if both kinds of investors simultaneously hold claims

on the intermediary? Let the face value of demand deposits be d2. Let other investors --

henceforth called "capital" -- hold a claim on all the residual cash flows (i.e, they hold all the


                                                                                                       15
equity, or a high level of subordinate debt). We show that a rent typically goes to the banker so

that the bank is no longer a complete pass-through.


        Let the banker threaten not to collect the loan at date 2. We have already argued that he

will be unsuccessful in negotiating depositors down. Hence this threat must be directed at capital.


Example 1 Continued Without the banker, capital will be able to collect only βX2 from the

entrepreneur. If deposits exceed βX2, capital will not be able to avoid a run if the banker quits,

and will get zero. The net amount available to capital and the banker if the bank does employ its

skills in collecting the loan is X2−d2. Since neither can get any of the surplus without the other's

co-operation, they split the surplus, and each gets ½( X2−d2). Alternatively, if the face value of

deposits is lower than βX2, capital can get βX2 − d2 without the banker. The additional surplus

generated by the banker with capital's co-operation is then X2−d2 − (βX2−d2) = (1−β)X2.

                                                                                        1− β
Bargaining then gives the banker one half of the additional surplus he generates, or         X2 ,
                                                                                         2

                                                                    1+ β
and capital gets the rest of the residual claim on the bank, or          X 2 − d2 .
                                                                     2


        Before proceeding further, we generalize the formal results for date 2. d2 is the level of

deposits going into date 2, P21 is the date 2 repayment promised by the entrepreneur at date 1.

Lemma 1:

1) If Min[ P21, X 2 ] < d2 , depositors will run on the bank and be paid

                                  1                    1
                                    Min[ P21 , βX 2 ] + Min[ P21 , X 2 ] .
                                  2                    2

2) If Min[ P21, X 2 ] ≥ d2 and




                                                                                                       16
           2.b) if Min[ P21, βX 2 ] < d2 then there is no run, depositors get paid d2, the banker gets

            1                                         1
              [ Min[ P21, X2 ] − d2 ] and capital gets [ Min[ P21, X2 ] − d2 ] .
            2                                         2



            2.c) if Min[ P21, βX 2 ] > d 2 then there is no run, depositors get paid d2 and

                     2.c.1) if P21 ≤ βX2 the banker gets 0 while capital gets P21 − d2 .

                                                                    1 1
                     2.c.2) if X 2 > P21 ≥ βX 2 the banker gets       [ P2 − βX 2 ] while capital gets
                                                                    2

                                                                                            1 1
                                                                                              [ P2 + βX 2 ] − d 2 .
                                                                                            2

                                                            1− β                        1+ β
                     2.c.3) if P21 ≥ X 2 the banker gets         X 2 while capital gets      X2 − d2 .
                                                             2                           2


           This lemma highlights the problem of setting deposits too high -- while it will reduce the

banker's rents to zero, it will also reduce the amount going to the depositors because it precipitates

runs that lead to a loss of the banker's valuable services. But why would the banker set deposits

so high as to precipitate a run. For this, we have to introduce uncertainty about date 2 asset

values. The ensuing tradeoff is discussed next.


1.9. Uncertainty about underlying date-2 asset values.


           Let us now assume the underlying value of the entrepreneur's asset is stochastic and

takes value X 2H with probability q2H and X 2L with probability 1 − q 2H at date 2. 8 The loan has face

value P2 = X2H > X 2L . Therefore, the bank can collect either X 2H or X 2L , depending on the



8
    These probabilities of date 2 values as of date 1 are conditional on the date-1 state, s, and should be read
as   q2Hs , but we suppress this dependency when there is no ambiguity.


                                                                                                               17
stochastic realization of the borrower’s business. The market value of the loan at date 1 is

1+ β    ~
     E[ X 2 ]. Without deposits to limit the banker’s rents, this is all that the claims on the bank
 2

would be worth at date 1. For the bank to create some liquidity, and to raise more than the market

value of its loan at date 1, it must use some demand deposits. There are two levels of deposits to

consider, low and high: d2 = X2L and d 2 = X 2H .9 If the low level of deposits is selected, the

                                                                                           1− β H
banker will capture a rent when X 2H is realized (of either 12 [ X 2H − X 2L ] or              X 2 depending
                                                                                            2

on whether X 2L > or < βX 2H ). For now, assume that X 2L < βX 2H . Then the expected total date-

2 payment the banker can commit to make to outsiders, that is to depositors plus other claimants,

when date-2 deposits are low enough to be riskless ( d2 = X 2L ), is given by

      1+ β H                       Safe
q2H       X 2 + (1 − q2H ) X 2L ≡ P .
       2

                                                                                       ~
           Alternatively, to avoid the rent to the banker when the outcome is X 2 = X 2H , the bank

could operate with a high level of deposits, d2 = X 2H . However, a bank run would occur if

 ~
 X 2 = X 2L is the realization of asset value. Once the run occurs, the sum of the value to

depositors, the banker, and any other claimants on the bank, falls to the market value of the loan,

      1+ β L
or        X 2 . So the expected total payment the banker makes to outsiders, that is to depositors
       2

plus other claimants, when deposits are high ( d2 = X 2H ) is given by

                       1+ β L            Risky
q2H X2H + (1 − q2H )       X2 ≡ P                .
                        2


9
                                                                            d 2 = X 2L is dominated
    In terms of the amounts that can be raised at date 1, a lower level of deposits than
by d 2 = X 2 and a level of deposits between d2 = X2 and d 2 = X 2 is dominated by d 2 = X 2 .
           L                                       L             H                           H

Hence the focus on these two levels.

                                                                                                          18
         The most that the bank can commit to pay to outsiders before date 2, is

         Safe        Risky
max{P           ,P           }. This is less than the total value the banker can collect from the borrower,

   ~                                                                            Safe                                      Risky
E[ X 2 ] , whenever the value of the asset is uncertain. We can also calculate P , P                                              when

X 2L ≥ βX 2H . P Risky is unchanged, and P Safe is given by

                                                             ( X 2H − X 2L )
                                                       q2H                   + X 2L                                                  (2)
                                                                    2

It follows that

                                                                    Safe                          Risky
Lemma 2: (i) If q2H X2H < (1 − q2H ) X 2L then P                           is greater than P              .

                                          Risky                            Safe
(ii) If X 2L ≤ q2H X 2H , then P                  is greater than P               .

                                                                                      Safe        Risky
(iii) If X 2L > q2H X 2H ≥ (1 − q2H ) X 2L , there is a β*such that P                        >P           iff β < β * .

Proof: See appendix.

              Safe           Risky
          P          >P              implies a capital structure with safe deposits raises more external financing

than a capital structure with risky deposits. Intuitively, this is the case when the expected loss

because of a run outweighs the expected rent that goes to the banker because deposits are not set

high enough, i.e., when the costs of financial distress outweigh rent absorption by the bank. Since

rent absorption takes place in "high"states while distress takes place in "low" states, this suggests

that the bank capital structure that raises the most cash ex ante is one with relatively fewer

deposits when bad times are anticipated and more deposits when good times are – the level of

deposits should be a leading indicator. Perhaps less obvious is when the intrinsic liquidity of project

assets, β, falls, the bank can again raise more by issuing fewer deposits. The intuition here is that

the banker's rent in the "high" state is relatively unaffected by the illiquidity of bank assets once

they are sufficiently illiquid -- capital has to share half the collections over the value of deposits



                                                                                                                                         19
with the banker since it cannot pay depositors on its own. However, the cost to investors of a

bank run increases with illiquidity. Therefore, the bank raises relatively more when assets become

more illiquid by adopting a safer capital structure.

                   Risky        Safe                                                                   ~
Corollary 1: P             −P          increases with a mean preserving spread in the distribution of X 2 .

                                                                                                        ~
         The risk of the loan repayments is proportional to the risk of the underlying collateral X 2 .

So the corollary suggests that the capital structure that raises the most at date 1 contains more

deposits as the distribution of loan repayments shift to the tails. The intuition is that as value shifts

to the tails, it becomes more important for the bank to commit to pay out the repayments extracted

in the high state, while the costs incurred through financial distress in the low state become

relatively unimportant.10 Note that this is observationally equivalent to "risk shifting" behavior

(riskier bank loans are correlated with higher leverage), though the direction of causality is

reversed, and bank management maximizes the amount raised, not the value of equity.

1.10 Implications of the simple one period model.

         The model so far could be thought of as a one period model of bank capital structure. If

we assume that banks want to set capital structure so as to maximize the amount that they can

raise against given loans, our model already has a number of predictions.

1.10.1. The Decline in Bank Capitalization.

         Berger et al. (1995) present evidence that bank book capital to assets ratios have been

falling steadily in the United States, from about 55% in 1840 to the low teens today. While

regulation providing greater implicit government capital to the banks could explain some of the

decline, bank capital also declined over periods with little, or no, regulatory change (see Berger et

al. (1995), p 402). Our model suggests that as the underlying liquidity of projects, β, increases, the



10
  Our view that bank capital structure can allow for risky deposits contrasts with the view in Merton and
Perold (1993) where capital structure is always maintained such that deposits are completely safe.

                                                                                                            20
capital structure that raises the most finance up front contains more deposits. Thus the increasing

liquidity of bank assets as information, the size of market, and the legal environment improve could

explain the decline in capital ratios.

1.10.2. Cyclical Implications.

         Our model also suggests that deposit ratios should decline as bad times become more

likely, and increase in an expected upswing. However, the natural flow of funds into a bank from

its loan assets tends to be high in good times and low in bad times. It is relatively easy to buy back

non-deposit claims with cash, which the bank has plenty of in good times. But banks may have a

hard time adjusting their capital structure in bad times because they will have little cash to pay

down deposits. If the amount a bank can raise against a loan is less than the amount that it can

get from liquidation, it may be forced to adjust its asset structure by calling those loans and only

renewing more liquid loans. This would be exacerbated if, for some un-modeled reason such as

asymmetric information, it were hard to issue non-deposit claims at short notice. Thus bank

lending would tend to be pro-cyclic, exacerbating any fundamental cyclical components (also see

Rajan (1994)). Alternatively, banks may hold down the deposit ratio in good times, but the cost will

be that bankers will absorb more rents at such times, and reduce the amount that can be raised.

                                         Section II: Date 1

        Thus far, we examined what is effectively a one period model. Two factors simplified our

analysis -- the entrepreneur had enough cash to repay what could be extracted, and the date being

analyzed was the last date. A similar situation obtains at date 1 if the entrepreneur faces a banker

at date 1 with no immediate need for cash. Since neither party has a strong preference over the

                                                                                            ~
timing of cash flows, the entrepreneur would offer to pay Min[ P10 + P20 , Max[ X1s , E[ X 2| s ]]]

over the two periods, and the offer would be accepted. The additional effects of bank capital

structure at date 1 come from it forcing the banker to pay out at date 1. This places an additional


                                                                                                       21
constraint on the banker, giving him a strong preference over the timing of cash flows which,

depending on the entrepreneur's cash position, can enhance or reduce the banker's ability to

extract payment from the entrepreneur.

2.1. Intermediation at date 1.

        As before, the entrepreneur either pays or opens negotiations at date 1 by making a take-

it-or leave-it offer to the banker. Before concluding these negotiations, the banker then negotiates

with capital at the end of which either the banker accepts the entrepreneur’s offer, the banker

liquidates the entrepreneur, or capital takes over and negotiates with the entrepreneur. The

entrepreneur’s opening offer is only available for the banker to accept, and if capital takes over,

the entrepreneur will open with a new offer.

        The easiest way to conceptualize what follows is to assume the banker pays off all

financial claimants every period. Because depositors can demand payment at any time, each must

get a claim worth as much as can be obtained by demanding payment, while capital is always free

to replace the banker, this is without loss of generality. Therefore, the bank's capital structure

coming into date 1 determines how much the banker needs to pay out at date 1. But the bank’s

capital structure leaving date 1 (our focus so far) affects how much it can raise to meet maturing

payments. Therefore, the difference between the amount due and amount raised has to be met by

extraction from the entrepreneur, else the bank will be liquidated. In addition to the banker's ability

to liquidate, the entrepreneur will have to consider this constraint on the banker in making an offer.

        We present the most illuminating case, leaving the general proposition for later. From the

previous section, we know the maximum the entrepreneur can commit to pay at date 2 is

   ~
E[ X2 | s] , and the maximum the bank can raise against this at date 1 is max{P Safe ( s), P Risky ( s)} .

Let P Safe( s ) > P Risky ( s) so that the bank can raise the most funds at date 1 by maintaining a safe

capital structure at date 2 with deposits low enough to avoid runs. Also let


                                                                                                        22
                                                                    1+ β s
                             C1 + P Safe( s) > X1 > P Safe( s ) >
                                s                 s
                                                                        X1                               (3)
                                                                     2


The first inequality implies the cash the entrepreneur can generate together with the amount the

bank can raise against the entrepreneur's best date-2 promise are greater than the amount

obtained from liquidation at date 1. The second inequality implies that the amount the banker can

collect by liquidating at date 1 exceeds the amount the bank can raise. The third implies that the

amount the banker can raise exceeds the market value of the date 1 liquidation threat so that

holding on to the entrepreneur's loan dominates selling it.

        Let us first determine how much the banker has to pay claimants. Let the bank's

outstanding deposits coming into date 1 (net of cash reserves if the bank holds cash) be worth d1.

The banker cannot renegotiate deposits. So at date 1, the banker will only negotiate with existing

capital about extracting a rent for his specific skills before he concludes a deal with the

entrepreneur. He will first make an offer to capital (as in figure 2). Capital can

reject the offer, enter the equal probability take-it-or-leave-it offer game, after which it can still

take over the bank if it finds the offer unsatisfactory. Since this is capital's best response, we now

determine how much the banker has to offer to avoid takeover.

2.2. Negotiations between the banker and capital.


        Suppose capital rejects the banker’s take-it-or-leave-it offer. This is as if capital takes

over the management of the bank after firing the banker, and it gets to negotiate directly with the

entrepreneur. If capital liquidates immediately, it can obtain βX1s. If capital were to wait until date

                                    ~
2 to liquidate it would get βE[ X 2| s ] . Therefore, after rejecting a final offer from the banker,

                                        ~
capital expects Max[β max{ X1s, E[ X 2 | s]} − d1 ,0] .




                                                                                                         23
         By contrast, if capital makes the take-it-or-leave-it offer, it does not have to give the

banker anything for his services (since it has the loan to the entrepreneur, and the banker has no

right to collect without the legal authority embedded in the loan). Therefore, it asks the banker to

collect from the entrepreneur, and capital gets the ensuing loan repayment net of deposit payments

of Max[X1s-d1, 0] .11


         Since each party gets to make the take-it-or-leave-it offer with equal probability, capital

will expect to get a rent from the banker of


                                       1                      ~                  1
                        π 1C ( s ) =     Max[ β Max[ X1 , E ( X 2| s )] − d1,0] + Max[ X1 − d1,0]
                                                       s                                 s
                                                                                                                    (4)
                                       2                                         2


On inspection, the total payment, π C1(s)+d 1 that has to go to date-1 claimants is (weakly)

increasing in the level of deposits. Capital structure coming into date-1 therefore affects the total

amount the banker has to pay out at date 1. Now we know how much the entrepreneur can pay,

how much the banker can raise against the entrepreneur's payments, and how much the banker

has to pay claimants, we can determine how much the entrepreneur actually pays. Let us

therefore examine negotiations between the entrepreneur and the banker.


2.3. Negotiations between banker and entrepreneur.


Suppose the entrepreneur makes an offer at date 1. The easy case is when the banker's best

response is to allow the project to continue, while retaining the right to liquidate at date-2. This is

                              ~
the case when X1s< E( X 2 | s) , and PSafe ≥ π C1+d 1. The banker can then raise enough money


11
  Alternatively, capital could ask the banker to do nothing at date 1, and pay everything he can commit to
pay out of date-2 collections. We have seen that the banker can commit to pay the capital and deposits
                                     Safe
withdrawn at date 2 at most P               . However, in the current case, immediate liquidation is preferred by
capital because X
                    s
                    1   >P   Safe
                                    from (3).



                                                                                                                    24
against date-2 promised payments to satisfy capital and depositors so capital structure does not

constrain the banker. The banker is always patient and has a credible threat to liquidate at the

date the yields the largest value. Anticipating this, the entrepreneur will offer payments P11=0 and

P21 = X 2H ( s ) , and the offer will be accepted.


2.3.1. The interesting case: the possibly impatient banker


                                                                        ~
The more interesting case is either when X1s≥ E( X 2 | s) , or the level of deposits coming into date 1

is so high that π C1+d 1 > PSafe. The banker has to liquidate if the offer is unacceptable. Since

            Safe
C1s + P            > X1s from (3), the cash the entrepreneur generates and the date-2 promises he can

make are sufficient to make an acceptable offer.


             Since the entrepreneur is indifferent between a dollar paid at date 1 and a dollar paid at

date 2, and the banker may prefer earlier payment, we can focus without loss of generality at

payment offers such that P21>0 only if P11=C1, i.e., the entrepreneur promises a positive date-2

payment only if he has no more cash to make date-1 payments. Let q2Hs denote the probability of

 X 2H given the state s at date 1. For the banker to accept an offer, two conditions must hold.

First, the amount paid by the entrepreneur at date 1 together with any date-1 amounts the bank

raises by issuing new claims to be repaid out future recoveries from the entrepreneur have to be

enough for the banker to pay the depositors and capital coming into date 1. So if Pledgeable(P21)

is the amount the bank can raise today against a date-2 promise of P21 by the entrepreneur 12, we



     More specifically, it is q2 s P2 + (1 − q2 s ) Min[ P2 , X 2 ] if P2 ≤ βX 2 and the capital structure can be set so
12                             H    1        H             1       L         1           H



                                                         (1 + β )
                                                                       P2 + (1 − q2 s ) X 2 if P2 > β X 2 > X 2 and the bank does
                                                     H                  1            H       L       1       H           L
that the bank does not collect a rent. It is q2 s
                                                               2
                                                                                     ( P2 − X 2 )
                                                                                         1       L

collect a rent at date 2. If P2 > X 2 > βX 2 , the expression is q2 s                                + (1 − q2 s ) X 2
                                1       L        H                               H                               H   L

                                                                                             2

                                                                                                                              25
have


                         P11 + Pledgeable( P21 ) ≥ π 1c + d1                                        (5)


         Second, the banker should get more over the two dates after paying out all claimants than

if he liquidates. Since the required payment to claimants does not depend on whether he liquidates

or not, this implies


           P11 + q2Hs P21 + (1 − q2Hs ) Min[ P21, X 2L ] ≥ X1s                       (6)


We will now show that, depending on how much cash the entrepreneur has, and the level of

deposits coming into date 1, the entrepreneur’s total payments to the bank may exceed

Max[ X1s , E ( X2 | s )] even though the date 1 liquidation threat is what enables the banker to

extract repayment. It may be useful to first outline the intuition with the numerical example.


2.3.2. Numerical example.


         Let β=0, X1s=0.99, X2L=0.8, X2H=1.4, and q2sH=0.5. As calculated in the introduction,

P Safe is given by (2), and equals 0.95, P Risky = 0.9.


         First let deposits coming into date 1, d1, be 0. Then the total payments the bank has to

make at date 1= π C1+d 1=π C1= 0.77 (substituting values in (4)). Since

   ~
E[ X 2 | s] = 11
               . > X 1s = 0.99 , the banker will extract an expected amount of 1.1 at date-2 from the

entrepreneur if it turns down the entrepreneur's offer. The bank can raise P Safe = 0.95 at date 1

against the expected date-2 collection from the entrepreneur. Since it has to raise only 0.77 to pay

off date-1 claimants, it can do so even by rejecting the entrepreneur's offer. Moreover, the




                                                                                                    26
difference between the expected inflow of 1.1. and the outflow of 0.77 (to pay off those who put

in money at date 1) will be a rent to the banker.


        As the level of deposits is increased from 0 to 0.7, an increase in deposits is met by a

commensurate reduction in the rents to capital, and total payout to investors remains constant. But

when d1 exceeds 0.7, total payout to investors increases and if d1>0.91, the total payout to date-1

claimants exceeds P Safe = 0.95 . Since this is the maximum the bank can raise at date 1, its

horizons shorten and it will liquidate at date 1 if not paid enough by the entrepreneur. Consider

deposits set at d1=0.99 so that from (4), π C1(s)+d 1=0.99.


        Now let us vary the cash the entrepreneur has to see how much he pays. An

entrepreneur with low cash, C1s <0.04, will always be liquidated if he attempts to renegotiate his

loan. This is because the most the entrepreneur can offer without being liquidated is

C1s + P Safe < 0.99 , and the bank needs 0.99 to avoid a run by depositors. But at C1s =0.04, the

entrepreneur can offer an immediate payment of P11= C1s=0.04, and a future payment P21=1.4.

This will be accepted since the banker gets C1s + P Safe = 0.99 to pay off maturing date-1

deposits. The total amount the banker will collect from the entrepreneur over date 1 and date 2 is

         ~
C1s + E[ X 2 | s] =0.04+1.1 = 1.14 which exceeds Max[ X1s , E ( X2 | s )] =1.1, the amount the banker

could collect if we ignored the effect of the bank's capital structure.


        Intuitively, the banker's need to pay claimants at date 1 shortens his horizons and makes

his date-1 liquidation threat credible even though it is inferior to the date-2 liquidation threat. In

order to avoid liquidation by the banker, the entrepreneur has to help the bank pay its depositors.

But the entrepreneur can pay only 0.04, and the rest has to be raised by the bank against future

promises by the entrepreneur. Since only a fraction of the future payments by the entrepreneur



                                                                                                         27
translate into current cash raised by the bank (the entrepreneur pays 1.1 while the bank raises

only 0.95 against it) the entrepreneur ends up overpaying to avoid liquidation. Of the total 1.14 in

expected payments the entrepreneur makes, 0.99 will be paid to outside investors, and the banker

will keep the rest as rent.


        As the entrepreneur’s date-1 cash inflows increase, he can make more of his payments in

cash and less in inefficient date-2 promises that involve paying an additional rent to the bank.

Eventually, the required date-2 promise falls to such a level that it no longer requires the bank’s

special skills to collect (the loan to the entrepreneur becomes liquid), and the bank’s rent falls to

zero. Therefore, the total payment made by the entrepreneur falls as he generates more cash, and

when C1s≥0.24, his payment bottoms out at 0.99. Note that the entrepreneur now pays less than

Max[ X1s , E ( X2 | s )] =1.1, and the banker's short horizon hurts his ability to collect.


2.3.3. More Formally.


        Let us now determine the entrepreneur’s actual payments more formally and show why

he overpays. As (5) indicates, if deposits due at date 1 are high so that the bank has to pay out a

lot at date 1, while the entrepreneur generates little cash at date 1 so that P11 is small, he may

have to promise to pay P21> βX 2H at date 2 for the bank to raise enough to pay off date-1

claimants. But such a high promised payment can only be collected by the banker which implies

                                            q2Hs 1
that the banker will get a date 2 rent of        P2 − βX 2H . So an entrepreneur with little date-1
                                             2

cash has to use an inefficient means of payment -- date-2 promises which have an element of

leakage in that some of it goes as a rent to the bank.




                                                                                                        28
        We cannot immediately conclude that the date-2 rent going to the bank is entirely excess

payment. The bank extracts payments by threatening to liquidate at date 1 for X1. If the amount

owed to date-1 claimants is less than X1 so that the banker gets some rents at date 1, the

entrepreneur could offset the rent the bank collects at date 2 by paying less at date 1. But if the

bank pays out everything it gets at date 1 to claimants, the rent at date 2 cannot be offset and

becomes entirely excess payment by the entrepreneur.


        In particular, the total amount the entrepreneur pays is



                 X1
                      s
                                RLq
                          + Max S M c P − βX h − d X
                                   H
                                   2s       1   H         s           C
                                                                          iOPQ UVW
                                                              − d1 − π 1 ,0                           (7)
                                TN 2        2   2     1




which is the sum of his liquidation threat and the net uncompensated rent he has to pay the bank

(the term in square brackets in (7)). The higher the level of deposits, the lower is the date-1 rent

                          d             i
going to the bank, X1 − d1 − π 1C , the less there is to offset the high date-2 rent with, and the
                              s




more the total payment by the entrepreneur. The most that can be paid by the entrepreneur is

when d1 = X1s so that the bank's date-1 rent is zero, and all the rent paid at date 2 is excess

payment. As (7) suggests, the total payment by the entrepreneur is then a function of P21. When

the entrepreneur has to pledge the maximum date-2 amount possible for the bank to avoid

liquidation, P21=X2H. Therefore, with such a cash-poor entrepreneur, the bank can extract up to

            (1 − β ) H                                                               ~
X1 + q2Hs           X 2 which, using the second inequality in (3) is greater than E[ X 2 | s] .
               2


        Of course, a deposit intensive date-1 capital structure that shortens the bank’s horizons

can also hurt its ability to extract repayment if the entrepreneur's project generates a lot of cash at

date 1. To see this, if the entrepreneur generates enough cash at date 1 so that P21≤βX2H , the



                                                                                                      29
                                                ~
total payment given by (7) is only X1s. If E ( X 2 | s) > X 1s , the entrepreneur will pay less to the bank

than a patient bank can extract, and the shortening of horizon makes the bank “weak”. Thus the

amount that can be extracted from the entrepreneur depends in a non-monotonic on the bank's

leverage and the entrepreneur's liquidity.


2.3.4. Related Literature.


        While others (Berglof and Von Thadden (1994), Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), and

Dewatripont and Tirole (1994)) have analyzed the role of multiple creditors in “toughening” up a

borrower’s capital structure, we do not know of any other work that examines the effect of a

tough capital structure on an intermediary’s behavior towards borrowers. The closest work to ours

is Perotti and Spier (1993) who examine the role of senior debt claims on management’s ability to

extract concessions from unions. In their model, management can credibly threaten to under-

invest by taking on senior debt. Of course, this is simply a ploy to extract concessions from unions.

In our model, a deposit intensive capital structure allows the bank to credibly threaten to liquidate.

However, if the bank gains it is not because the borrower makes concessions, but because he is

forced to make overly expensive future promises to avoid liquidation.


2.4. General Characterization of Date 1


Thus far, we have only examined a special case, albeit one that contains the most interesting

implications. More generally,


Proposition 1


If the entrepreneur has to renegotiate his payment at date 1, the outcomes are as follows.




                                                                                                       30
                                    Safe        Risky
1) If d1 > Max{P                           ,P           , X1s} , the entrepreneur offers nothing at date 1 and there is a bank

                                                                                                1+ β             ~
                                                                                                       X1 , βE [ X 2 | s]} , and
                                                                                                         s
run. The run reduces the amount collected by depositors to Max{
                                                                                                 2

drives the payoff of capital and the banker to zero. In the rest of the proposition, the level of d 1 is

                                                                 Safe        Risky       s
assumed less than or equal to Max{P                                     ,P           , X1 } .


                        Safe        Risky
                                            } ≥ X1 then the bank cannot use its date-1 liquidation threat. If
                                                        s
2) If Max{P                    ,P

    Risky        Safe
P           >P          , there is a level of date-1 net deposits beyond which the amount collected from the

                            ~             Risky        Risky    Safe
entrepreneur falls from E [ X 2 | s] to P       . If P       ≤ P the level of date-1 net deposits has

                                                    ~
no effect on total collections which are always E [ X 2 | s] .


             Risky             Safe
                        <P            < X1 , there is a d* such that for every d1> d*, we can find a C1Liq (d1 ) such
                                                s
3 a) If P

that the entrepreneur will be liquidated with some probability if he defaults at date 1 when

                                        ~
C1s< C1Liq . 3 b) If further, X 1s > E[ X 2 | s] , there is a d** such that for every d1> d** , there is a

range [ C1* , C1** ) such that the bank extracts more than X1s from the entrepreneur if

C1 s ∈[C1* , C1** ) . For any given d1>d**, the amount extracted by the bank increases until C1s equals

C1* and then decreases monotonically as C1s increases.


            ~
3 c) If E [ X 2 | s] > X 1 s , there is a d*** such that for every d1>d*** , there is a range [ C1' , C1'' ) such

                                     ~
that the bank extracts more than E [ X 2 | s] from the entrepreneur iff C1 s ∈[C1' , C1'' ) . There is a C1

such that the bank extracts only X1s iff C1s≥ C1 . For any given d1>d***, the amount extracted by

the bank increases until C1s equals C1’ and then decreases monotonically as C1s increases.




                                                                                                                                   31
          Risky        Safe
                  <P          < X1 , then capital structure has no effect on the expected amount the bank
                                  s
4) If P

                ~                           ~
extracts if E [ X 2 | s] ≤ X 1 s . When E [ X 2 | s] > X 1 s , there is a d such that the bank extracts less than

    ~
E [ X 2 | s] iff d1≥ d.


Proof: See Appendix.


          We have seen that at date 2, a higher level of deposits in the capital structure has two

effects. It increases the chances of a bank run, and it decreases the rent absorbed by the banker.

The proposition suggests there is an additional effect of capital structure at date 1; it changes the

amount that can be extracted from the entrepreneur. The most general rationale is that a deposit

intensive capital structure gives the bank a need for cash. This can hurt the bank's ability to

extract if the entrepreneur has lots of cash since he can take advantage of the bank's need for

liquidity to drive down payments. By contrast, if the entrepreneur has little cash, he has to make

excessive future payments because the bank can credibly discount future promised payments at a

high rate -- the rate which the bank's investors will demand given the project's illiquidity to put up

money to help the bank survive today. Thus borrowers may have to make greater expected

payments than if they were faced by a less constrained lender.


                                                Section III: Date 0

Proposition 1 is perhaps the most important result in the paper. It indicates the effects of a pre-

existing capital structure on the payments that will be made by an entrepreneur, and on the bank's

health. The banker's choice of capital structure at date 0 is then simply a matter of aggregating the

effects across multiple states, and choosing an optimal capital structure given that he wants to

maximize the amount of surplus he captures over the two periods. Clearly, the optimal structure

depends on the competitive environment, the available projects, and the amount of funds he starts



                                                                                                             32
out with. Space considerations restrict us to examining only the case of perfect competition in the

banking sector where all projects for which the banker can raise sufficient capital by pledging

payments to outside depositors and capital are funded. 13 As shown in the previous section, higher

deposits can increase the amount collected by the bank but some of it stays as a rent in the bank.

Therefore, unless the bank has its own funds up front to pay for the ex post rents it will extract, it

cannot lend more as a result of its higher collections. This suggests two sub cases -- the first when

the banker starts with no money of his own and the second when he has an initial endowment of

inside capital.

3.1. Date-0 Trade-offs when banking is competitive and banker has no funds of his own.

              When the banker has no funds of his own at date 0, the level of deposits going into date 1

will be set such that it minimizes the rent that flows to the banker, provided the project can be fully

funded. Let there be two states of nature at date 1, H and L, where s denotes the state of nature.

The maximum that can be pledged to outsiders at date 1 for a particular state indicates the level of

claims that can be refinanced. This maximum is given by P1 ( s) ≡ max{ X 1s , P Risky( s ), P Safe( s )} ,

where P Risky and P Safe are the maximum date-2 pledgeable cash flows with date 2 state

probabilities that are conditional on state s at date 1. Without loss of generality, let the amount

pledgeable at date 1 in state H exceed the amount pledgeable in state L. The bank can finance

with safe deposits at date 0 if d1 ≤ P1( L ) . This implies a date 1 rent to the banker when state H

occurs. The total amount that can be raised through deposits and capital at date 0 is then

                                                        ~
            = P1 ( L ) + q1H       [max[β max{ X1 , E [ X 2 | H ]} − P1 ( L ),0] + 12 [P1 ( H ) − P1( L )]
     Safe                      1                 H
P0                             2                                                                             .

where the second term is the rent that accrues to capital at date 1 in state H.




13
 For a paper that obtains the pricing and quantities of bank capital in an equilibrium setting, see Gorton and
Winton (1995).

                                                                                                                 33
             If deposits d1 exceed P1(L) , there will be a run at date 1 in state L. This reduces the

                                                     1+ β L         ~
pledgeable payment to outsiders in that state to max{    X 1 , βE [ X 2 | L ]} . The maximum that
                                                      2

can be raised at date 0, given a run in the low state at date 1, is then obtained by setting

d1 = P1 ( H ) . The date-0 amount raised is

                                             1+ β L       ~
             ≡ q1H P1 ( H ) + (1 − q1H ) max{    X1 , βE[ X 2 | L ]} .
     Risky
P0
                                              2

             It is now easy to see the date-0 capital structure under competition. If $1 has to be

raised and P0 Risky ≥ 1 > P1 ( L ) , and P1 Risky (H) ≥ P1Safe ( H ) , so no rents need be given to the

banker, the firm is best off borrowing from a risky bank. Of course, this result would be tempered

if the firm suffered some (unmodeled) costs when the bank was in financial distress. By contrast,

if P0 Safe ≥ 1 > P0 Risky , the project cannot be financed with risky deposits. The bank will choose to

raise a level of deposits at date 0 that will be safe in all states at date 1. It will issue capital to fund

the rest of the project. So even under competition, rents will accrue to the banker, simply because

he is liquidity constrained (in the sense of having no inside capital) and cannot pay for the rents up

front.

3.2. Date-0 Trade-offs when banker has funds of his own.


             Now let the banker have the endowment to pay up-front for the rents he extracts. The

level of deposits going into date 1 is determined by trading off the total amount collected from the

entrepreneur (which varies with the level of deposits as seen in the previous section) against the

risk of runs (which increases with deposits). A highly levered bank may now have a comparative

advantage in funding an entrepreneur who expects to generate only modest amounts of cash at

interim dates --the bank can extract more from such an entrepreneur and thus can lend more

                                                                         ~
money up front. By contrast, as proposition 1 suggests, if E ( X 2 | s) > X 1s , an entrepreneur with

                                                                                                          34
high anticipated date-1 cash inflows may prefer a well-capitalized bank since such a bank can

wait to liquidate, and will collect E( X 2 | s) . Thus our theory predicts a matching between banks

and entrepreneurs for which there is some empirical evidence (see Hubbard, et al. (1998)).

                                     IV. Robustness

Let us now examine how robust our model is to changes in assumptions.

4.1.     Actions other than threats to quit.

         Because the financial asset requires the banker’s collection skills, the threat of dismissal

is not always a credible sanction. However, a run serves to discipline and thus helps control

many actions that can be observed by outsiders. The discipline occurs because depositors,

anticipating losses, run and disintermediate the banker, driving his rents to zero.

         Actions that can be controlled by the threat of disintermediation include the bank operating

inefficiently, making poor credit decisions, incurring excessive labor costs, or even substituting

assets. Some of these actions entail losses to depositors (and benefits to the banker) that are not

imposed instantaneously. In such cases, or in cases where a banker’s threats cannot be responded

to immediately, some short-term debt could mature before the threat is carried out or responded

to. Such short-term debt could have properties similar to demand deposits, and this is what we

now examine. 14

4.2. Can the intermediary do without demandable debt?

         Demand deposits have three important characteristics. First, depositors can ask for

repayment at any time. Second, they have priority over any other claim if they ask for repayment.

Third, if there are multiple depositors, each one can establish priority with respect to the other only


14
  We assume the information possessed by depositors is obtained freely and depositors do not spend
money to monitor the bank. A generalization of our approach is to consider either low cost monitoring of
information about banker actions, or situations where a subset of depositors learn banker actions and
incipient runs reveal information to other depositors. This would allow us to incorporate the insights of
Calormis-Kahn [1991], where the fact that the first few depositors get paid in full provides incentives for the



                                                                                                             35
by seizing cash and forcing disintermediation. An important question is to what extent a financial

intermediary can create liquidity as easily by financing with short-term debt. What properties of

demand deposits are necessary for our result?

         It turns out that it is hard for the intermediary to reproduce the effects of demand deposits

without issuing something that looks very much like a deposit. To see why, suppose the bank

finances at date 1 by issuing a single class of short-term debt maturing in one period. If, at date 2,

the banker attempts to renegotiate payments, the short-term creditors will have no option but to

give in; because they are treated identically, they are better off accepting the banker's terms. The

important difference between short-term debt and demand deposits here is not maturity, but that

all creditors in the same class of short-term debt enjoy the same seniority, so there is no collective

action problem to force disintermediation and discipline on the bank. It is thus important that some

creditors should be able to achieve priority only by demanding payment. This then leads to

disintermediation.

         Of course, by allowing all the action to take place only at date 1 or date 2, we are

obscuring differences in maturity that exist between demand deposits and short term debt. This

could lead to additional differences in the ability to control bank rents. For instance, suppose that

the banker's demand for rents has to be responded to before any debt matures. Then the holders

of the various classes and maturities of debt who would be impaired by the banker’s threat if it

were carried out, will make concessions. Importantly, the unimpaired classes will not impose any

discipline on the banker. Even if some of this debt matures before the banker’s threat can be

carried out, they will not demand payment on maturity if granted sufficient future priority to keep

them unimpaired.




monitoring of malfeasance, and of Park [1999] where potentially impaired senior creditors have the strongest
incentive to monitor a borrower.

                                                                                                         36
           If, however, the banker cannot maintain maturing debt's effective priority over other

classes of debt going forward, then maturing short-term debt can have features similar to demand

deposits. If the banker cannot offer maturing creditors a future claim equal in worth to what they

can get immediately, they will demand immediate payment. The amount of disintermediation that

will occur is then equal to the amount of demand deposits plus the amount of debt maturing before

the banker’s threat can be responded to by creditors. The banker’s rents will be restricted to a

function of the extra value that he can collect on the assets that remain in the bank.

           Finally, we have ignored throughout the paper any rationale for investors themselves to

want demandable claims. If, as in Diamond and Rajan (1999), investors have random liquidity

needs, then demandable deposits would be preferable to short maturity debt even if they have

similar disciplinary effects.

4.3. Multiple Borrowers.

           We have analyzed outcomes with only one borrower. Does the bank’s ability to extract

more than Max[ X1s , E ( X2 | s )] change if it had multiple borrowers? The qualitative answer is no.

Whether assets are contained in one borrower or multiple borrowers, the bank has the right to

liquidate if the borrower defaults. Of course, since the debt capacity of each borrower is the

maximum of his project’s date-1 and date-2 liquidation values, the sum of individual debt capacities

will be more than the maximum of aggregate date-1 and date-2 liquidation values.15 Nevertheless,

the principles we have examined will apply.

           For example, the use of the date-2 liquidation threat may dominate for some borrowers.

However, if the bank has issued sufficient demand deposits, it may have to threaten to liquidate

some of these borrowers at date 1 itself. There is qualitatively nothing new if it has to threaten to

liquidate all borrowers to meet the needs of claimants. There will be no strategic interaction


15
     By Jensen’s inequality, the sum of maximums is greater than the maximum of the sums.

                                                                                                     37
between borrowers – each of them will have to pay up in order to avoid liquidation. If, however,

the bank does not need to threaten all borrowers with date-1 liquidation because its capital

structure allows it some slack, the bank may have to discriminate between borrowers. Assuming

that at each date, it can choose the sequence in which it negotiates with borrowers, our analysis

indicates the bank should negotiate first with the cash rich while it still has the leeway to meet its

pressing needs from later borrowers. This allows it to use the date-2 liquidation threat with the

cash rich – somewhat paradoxically, it will not press the cash rich for immediate payment. As it

concludes these deals and its leeway to accept future payments falls, it should negotiate with the

cash poor who will have to make expensive future promises to avoid immediate liquidation – the

cash poor will be leaned on heavily. Thus apart from possibly variations in the behavior of a highly

levered bank towards heterogenous borrowers, there is nothing qualitatively different in the

analysis of multiple borrowers.

4.4. Could the entrepreneur issue deposits?

        One could also ask why the entrepreneur does not reduce his cost of capital by directly

issuing demand deposits. It turns out that since the entrepreneur's human capital is still essential ex

post to the generation of cash flows, he cannot commit to lower rents by issuing demand deposits.

Intuitively, depositors in the firm will seize the firm's assets after a run. But since the entrepreneur

is still the best user of the assets, they will rehire the entrepreneur after they take the assets, and

thus will be forced to pay him his rents. Unlike the banker, the entrepreneur is not redundant ex

post, and hence demand deposits that induce depositors to grab assets do not discipline him. As a

result, demand deposits will be much less effective in the capital structure of industrial firms, and

firm capital structure will tend towards irrelevance.

4.5. Cash and Collateral.

        Thus far, we have not examined what happens if either the entrepreneur or the bank store



                                                                                                      38
cash. If cash is simply treated as an asset with β=1, it turns out that the storage of cash has no

effect on our results. For example, at date 1 only net debt, P1-cf, or d1-cb matter, where cf is cash

stored by the firm at date 0 and cb is cash stored by the bank. So everything that is achieved by

holding cash is achieved by taking on less debt.

         Stored cash does have use if it cannot be seized by the lender but can be used at the

borrower's discretion. Essentially, as in Hart and Moore (1998), it is one way to make simple

                                                      ~
contracts more contingent. To see this, let C1L + E [ X 2 | L] < X 1L so that the bank will liquidate in

the low date-1 state if the entrepreneur defaults. In order to avoid liquidation in the low state, the

entrepreneur must not be required to pay more than P1 ≤ C1L . But this will limit what he can pay

                               ~
in the high state to C1L + E [ X 2 | H ] . If the date 1 liquidation threat in the high state allows the bank

                                                    ~
to collect more than this (i.e., X1H > C1L + E[ X 2| H ] ) then liquidation in the low state may be

averted only at the cost of drastically reducing the total amount the entrepreneur can commit to

pay.

         Stored cash that the entrepreneur has complete discretion over can help in this situation. 16

The bank could lend the entrepreneur 1+x at date 0, set P1 = ∞ , and have him hold cash of cf=x.

In the low state at date 1, the entrepreneur can avoid liquidation by pledging

             ~
x + C1L + E[ X2 | L] = X1L . In the high state, the entrepreneur will pay X1H . So the collateral value

in the high state at date 1 can be fully utilized without incurring excessive liquidation.

         It turns out that the role cash plays is identical to that played by a clause giving the

borrower an inviolable claim to a fixed quantity of the assets on liquidation. When C1 is low, the

bank can be deterred from liquidation even if the entrepreneur defaults by reducing the amount the



16
   In other words, the cash is held in such a form that it is not available to the bank when the bank liquidates
-- either because the borrower has transformed it (see Myers and Rajan (1998)) or because the borrower has
stored it in a form only he can access.

                                                                                                             39
bank can keep of liquidation proceeds. If the first x units of liquidation proceeds go elsewhere, for

example to the entrepreneur, then the bank will only liquidate after a default if C1 plus what the

                                                                                  ~
borrower can pledge at date 2 is less than X1s − x . By setting x = X1 − C1 − E [ X 2 | L ] ,
                                                                      L    L




liquidation is avoided after a default in state L. In state H, the bank can then collect up to

                                                        ~
 X1H − x which may be substantially more than C1L + E [ X 2 | H ] .

         In practice, it may be hard to give the entrepreneur an inalienable part of the underlying

project, especially when the project is not divisible. In addition, even if this were easy, there could

be times when the liquidation values are too high, and this will give the entrepreneur incentives to

store cash to blunt the lender’s liquidation ability. Our model predicts entrepreneurs will hold extra

cash to keep control either when a cash shortage could lead to liquidation or when a cash shortage

could increase the amount that the lender can extract. These roles for cash can be part of the

original implicit deal, and anticipated by the bank. 17

4.6. Uncertainty and incomplete contracts

         State contingent deposit contracts would allow the promised payment to depositors to

fluctuate with the state and thus allow the bank to pay out everything to depositors. We have

assumed that the uncertainty is non-contractible so that the bank cannot write such contracts.18

Alternatively, if the state were contractible, the bank could purchase insurance against poor

borrower repayment outcomes, rather than using capital as an indirect hedge against uncertainty.

We do not explicitly model the constraints that prevent contingent contracting. Previous work has



17
   This suggests a role for cash balances different from the traditional one. Instead of giving the bank greater
comfort or collateral, fungible cash balances that can be drawn down at the discretion of the entrepreneur
offer him a way to limit the bank's power in a way that enhances overall efficiency.
18
   While deposits cannot be contingent on the state, we do allow loans seized from the bank to be sold at a
market price that is state contingent. More plausibly, the bank sells loans, and realizes cash to repay
depositors. If loans are heterogenous, and the bank can choose what to sell, it may be hard to infer from a
few loan sales what the state is. But many loans are sold only if the bank is largely disintermediated.
Therefore loan sale prices will reflect the state only if the bank is run. In general, therefore, loan sale prices
cannot be used to make normal deposit payments contingent on the state, even if sale prices were verifiable.

                                                                                                              40
motivated these limits in settings very similar to ours by private information (Townsend [1979],

Diamond [1984]), unobservable renegotiation possibilities (Hart-Moore [1999]), coalition formation

(Bond [1999]) or collateral constraints (Holmstrom-Tirole [1998], Krishnamurthy [1999]). We

intend in future work to examine the relative roles of capital and risk management in settings

where some limited contingent contracts would be feasible.

        Our model has some common features with that in Diamond [1984]. The value lost from

disintermediation in our model has a role somewhat similar to the distress costs (non-pecuniary

penalties) in Diamond [1984] that help to resolve ex-post information asymmetry. In both models,

a borrower’s uncertain ability to repay leads useful commitment devices to be ex-post costly for

some realizations. In Diamond [1984], it is shown that deposit contracts should be contingent on

observable aggregate shocks (or risk management contracts should be conditioned on these

shocks), but uncertainty remains because idiosyncratic shocks cannot be written into contracts.

Unlike Diamond [1984], we do not have explicit private information, but if one believes that there

are some easily contractible aggregate shocks, one should interpret the uncertainty in our model as

conditional on the realization of these aggregate shocks. In addition, as in Diamond [1984], the

bank’s loan should be interpreted as a diversified portfolio of loans. Diversification within the bank

can reduce the probability that runs and deposit defaults occur. Diversification and risk

management are substitutes for capital. Without a theory of the effects of bank capital, it has not

been possible to analyze the tradeoffs between these responses to uncertainty. We hope that our

approach will provide a foundation for this analysis.


                           Section V: Policy Issues and Conclusion

        Our framework allows us to comment on the effects of policies such as capital

requirements. We describe the trade-offs highlighted in our model that have not figured

prominently in the policy debate.


                                                                                                   41
5.1. The effects of minimum capital requirements

         Minimum capital requirements specify a minimum capital to asset ratio required to enter

banking or to continue to operate as a bank. 19 This limits the use of deposits as a commitment

device. As the permissible fraction of deposits is reduced, the amount that a bank can pledge to

outsiders is reduced (i.e., its effective cost of capital increases). For a bank that continues to

operate, a binding capital requirement makes the bank safer, increases the banker’s rent, and

reduces the bank’s ability to pay outside investors.

         Now consider the effect of a binding current capital requirement on a bank's interaction

with borrowers. If a very strict capital requirement is imposed, such as allowing no deposits at all

in the future, the most that a bank can commit to pay outsiders at date 2 is the market value of its

                                                  Safe        Risky          1+ β       ~
loans (pledgeability goes down from max{P                ,P           } to          E [ X 2 | s] as more capital is
                                                                              2

required). By contrast, the bank can collect its full liquidation threat immediately, and this threat is

unchanged by the requirements. As a result, given a pre-existing set of claimants that have to be

paid, an increase in future capital requirements makes it more likely that the banker will need to

enforce the immediate liquidation threat, which will lead to liquidation if the borrower has very little

cash. The liquidation threat can also increase payments extracted if the borrower has moderate

cash, because future promises from the borrower have less value under the stricter capital

requirements. Finally, as seen earlier, if the borrower has sufficient cash and the future liquidation

threat is more valuable than the immediate one, the shortening of bank horizons induced by the

changed capital requirement can reduce collections. Thus an increase in capital requirements has

very diverse effects on a bank's customers, causing a "credit crunch" for the cash poor and

potentially alleviating the debt burden of the cash rich. Finally, and paradoxically, by reducing the


19
  See Berger et al. (1995), Kane (1995), and Benston et al. (1986) for rationales for minimum capital
requirements.

                                                                                                                      42
bank's future ability to pledge (i.e., by increasing its cost of capital), an abrupt transition to higher

capital requirements can lead to a bank run because maturing deposits may exceed what the bank

can pledge while maintaining capital at required levels.

5.1.1 Long run effects of capital requirements

A binding future capital requirement will reduce a bank’s ability to fund itself today. The amount

that a bank can raise at date 0, depends on what it can commit to pay out at date 1. If the bank

relies on liquidation threats at date 1, capital requirements do not reduce pledgeability. But if

               Safe        Risky
X1 < max{P
   s
                      ,P           } , higher capital requirements reduce the amount that can be pledged to

those outside the bank. This can prevent the funding of entrepreneurs with projects with high

payoffs in the more distant future.

         In summary, capital requirements have subtle effects, affecting the flow of credit, and

even making the bank riskier. These effects emerge only when the capital requirements are seen

in the context of the functions the bank performs rather than in isolation.

5.2. The Effects of Deposit Insurance.

Thus far, we have not considered the effect of deposit insurance. In practice, bank deposits below

a certain amount have explicit insurance while bank deposits above that may enjoy some implicit

insurance if the bank is too big to fail.

         It is easy to see that at one extreme, when all depositors are insured, the insurer

intervenes early, and enjoys no special powers in negotiating, deposits have no disciplinary effect.

In such a situation, deposits essentially are no different from capital, and banks are safe but do not

create liquidity (implying that if banks raise deposits in excess of the market value of loans, the

excess will be a subsidy provided by the deposit insurer). Moreover, even if deposit insurance is

fairly priced, it interferes with private contracting and weakly reduces aggregate welfare. On the

other hand, when some deposits are uninsured (or when there is a positive probability that some


                                                                                                          43
deposits will not be bailed out), and the insurer takes its own time coming to the bank's aid, we

could get very similar effects to those in the model. Runs by uninsured depositors would still lead

to some disintermediation, and this would provide some discipline. Further, if the deposit insurer

has a committed policy of closing a bank when its capital it too low (and somehow enforces this

commitment), then our results again follow. See Diamond [1999] for an analysis of recent

Japanese banking using this approach.

         We have not considered the possibility of panic-based runs (perhaps resulting from

depositor fears that refinancing will not be available) or aggregate liquidity shortages which are

central to the rationale for deposit insurance in Diamond-Dybvig [1983] or Holmstrom-Tirole

[1997]. If these events have a positive probability of occurring, deposit insurance can have

benefits that have to be traded off against its costs of reduced commitment. Firm conclusions

await further research.

5.3. Intervention in a Crisis.

         Consider a financial crisis where a number of firms are short of cash and are threatened with

liquidation by banks, while banks themselves are insolvent and face imminent runs by depositors. If the

regulatory authorities want to minimize failure, how best should they target resources?

         While a complete answer is not possible without parameterizing the problem more fully, our model

points to some issues that are often overlooked. It is usually thought that the infusion of cash (i.e., capital)

into either the industrial sector or the banking sector should make both sectors better off. This is not the

case since the infusion of cash can increase (and sometimes decrease) the targeted sector's bargaining

power vis a vis the other sector.

          If the industrial sector gets cash, some firms will be able to avoid liquidation, and repay

their loans. This may not make the banking sector any better, since it would have recovered the

money anyway by liquidating. Other firms may be able to survive by committing to pay the banks

more in the long run, with little effect on the banks' current state. And still other firms will be able



                                                                                                               44
to take advantage of the banking sector's weakened state and short horizon, and negotiate their

repayments down in return for immediate payment. This will hurt the long run viability of the

banking sector. Finally, the cash infusion that goes to firms that are already cash rich will have no

effect on repayments or on failures. On net, the industrial sector will definitely be made better off

by the infusion, though some of it may go waste (also see Holmstrom and Tirole (1998)). The

banking sector may be made worse off depending on the distribution of borrowers in the economy.

           Consider now a cash (i.e., capital) infusion to the banking sector. An infusion only large

enough to prevent bank runs from taking place may simply lead to the industrial sector being

squeezed harder. If the infusion did not take place, banks would have to sell loans to stave off a

run (or actually be run), and firms would be able to negotiate their debts down with the new

creditors. The infusion helps banks just survive without selling loans, but forces them to be tough

with their borrowers. Some firms will be liquidated, while others may just survive by mortgaging

their future to the banks. The industrial sector could be made worse off by such an infusion. Of

course, a greater cash infusion will extend bank horizons, enabling banks to use long run liquidation

threats, and help the industrial sector escape liquidation without transferring excessive value to the

banking sector. Thus the re-capitalization of the banking sector may have to be really large in

order to have a positive influence on the industrial sector. More work is needed to quantify these

effects.

5.4. Conclusion

           We have presented a theory of bank capital in a model where the bank’s asset side and

liability side are intimately tied together. We have identified at least three effects of bank capital –

on bank safety, on the bank’s ability to refinance at low cost, and on the bank’s ability to extract

repayment from, or its willingness to liquidate, borrowers. A large number of avenues for future

research have only been sketched and deserve much more detailed exploration.



                                                                                                        45
                                            References.

Allen, F. and D. Gale [1998], "Optimal Financial Crises", Journal of Finance, vol 53, no 4, 1245-
1284.

Benston, G., R. Eisenbeis, P. Horvitz, E. Kane, and G. Kaufman, [1986], Perspectives on Safe
and Sound Banking: Past, Present, and Future (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA).
Berger, Allen, Richard Herring, and Giorgio Szego [1995], “The role of capital in financial
institutions”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 19, 393-430.

Berglof, Erik and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden [1994], Short-Term versus Long-Term Interests:
  Capital Structure with Multiple Investors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1055-1084.

Bolton, Patrick and David Scharfstein [1996], Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of
  Creditors, Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1-25.

Bond, Phillip [1999], “Joint Liability and the Structure of Financial Intermediaries,” University of
  Chicago dissertation, June 1999.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn [1991], “The Role of Demandable Debt in
  Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements” The American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3.
  (Jun., 1991), pp. 497-513.

Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole [1994], “A Theory of Debt and equity: Diversity of
  Securities and Manager-Shareholder Congruence", Quarterly Journal of Economics 109,
  1027-1054.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig [1983], “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
  Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Diamond, D. and R. Rajan [1999], “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility:
A theory of banking”, mimeo, University of Chicago.

Flannery, M., 1994, Debt maturity and the deadweight cost of leverage: Optimally financing
   banking firms, American Economic Review, 84, 320-331.

Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi [1990]"Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation",
Journal of Finance 45: 49-71.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Winton [1995], “Bank Capital in General Equilibrium”, N.B.E.R.
working paper 5244.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, v109 n4 (November 1994), pp. 841-79.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore [1998], “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of
  Debt,” Quarterly Journal of Economics; v113 n1 February 1998, pp. 1-41.

                                                                                                 46
Hart, Oliver and John Moore [1999], " Foundations of Incomplete Contracts", mimeo, Harvard
  University.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole [1997], “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
  Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 52 (August): 663-692.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole [1998], “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political
  Economy 106 (February): 1-40.

Hubbard, R.G., K. Kuttner and D. Palia [1998], "Are there "bank effects" in borrowers' cost of
  funds? Evidence from a matched sample of borrowers and banks", mimeo, Columbia
  University.

Kane, Edward, [1995], “Three paradigms for the role of capitalization requirements in insured
  financial institutions, Journal of Banking and Finance, 19, 431-459.

Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein [1999], “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation for the
  Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit Taking”, mimeo, University of Chicago.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind [1999], "Collateral Constraints and the Credit Channel", mimeo,
Northwestern University.

Merton, R.C. and Andre Perold [1993], "Theory of Risk Capital in Financial Firms", Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance, 5, 16-32.

Miller, Merton H. [1995], “Do the M&M propositions apply to banks?”, Journal of Banking and Finance,
19, 483-490.

Myers, Stewart and Raghuram Rajan [1998], "The Paradox of Liquidity", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August 1998, vol 113: (3), pp 733-771.

Park, Cheol [1999], “Monitoring and Structure of Debt Contracts,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Perotti, Enrico and Kathy Spier [1993] "Capital Structure as a bargaining tool: The role of leverage in
contract renegotiation", American Economic Review, 83(5), 1131-1141.

Rajan, R. [1992], “Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and arm's length debt”, Journal of
  Finance 47, 1367-1400.

Stein, Jeremy C. [1998]. "An Adverse Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability Management
with Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy," RAND Journal of Economics 29:
466-486.

Townsend, Robert [1979] " Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
           State Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory v21 n2 Oct.1979, pp. 265-93.

Wojnilower, Albert [1980] "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial
       History," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, II (1980), 277-339.

                                                                                                            47
Appendix .

Proof of Proposition 1 (sketch)


                     Safe        Risky      s
1) If d 1 > Max{P           ,P           , X1 } , pledgeable bank assets are less than the face value of deposits.

Depositors know that not enough cash can be raised to pay off all the maturing deposits, therefore

they will run to seize loans (or force the bank to sell them to third parties for cash). After the run,

the loans will be in the hands of depositors. The entrepreneur can make them a direct offer.

Whether they accept or reject depends on how much they can get by rejecting. Since the banker

has been disintermediated, he has valuable collection skills this period at date 1, but they will

dissipate by date 2. So if the depositors negotiate with the banker to act as their liquidating agent

                                                                                                 (1 − β ) s
at date 1, the banker will collect X1s from the entrepreneur and pocket a fee of                         X1 ,
                                                                                                    2

           (1 + β ) s
leaving            X1 for depositors. Alternatively, the depositors may prefer to wait till date 2 and
              2
                                                    ~
exercise their expected liquidation threat of β E [ X 2 | s ] . Thus depositors can expect to get

          (1 + β ) s          ~
Max[              X 1 , β E [ X 2 | s ]] by rejecting the offer. This is the offer the entrepreneur will
             2

make to them directly, and the banker will get cut out.

          The entrepreneur has the ability to make this offer; even if he has no cash, he can

                                                  (1 + β ) s                                 ~
liquidate himself and pay depositors                      X1 and he can always promise β E [ X 2 | s ] . Would
                                                     2

he prefer to not liquidate himself and take his chance with the banker? The answer is no. To avoid

liquidation, he would need to offer the bank cash and future promises totaling X1s. But since the

bank has no better ability to enforce future payments by the entrepreneur, when the entrepreneur




                                                                                                                48
                                                                                              (1 + β ) s
can avoid liquidation by the banker, he also can promise depositors                                   X1 without liquidating
                                                                                                 2

himself.

                   Safe        Risky                      ~
                                       } ≥ X1 only if E [ X 2 | s ] > X 1s . If the banker rejects an offer from the
                                             s
2)   Max{P                ,P

     entrepreneur, he will simply wait till date 2 to threaten liquidation and extract cash. Liquidation

     at date 1 is dominated. As a result, the entrepreneur will offer P11=0, P21=X2H and the offer

     will be accepted. The banker will want to use a safe level of date-2 deposits as far as

                                                          ~
     possible because this ensures he gets to extract E [ X 2 | s] from the entrepreneur. Let d1* be

                                                  Safe
     such that = π C1+d 1* = P                           (if there are many d1* that satisfy this equality, let d1*be the

                                Safe          Risky
     highest). If P                    <P             , then for d1> d1*, the banker will not be able to issue safe date-2

     deposits and still meet the needs of investors at date 1 (since, by inspection, π C1+d 1 strictly

     increases in d1 after an initial region where it does not change with d1). Once he has to issue

     risky date 2 deposits, funds raised at date-1 go up to meet investor claims, but funds extracted

                                                      ~             Risky       Safe Risky
     at date 2 from the entrepreneur go down from E [ X 2 | s] to P       . If P ≥ P       there is

     no need to switch to issuing risky deposits.


           Risky           Safe
                    <P            < X1 , then the banker will liquidate when he gets more from doing so than
                                          s
3a) If P

continuing, or when he simply cannot continue even though he wants to. For a borrower to not be

able to stave off liquidation, either of the following conditions must be true:


                                                          ~
                                                      E ( X2 | s ) + C1s < X1s                                               (8)


                                                      P Safe + C1s < π 1c + d1                                               (9)




                                                                                                                             49
The first condition is that the entrepreneur not have enough resources to bribe the banker. The

second is that the banker cannot raise enough resources even with the entrepreneur's full co-

operation to be able to commit enough to investors without liquidating. It then follows that

                      ~
C1Liq = Max[ X1s − E( X 2| s ), π 1c + d1 − P Safe ] where it should be noted that π 1c is also dependent

on d1.


                                                                              (1 − β ) H
3 b) We claim that d** solves d1+ π 1c =X1- π B2 where π B2 = q2H                     X 2 is the maximum rent
                                                                                 2

the bank can extract at date 2 when deposits are set at the safe level. 20To see why this is true,

note that the bank can extract more than X1s only when the entrepreneur, in order to placate

outside investors, makes date-2 promises whose value to the bank exceeds their current

pledgeable value. Were it not for this pressure, i.e., if the entrepreneur only had to satisfy the

bank, he would simply pay the bank a total of X1s over the two periods, and the bank would be

satisfied. Therefore the question we have to ask is what is the minimum level of deposits at which

the entrepreneur, in placating the outside investors, ends up overpaying. Consider an entrepreneur

who has just enough cash, C1s, to enable the bank to meet the demands of outside investors

through current cash and future promises. So C1s = π 1c + d1 − P Safe . Such an entrepreneur has to

                                                      ~
make the maximum date-2 promise of E[ X2 | s] to avoid liquidation at date 1, and hence will end

up paying more than an entrepreneur with more current cash. Of course, an entrepreneur with

                                                                                                                ~
less cash will be liquidated. The total payment by this entrepreneur to the bank is C1s + E[ X 2 | s] .

Substituting for C1s, we get the total payment made by this entrepreneur to be

                        ~
π 1c + d1 − P Safe + E[ X 2| s ] . Now if d1> d**, π 1c + d1 > X1s − π B2 . Therefore, total payments are




     If multiple d ** solve d1+ π 1 =X1- π 2 (since the l.h.s is weakly increasing in d 1initially), we pick the highest
20                               c        B


such value.

                                                                                                                      50
                                         ~                                ~
greater than X1s − π 2B − P Safe + E[ X 2| s ] . But π B2 + P Safe = E[ X 2 | s] . Substituting, we get total

payments exceeding X1s. It is easily shown that when π 1c + d1 < X1s − π B2 , the amount the

entrepreneur has to pay the bank in order for the bank to meet the claims of investors does not

exceed X1s. Hence we obtain d** is the solution to d1+ π 1c =X1- π B2 .


         For d1> d**, the entrepreneur who will overpay the most is one who can just avoid

liquidation. So C1* ( d1 ) = π 1c + d1 − P Safe . Obviously, one with less cash will not be able to meet

the needs of investors and will not overpay. 21 As entrepreneurs have more cash, the date-2

promise necessary to escape liquidation falls, and the rent embedded in the date-2 promise, as well

as overpayment, fall. When C1s is high enough that the rent to the bank embedded in the date-2

promise falls below the date-1 rent the bank extracts, the entrepreneur will not overpay since he

will simply offset one rent against the other. If P12 is the promised date-2 payment that avoids

liquidation, and assuming βP12 > X 2L (only the expression for the rent changes if this is not true,

and that case is easily handled), we require


                                  (1 − β ) 2
                            q2H           P1 = X1s − π 1c − d1                                 (10)
                                     2


The right hand side of (3) is the date-1 rent the bank expects while the left hand side is the date-2

rent. Now P12 is the minimum date-2 promise that will enable the entrepreneur to commit enough

to the bank's investors to avoid liquidation, so that it solves


21
  The banker need not always liquidate such entrepreneurs with probability 1. If the date 1 cash payment
and the future promise they offer is sufficiently attractive, the bank may want to continue if it can. So it may
enter the alternating offer game with capital. With probability 1/2, capital will get to make the offer and
demand the bank liquidate. With probability 1/2, the bank will make the offer and offer capital its small
outside option. Anticipating this, the entrepreneur will offer to pay the banker a little over X1s in current and
future promises, the offer will be accepted half the time, and the entrepreneur will be liquidated half the time.



                                                                                                              51
                                  (1 − β ) 2
                           q2H            P1 + (1 − q2H ) X 2L + C1** = π 1c + d1                       (11)
                                     2


Substituting for P12 from (4) in (3), we get C1**.


3 c) The first part is similar to (3 b) and is omitted. Again, when the date-2 rent the entrepreneur

has to give the bank exactly equals the date 1 rent the bank gets from liquidation, the entrepreneur

does not pay more than X1s. So C1 = C1** calculated above.


              Safe        Risky                                                    ~
                     <P           < X1 , the bank will threaten liquidation if E [ X 2 | s] ≤ X 1 s . But the promises a
                                      s
4) If P

cash constrained entrepreneur will make do not embed a date 2 rent to the bank since

    Risky
P           (which is the most valuable promise) does not contain a rent. So the banker will not be able

                                                    ~
to extract more than X1s regardless of d1. When E [ X 2 | s] > X 1 s , a low level of d1 such that

                 Safe
d1+ π 1c ≤ P            will enable the bank to continue till date 2 regardless of the entrepreneur’s offer and

            ~
extract E [ X 2 | s] . But once deposits exceed this level, the bank will have to liquidate at date 1 if it

turns down the entrepreneur’s offer (since financing using the higher level of deposits inherent in

    Risky
P           gives it no extra rent, and it is better off liquidating). As a result, entrepreneurs will offer the

bank cash and date-2 promises that enable the bank to get no rent to avoid liquidation, and the

bank will extract no more than X1s.

Lemma 2:


Proof of Lemma 2:

                                                                Safe        Risky
When X 2L < βX 2H , it is easily checked that P                        >P           iff



We assume here that liquidation is very costly to the entrepreneur so he always makes an offer to drive the
probability of liquidation to zero if he can.

                                                                                                                       52
                                                           q2H X2H < (1 − q2H ) X 2L                                                                    (12)

                                Safe                 Risky
When X 2L ≥ βX 2H , P                   >P                   iff

                                       1− β L           X H − X 2L
                            (1 − q2H )(    ) X 2 > q2H ( 2         )                                                                                    (13)
                                        2                   2


                                                                 Safe                           Risky
(i) If q2H X2H < (1 − q2H ) X 2L then P                                 is greater than P               .


By (12), this is certainly true when X 2L < βX 2H . Now consider X 2L ≥ βX 2H . We know

                                                                 (1 − β ) L        (1 − β ) H
(1 − q2H ) X 2L > q2H X 2H => (1 − q 2H )                                X 2 > q2H         X 2 . But X 2L ≥ βX 2H . So
                                                                    2                 2

  (1 − β ) H     H X2 − X2
                     H   L
                                                     H 1− β          H X2 − X2
                                                                         H   L
qH
 2        X 2 ≥ q2 (       ) . It follows that (1 − q2 )(   ) X 2 > q2 (
                                                                L
                                                                               ) , hence
     2                 2                                  2                2

     Safe                             Risky
P           is greater than P                 .

                                                  Risky                               Safe
(ii) If X 2L ≤ q2H X 2H , then P                          is greater than P                  . By inspection, inequalities (12) and (13) are

                                                                           Risky                               Safe
reversed when X 2L ≤ q2H X 2H . Hence P                                            is greater than P                  .

                                                                                                        Safe              Risky
(iii) If X 2L > q2H X 2H ≥ (1 − q2H ) X 2L , there is a β*such that P                                          >P                 iff β < β * . The relative

               Safe           Risky
size of P             and P            is unaffected by β when X 2L < βX 2H . When X 2L ≥ βX 2H , by inspection,

                                                                                                                              X 2L
there is a β’ such that (13) holds for β < β ' . Also, X 2L ≥ βX 2H => β ≤                                                         . Therefore,
                                                                                                                              X 2H

     Safe           Risky                   X 2L
P           and P           when β < min[β , H ] .           '

                                            X2

Q.E.D.




                                                                                                                                                          53
                       Figure 1


                       Bargaining between entrepreneur and lender j
                       (either j=B, j=C or j=D) at date k

                       Borrower offers alternative current and future payments,
                        Ptk , and collateral, f t k , for all t ≥ k. Borrower will not
                       supply human capital this period (date k) if no agreement
                       is reached, but will supply human capital and commit to
                       make the alternative current payment if agreement is
                       reached.




                                                                                                  Lender rejects and
Lender j rejects the                                                                              either sells loan to
offer and liquidates for                                                                          new lender who
β j X k , and retains                                                                             negotiates as
                                                                                                  above, or hires a
β j f kk −1 X k This
                                                                                                  third party to
destroys all future                                                                               negotiate the loan.
output.
β B = 1, while β D = β C < 1


                                            Lender j Accepts                    Lender j Rejects and
                                                                                negotiations end




                                                                             Current cash Ck is not
                                                                             produced. Negotiations
                                                                             start again next period.




                                                                                                        54
                                  Figure 2
                                  Bargaining within an intermediary.

                                  Banker (B) threatens to withdraw her human capital from the bargaining unless
                                  capital (C) makes concessions.



                         C can refuse, and negotiate directly
                         with entrepreneur.                                                   C accepts



                         Entrepreneur makes an offer, Pt, to C.




 C can accept
                         C rejects and
                         liquidates assets
                         now or reserves the
                         right to liquidate in
                         the future (no
                         current cash is then
                         produced).                                      C rejects and negotiate with B over who will negotiate with
                                                                  entrepreneur.
                                                                                  ½                        ½


All payments                     Cash not                          C makes final                               B makes a final offer of a fee
made                             produced                          Offer of a fee to B to                      that she will accept for
                                 this period.                      negotiate on her behalf.                    negotiating on behalf of
                                                                                                               investor C.


                                                      B Accepts.              B Rejects           C Accepts.            C Rejects.
                                                      B negotiates with    C negotiates with      B negotiates with     C negotiates with
                                                      borrower as in       borrower as in         borrower as in        borrower as in figure
                                                      figure 1.            figure 1.*             figure 1.             1.*




                *
                 If this part of the tree is entered after C rejects the entrepreneur’s offer, C now has the option
                of liquidating or negotiating with the entrepreneur but not of accepting the offer.


                                                                                                                          55
                                Figure 3
                                Bargaining with depositors.

                                Banker threatens to withdraw her human capital from the bargaining unless
                                depositors make concessions. If agreement reached, banker will make agreed
                                payments after negotiating with entrepreneur.




D accepts            D refuses, seizes specified amount of                   D does not seize asset and enters into negotiation
                     loans and negotiate directly with                       With C and B.
                     entrepreneur.

                     Entrepreneur makes an offer to D




D refuses and        D refuses, current cash not                 D enters into negotiation with B about who will negotiate with E.
liquidates assets.   produced. Right to liquidate
                     in the future is retained if                             ½                        ½
                     t=1.




                                                                 D makes final                             B makes a final offer of a fee
                                                                 Offer of a fee to B to                    that she will accept for
                                                                 negotiate on her behalf.                  negotiating on behalf of D.




                                                    B Accepts. B         B Rejects.          D Accepts. B           D Rejects
                                                    negotiates with      D negotiates with   negotiates with        D negotiates with
                                                    borrower as in       borrower as in      borrower as in         borrower as in figure
                                                    figure 1.            figure 1.*          figure 1.              1.*




              *
               If this part of the tree is entered after D rejects the entrepreneur’s offer, D now has the option
              of liquidating or negotiating with the entrepreneur but not of accepting the offer.


                                                                                                                      56
