NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ONE MONEY, ONE MARKET:
ESTIMATING THE EFFECT OF COMMON
CURRENCIES ON TRADE

Andrew K. Rose

Working Paper 7432
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7432

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999

This paper began in a series of conversations with Harry Flam; without him, the paper would not have been
written. I also thank Nils Bohlinda, Rob Feenstra, Michael Ferrantino and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti for help
with the data, and Joshua Aizenman, Samuel Bentolila, David Begg, Michele Boldrin, Dick Cooper, Barry
Eichengreen, Charles Engel, Antonio Fatas, Raquel Fernandez, Michael Ferrantino, Jeff Frankel, Jeff Frieden,
Miriam Green, Elhanan Helpman, Harry Huizinga, Ben Lockwood, Rich Lyons, Danny Quah, Richard Portes,
Assaf Razin, Helene Rey, Ken Rogoff, Andre Sapir, Larry Schembri, Alan Winters, Charles Wyplosz,
seminar participants at DG2 and Harvard, and the members of the Economic Policy panel for comments and
encouragement. Asher Isaac provided inspiration. The data set and a current version of the paper are
available at my website. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of
Common Currencies on Trade
Andrew K. Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 7432
December 1999
JEL No. F33

ABSTRACT
A gravity model is used to assess the separate effects of exchange rate volatility and currency
unions on international trade. The panel data set used includes bilateral observations for five years spanning
1970 through 1990 for 186 countries. In this data set, there are over one hundred pairings and three
hundred observations, in which both countries use the same currency. I find a large positive effect of a
currency union on international trade, and a small negative effect of exchange rate volatility, even after
controlling for a host of features, including the endogenous nature of the exchange rate regime. These
effects are statistically significant and imply that two countries that share the same currency trade three times
as much as they would with different currencies. Currency unions like EMU may thus lead to a large
increase in international trade, with all that entails.

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
B.T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Business
Economic Analysis and Policy Group
and NBER, CEPR
arose@haas.berkeley.edu
haas.berkeley.edu/~arose

