NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

G3 EXCHANGE RATE RELATIONSHIPS:
A RECAP OF THE RECORD AND A REVIEW OF
PROPOSALS FOR CHANGE

Richard H. Clarida

Working Paper 7434
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7434

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 1999 by Richard H. Clarida. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

G3 Exchange Rate Relationships: A Recap of the Record and a
Review of Proposals for Change
Richard H. Clarida
NBER Working Paper No. 7434
December 1999

ABSTRACT
This paper is a recap of G3 exchange rate relationships since the collapse of Bretton Woods and
an analysis of recent proposals for changing the way the G3 countries currently conduct exchange rate
policy. We seek to understand these proposals in the context of the status quo monetary policies and
intervention arrangements that are likely to be pursued by the G3 central banks in the absence of any formal
arrangements among their governments to limit exchange rate volatility. The advocates of the proposals
for change have made their assessment of the global costs of exchange rate volatility and (their estimates)
of exchange rate misalignments, especially as these apply to the emerging economies through their linkages
to the global capital markets. In their view, the status quo is unacceptable, and a sustained effort to limit
G3 exchange rate fluctuations would deliver benefits to the world economy that would outweigh the value
that they place on any loss of monetary autonomy in the G3 that would be required to maintain such a
system. The skeptics make a positive, not a normative, judgment that the sorts of proposals that are on
the table will not, in practice, get around the ‘impossible trinity’ of international finance.

Richard H. Clarida
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
Room 1014 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rhc2@columbia.edu

