NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A HEURISTIC METHOD FOR EXTRACTING SMOOTH
TRENDS FROM ECONOMIC TIME SERIES

Julio J. Rotemberg

Working Paper 7439
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7439

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999

I wish to thank Michael Woodford for many thought-provoking conversations, John Driscoll for comments
and the Harvard Business School Division of Research for support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Heuristic Method for Extracting Smooth Trends from
Economic Time Series
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 7439
December 1999
JEL No. E3, C1
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a method for separating economic time series into a smooth component whose
mean varies over time (the “trend'') and a stationary component (the “cycle''). The aim is to make the
trends as smooth as possible while also producing cycles with plausible properties. While the main
justification for the method is intuitive, the method does a good job of separating these two
components in some artificial examples where the constructed series are indeed the sum of smooth
(possibly stochastic) functions of time and a low order autoregressive process. When the true trends
consist of low order polynomials, the proposed method obtains trends that are of similar accuracy than
fitted polynomial trends. In other cases, the MSE of the proposed trends is much lower. Similarly, except
in quite special cases, the MSE of the proposed trend is considerably smaller than that obtained by the HP
filter. VARs that involve the cyclical variables constructed by this method yield accurate representations
of the behavior of the underlying cycles of several variables. By contrast, VARs with the series in
differences give poor descriptions of the effect of cyclical shocks, even though Dickey-Fuller tests do not
reject the hypotheses that the artificial series have unit roots. I apply the method to some well known
aggregate time series. The results suggest that real wages in the U.S. are strongly positively correlated with
military purchases and that the reduction in the growth of trend GDP in the U.S. started well before 1973.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field,
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu

