NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIAN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY: ELEPHANT OR TIGER?
NEW EVIDENCE ON THE ASIAN MIRACLE

Charles Hulten
Sylaja Srinivasan

Working Paper 7441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7441

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1999

Draft of paper prepared under the World Bank project on the effects of infrastructure on the growth of Indian
manufacturing industry. We would like to thank Esra Bennathan for his encouragement and many valuable
comments on this draft (he deserves credit for improving the better parts of the paper but no blame for the
worst), participants at the 1999 Summer Institute and the University of Michigan presentations of this paper,
and Subhashis Gangopadhyay for his help in assembling the data. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1999 by Charles Hulten and Sylaja Srinivasan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Indian Manufacturing Industry: Elephant or Tiger? New
Evidence on the Asian Miracle
Charles Hulten and Sylaja Srinivasan
NBER Working Paper No. 7441
December 1999
JEL No. O47, O11
ABSTRACT
We estimate the rate of total factor productivity growth in Indian manufacturing industry for the
period 1973-1992, and compare the results to those obtained by Young for the East Asian Tigers. We
then interpret our results in light of Krugman’s hypothesis that, because the Asian Miracle was driven by
capital formation under diminishing marginal returns, it is not sustainable. We suggest a reinterpretation of
the sustainability problem that recognizes the true role of TFP as a motive force in output growth. Past
studies have compared the TFP residual to the growth rate of output and used this ratio as a measure of
the importance of TFP as a source of growth. We argue that this is an erroneous way of assessing the role
of TFP, because it ignores the additional capital formationmade possible by an increase in productivity and
therefore understates productivity’s true importance. Our estimates suggest that the understatement may
be quite large, and that one might better ask if the growth rate of TFP, rather than capital growth, is
sustainable.

Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu

Sylaja Srinivasan
Department of Economics
University of Southhampton
Highfield Southhampton
SO17 1 BJ
UK

