                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE IMPACT OF AIR POLLUTION ON INFANT MORTALITY:
                     EVIDENCE FROM GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN POLLUTION
                              SHOCKS INDUCED BY A RECESSION



                                            Kenneth Y. Chay
                                            Michael Greenstone


                                            Working Paper 7442
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7442


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      December 1999



We are grateful to Richard Blundell, David Card, Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Bill Evans, Richard Freeman,
Jon Gruber, Michael Hanemann, Judy Hellerstein, Han Hong, Bo Honoré, Caroline Hoxby, Hilary Hoynes,
Ted Joyce, Larry Katz, Jeff Kling, Helen Levy, Ellen Meara, Aviv Nevo, Anne Piehl, Jack Porter, Jim Powell,
Chris Ruhm, Doug Staiger and participants of seminars at Princeton, UC-Berkeley, Harvard, and Maryland,
and the NBER Summer Institute Child Studies Workshop for helpful comments. Paul Torelli, Doug Almond,
Justine Hastings, and Joshua Roth provided excellent research assistance. Funding from NSF Grant No.
SBR-9730212 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from
Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession
Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone
NBER Working Paper No. 7442
December 1999
JEL No. I12, Q25, Q28

                                                ABSTRACT


        This study uses sharp, differential air quality changes across sites attributable to geographic variation
in the effects of the 1981-82 recession to estimate the relationship between infant mortality and particulates
air pollution. It is shown that in the narrow period of 1980-82, there was substantial variation across
counties in changes in particulates pollution, and that these differential pollution reductions appear to be
orthogonal to changes in a multitude of other factors that may be related to infant mortality.
        Using the most detailed and comprehensive data available, we find that a 1 mg/m3 reduction in
particulates results in about 4-8 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births at the county level (a 0.35-0.45
elasticity). The estimated effects are driven almost entirely by fewer deaths occurring within one month and
one day of birth, suggesting that fetal exposure to pollution has adverse health consequences. The
estimated effects of the pollution reductions on infant birth weight provide evidence consistent with this
potential pathophysiologic mechanism. The analysis also reveals a nonlinear relationship between pollution
and infant mortality at the county level. Importantly, the estimates are remarkably stable across a variety
of specifications. All of these findings are masked in “conventional” analyses based on less credible
research designs.



Kenneth Y. Chay                                                      Michael Greenstone
Department of Economics                                              Robert Wood Johnson Fellow
University of California, Berkeley                                   University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall                                                       140 Warren Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720                                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                                             grenstne@econ.berkeley.edu
kenchay@econ.berkeley.edu
                                                Introduction

        The impact of air pollution on infant health is a topic of considerable interest to a wide range of

researchers and policy analysts. Previous research has documented a statistical association between

differential pollution levels across sites and variation in adult health outcomes.         Evidence on the

pollution-health relationship comes from three types of studies: 1) cross-sectional investigations of the

correlation between adult mortality rates and pollution levels across U.S. cities; 2) time-series analyses of

the correlation between daily adult mortality rates and pollution levels within a given site; and 3) cohort-

based longitudinal studies of adults which suggest that particulates pollution results in excess mortality.

        However, a heated debate has arisen about whether these documented correlations are causal. At

issue is the possibility that since air pollution is not randomly assigned across localities, previous studies

may not adequately control for a number of confounding determinants of mortality. These include the

length of exposure and the characteristics of the exposed population. For example, areas with higher

pollution levels also tend to have higher population densities, different economic conditions, and higher

crime rates; all of which could contribute to differential adult health outcomes.

        This basic “omitted variables” problem is analogous to the confounding that arises from the

individual choice-based nature of cigarette smoking that complicates studies of the relation between

smoking and lung cancer (Cook 1980). In the ideal controlled experiment, subjects would be randomly

assigned to different levels of air pollution exposure, and then subsequent health outcomes in the high and

low pollution exposure groups would be compared. Any observed differences in outcomes could be

causally attributed to pollution since random assignment ensures that differential pollution exposure

would be independent of all other factors determining mortality.

        Since randomized clinical trials are not feasible, our solution to this evaluation problem is to use

an event that caused sharp differential changes in air pollution across sites within a narrow time frame to

identify the effects of particulate matter pollution on infant mortality. In particular, this study exploits

geographic variation in pollution changes from 1980 to 1982 induced by the 1981-82 recession. The

1981-82 recession caused extremely large reductions in suspended particulates pollution in heavily

industrialized sites, such as Pittsburgh, PA, where many manufacturing plants were shut down. Not
surprisingly, locations that neighbored the areas where the recession had a heavy impact also experienced

air quality improvements. On the other hand, sites that did not contain pollution-intensive manufacturing

and did not neighbor such counties experienced minimal pollution changes.

        The analysis compares changes in infant mortality rates in counties that had large reductions in

pollution to the changes in counties with small or no pollution reductions. To implement our approach,

we bring together the most detailed and comprehensive data available on air pollution, infant births and

deaths, and other potential determinants of infant health; including parental characteristics, the health

endowment and medical history of the mother, the utilization of medical services such as prenatal care,

and transfer payments from programs such as Medicaid. While there is substantial variation across

counties in changes in particulates pollution from 1980-82, there appear to be virtually no confounding

changes in any of the other measured factors. The 1980-82 period is unique in this regard, since there

appears to be a much greater potential for confounding in cross-sectional analyses. Since the pollution

changes vary substantially and many of the reductions are quite large, another advantage of the 1980-82

period is that it allows us to examine potential nonlinearities or thresholds in the relationship between

pollution and infant mortality. Knowledge about these potential thresholds is crucial for determining the

optimal design of federal regulatory policy for air pollution.

        The evidence suggests that this quasi-experimental research design provides a more credible basis

for evaluating the pollution-infant mortality relationship than those used in previous studies.        The

conventional cross-sectional estimates are very sensitive to specification and provide little evidence of a

systematic relationship between pollution and infant mortality. Based on the research design of this

study, however, we find a significant impact of pollution reductions on decreases in infant mortality rates

at the county level, with a 1 mg/m3 particulates reduction resulting in about 4-8 fewer infant deaths per

100,000 live births (a 0.35-0.45 elasticity). The estimated effects are driven almost entirely by fewer

deaths occurring within one month and one day of birth, suggesting that fetal exposure to pollution has an

adverse impact on health. The estimated effects of the pollution changes on infant birth weight provide

evidence consistent with this potential pathophysiologic mechanism and exhibit similarities to previously

documented findings on the birth weight effects of maternal smoking.

                                                      2
           Just as importantly, the estimated impact of pollution is remarkably stable across a variety of

specifications. For example, the estimates are insensitive to the inclusion of many, detailed covariates as

controls. As a test of internal validity, we also find that air pollution appears to have no effect on infant

deaths attributable to accidents and homicides. Since county-level income changes appear to be the most

relevant potential confounder, we further refine the treatment and control group analysis by matching

counties with similar income shocks. We find no evidence of an interaction effect between pollution

changes and income changes. However, the analysis reveals a nonlinear relationship between pollution

and infant mortality at the county level. In addition, there is some evidence that black infant mortality

may be more sensitive to county-level pollution reductions than infant mortality as a whole, while female

infant mortality may be less sensitive. All of these findings are masked in “conventional” analyses based

on less credible research designs. The timing and location of the dramatic reductions in suspended

particulates pollution and the abrupt shifts in infant mortality rates from 1980-82 provide evidence that air

pollution has a causal effect on infant health.



                 Previous Findings on the Association between Air Pollution and Mortality

           For many centuries, it has been suspected that there is a relationship between air pollution and

human health. 1 The strongest evidence comes from developing countries and a few historical episodes of

extreme pollution concentrations. Since randomized experiments are unethical, it has been difficult to

determine whether there are adverse health consequences at the lower levels of pollution that prevail

today in developed nations. Ultimately, this question can only be resolved by using convincing research

designs to estimate the function that maps pollution into mortality rates. Here, we review the previous

empirical literature and describe the barriers to obtaining credible estimates of this relationship.

           The first generation of research on the relationship between air pollution and human health comes

from studies in which pollution concentrations dramatically exceed the levels that currently predominate

in the United States. For example, Wang, et al. (1997) document a positive correlation between total


1
    Concerned about his citizens’ “bodily health,” King Edward I banned the burning of coal in 1307.

                                                           3
suspended particulates (TSPs) concentrations and the risk of low birth weight in China, where TSPs

concentrations are six times greater than those recorded in this study. A number of other studies have

examined historical “episodes” in which pollution concentrations reached unprecedented levels due to

weather inversions that trapped air pollution in valleys. In one instance, people could not see objects as

close as 20 feet away. In the best known examples of these episodes in Donora, PA (1948), London,

England (1952), and the Meuse Valley of Belgium (1930), researchers reported dramatic increases in the

rates of morbidity and mortality. Although the biological mechanisms through which pollution harms the

body are still poorly understood, a consensus exists on the link between health and radically elevated

concentrations of air pollution (Holland, et al. 1979, Wilson 1996).

        The current generation of research has explored whether human health is affected by the lower

levels of pollution that prevail on a more typical day. This research can be categorized into three types of

studies: 1) cross-sectional investigations of the correlation between adult mortality rates and pollution

levels across U.S. cities; 2) time-series analyses of the correlation between daily adult mortality rates and

pollution levels within a particular city; and 3) cohort-based longitudinal studies of adults which have

shown associations between fine particulate pollution and excess mortality.

        The cross-sectional studies have found that cities and counties with higher concentrations of

particulates pollution tend to have higher rates of adult and infant mortality (Lave and Seskin 1977,

Mendelsohn and Orcutt 1979, Chappie and Lave 1982, Lipfert 1984, Joyce, Grossman, and Goldman

1989, Özkaynak and Thurston 1987, Woodruff, Grillo, and Schoendorf 1997). The estimates from the

adult mortality studies suggest that a 10 mg/m3 increase in particulates pollution is associated with a 3-9%

increase in total mortality. However, some observers believe that the magnitude of these effects is

implausibly large, particularly in light of the relatively low levels of pollution that currently prevail (Pope

and Dockery 1996). Moreover, the strength of the associations is sensitive to the inclusion of social and

demographic control variables, such as cigarette smoking rates and access to health care, and to the

particular cities included in the sample; all of which mitigates confidence in the findings.

        Another concern with these studies is that they implicitly assume that the current citywide

pollution concentration accurately measures each resident’s lifetime exposure to pollution. A simple

                                                      4
example highlights the problems with this assumption. Consider the case of two 30 year-old women

living in St. Louis. Suppose that the first woman has lived there her entire life. The “lifetime exposure”

assumption implies that pollution concentrations have been constant in St. Louis over the last 30 years.

Suppose the second woman moved to St. Louis at age 29. In her case, the assumption implies that the

unknown location(s) where she previously lived had the same pollution levels that St. Louis currently

does. Given the dramatic changes in pollution levels that have occurred both within and across cities over

the last 50 years, this assumption is unlikely to hold for either person. Due to the inability to precisely

determine individuals’ lifetime exposure to air pollution, it is questionable whether the cross-sectional

estimates solely reflect the effects of air pollution.

         A second body of evidence comes from time-series studies of acute exposure, in which (typically)

daily changes in air pollution are linked to daily changes in health outcomes within a city. These studies

have found increased rates of cardiovascular and respiratory deaths, asthma attacks, and respiratory

problems on days with higher levels of particulates pollution (Dockery and Pope 1996). The reliability of

these findings rests on the reasonable presumption that confounding is less likely than in cross-sectional

studies since many of the potential confounding variables (i.e., cigarette smoking patterns, access to

medical care, etc.) are constant within a city over short periods of time. These studies also find that TSPs

pollution, particularly finer particles, which result from the combustion of fuels, has the strongest

associations with adult mortality across all types of air pollution.

         A substantive criticism of these studies, particularly the ones that focus on mortality as the

outcome of interest, is that air pollution may have caused individuals who were already very ill to die

slightly earlier than they would have otherwise, and that the life expectancy loss is minimal.2 This

hypothesis suggests that the individuals who constituted the “excess” deaths were likely to die in a few

days anyway. Spix, et al. (1994) and Lipfert and Wyzga (1995) find that daily mortality rates declined on




2
 Epidemiologists refer to this phenomenon as “harvesting,” while statistically it is referred to as negative serial
correlation. Interestingly, there was no evidence of negative serial correlation in mortality rates in the previously
mentioned episodes of extreme pollution concentrations.

                                                           5
the days immediately following the high pollution days. Consequently, some believe that these studies

fail to provide strong evidence that current levels of air pollution have substantial long-run health effects.

         The third, most recent, set of studies is prospective cohort studies of adult mortality. These

studies have the attractive feature of tracking individuals over time, not a group of ill-defined individuals

in a community, and contain detailed individual-level data on alternative risk factors, including cigarette

smoking histories, body mass indices, education levels, alcohol use, and occupational exposure to

pollution. The two most widely known studies found that adjusted mortality rates are higher in cities with

greater concentrations of particulate pollution (Dockery, et al. 1993; Pope, et al. 1995).3

         There are several concerns regarding the reliability of these results. As before, the measures of

ambient pollution concentration used may not be representative of the subject’s long-term cumulative

exposure, particularly in the dirtiest cities. For example, Dockery, et al. (1993) use only the measures of

pollution at the beginning of their study, and Pope, et al. (1995) only use pollution concentrations in the

1979-1981 period although they examine health outcomes from 1983-1989. The individual’s lifetime

exposure to pollution is unknown. In addition, Chay and Greenstone (1998) document that federal air

pollution regulations caused particulates concentrations to decline disproportionately more in the dirtiest

cities. Consequently, an analysis that only uses initial levels of pollution as a measure of exposure will

not account for the large differential changes in particulates pollution that may have occurred across the

cities of interest. Finally, some have suggested that these studies are prone to substantial biases due to

unobserved factors (Fumento 1997). For example, the Dockery study did not control for a number of

factors, including income and citywide characteristics.

         In summary, the previous literature has documented an association between air pollution and

adult mortality. However, the reliability of this evidence has been seriously questioned for several

reasons. First, since air pollution is not randomly assigned across locations, previous studies may not be

adequately controlling for a number of potential confounding determinants of adult mortality. It is known




3
 Interestingly, Dockery, et. al. (1993) did not find a statistically significant effect of pollution on health when the
sample was limited to either nonsmokers or those without occupational exposure to “gases, fumes, or dust.”

                                                            6
that areas with higher pollution levels also tend to have higher population densities, different economic

conditions, and higher crime rates; all of which could contribute to differential health outcomes. In

addition, the lifetime exposure of the individual to pollution is unknown in all three types of studies.

Finally, it is possible that the excess adult deaths that are attributed to changes in air pollution occur

among the already sick and represent little loss in life expectancy.


         A New Research Design for Evaluating the Pollution-Infant Mortality Relationship

        This study attempts to circumvent these “identification” problems by examining the effects of

pollution on infant mortality in a narrow two-year window with one of the most striking changes in

pollution over the last thirty years. First, the problem of unknown lifetime exposure to pollution is

significantly mitigated, if not solved, by the low migration rates of pregnant women and infants. Here,

pollution levels are assigned to infants based on the exposure of the mother during the gestational period

and the exposure of the newborn during the first few months after birth (the analysis focuses on infant

deaths within 24 hours, 28 days, and 1 year of birth).4 In addition, given that the mortality rate is higher

in the first year of life than in the next 20 years combined (NCHS 1999), it seems reasonable to presume

that infant deaths represent a large loss in life expectancy.5

        Most importantly, our analysis is based on a research design in which it is plausible that the

variation in air pollution changes across counties that is used is orthogonal to changes in the potential

confounding factors. Since the ideal of randomized clinical trials is not feasible, our “solution” to this

evaluation problem is to use an event that caused sharp differential changes in air quality across sites

within a narrow time frame to identify the impact of particulate matter on infant mortality. Specifically,

this study exploits geographic variation in pollution changes from 1980 to 1982 induced by the 1981-82

recession. The availability of an event that causes differential changes in air pollution but is unrelated to

unobserved determinants of infant health allows for unbiased inference on this relation.

4
  It is possible that a mother’s lifetime exposure to air pollution, and not just exposure while pregnant, may also
impact infant health. One would expect any bias arising from unknown lifetime exposure of the mother to be small.
5
  Relative to the adult mortality studies, another advantage of an analysis which focuses on infant deaths within 1-
day, 1-month, and 1-year of birth is that it circumvents the measurement problem of unpredictable time delays
(“delayed causation”) in the impact of pollution exposure on eventual death.

                                                         7
        Figure 1A presents trends for the U.S. in average total suspended particulates (TSPs) pollution

and average ozone concentrations across counties for the years 1971-1990 (the data sources are described

below). 6   From the figure, it is clear that air quality, as measured by TSPs pollution, improved

dramatically in the 1970s and 1980s with particulate emissions falling from an average of above 75

mg/m3 to less than 50 mg/m3. All of these improvements occurred in two punctuated periods, 1971-1975

and 1980-1982. Chay and Greenstone (1998) show that most of the improvements in 1971-75 can be

attributed to the federal air pollution regulations imposed at the county-level by the EPA after the 1970

Clean Air Act Amendment (CAAA). On the other hand, most of the 1980-82 pollution changes can be

attributed to the differential impacts of the 1981-82 recession across counties. Remarkably, the air quality

improvements in this two-year period are as large as those that occurred in the five years following the

1970 CAAA. The figure also suggests that TSPs pollution levels are particularly sensitive to economic

shocks when compared to ozone pollution levels, which are relatively stable throughout the period.7

        The 1981-82 recession caused extremely large reductions in suspended particulates pollution in

heavily industrialized sites, such as Pittsburgh, PA, where many manufacturing plants were shut down.8

Not surprisingly, locations that neighbored the areas where the recession had a heavy impact also

experienced air quality improvements.9 On the other hand, sites that did not contain pollution-intensive

manufacturing and did not neighbor such counties experienced minimal pollution changes. Our analysis

compares the changes in infant mortality rates in counties that had large reductions in pollution to the

changes in counties with small or no pollution reductions for the 1980-1982 period. Below, we further

refine the treatment and control group analysis by comparing infant mortality changes in counties that had

no pollution reductions to changes in counties that had large pollution reductions because they neighbor


6
  Average TSPs pollution is based on about 1,000-1,300 counties a year, and average ozone concentrations are based
on about 300-450 counties a year. The counties with TSPs data account for almost the entire U.S. population.
7
  Carbon monoxide pollution, while trending down during this period, also appears to be insensitive to the cycle.
8
  The death of heavily polluting, older plants, such as steel plants, that were never reopened accounts for the
relatively mild reversion back of pollution levels during the post-1982 recovery period. Also, new plant openings
and investment at existing plants fell under the purview of the stricter 1977 Clean Air Act Amendment, which
required the installation of state of the art pollution abatement technology and the acquisition of offsets for the
pollution arising from these new investments.
9
  Cleveland, et. al. (1976) and Cleveland and Graedel (1979) provide evidence on the “trans-boundary” nature of air
pollution (e.g., wind patterns often transport air pollution hundreds of miles).

                                                         8
counties that were impacted by the recession and not because they themselves experienced an economic

shock.   To implement our approach, we bring together the most detailed and comprehensive data

available on air pollution, infant births and deaths, and other potential determinants of infant health.

         This quasi-experimental research design may provide a more credible basis for evaluating the

pollution-infant mortality relationship than those used in previous studies. First, the differential changes

in TSPs pollution across counties in this very narrow time-frame are both dramatic and abrupt.

Consequently, this study has the feature of an interrupted time-series design with many control groups

(Cook and Campbell 1979). Second, while there is substantial variation across counties in changes in

TSPs pollution from 1980-82, we find little evidence of confounding changes in any of the unprecedented

number of factors that we can control for. Also, presuming that pollution should have no effect on infant

deaths attributable to accidents and homicides, we use these “external” causes of death to check the

internal validity of our findings. The unique circumstances that prevailed in the 1980-82 period provide

an invaluable opportunity to falsify the hypothesis that pollution and infant mortality are causally related.

         Finally, potential “thresholds” or nonlinearities in the relationship between pollution and infant

mortality are a controversial point in the epidemiological literature. Since the pollution changes vary

substantially and many of the reductions are quite large, another advantage of the 1980-82 period is that it

may allow for an examination of these potential nonlinearities. The existence of thresholds has immense

implications for determining the optimal design of federal regulatory policy for particulates pollution.

For example, as a result of the 1970 CAAA, the EPA established federal pollution standards to be applied

at the county-level. In the case of TSPs pollution, if a county’s emissions exceeded an annual geometric

mean of 75 mg/m3 in a given year, then the county would be designated as “non-attainment” and its plants

would be subject to strict EPA regulations in the following year. If the county’s emissions were below

this ceiling, then it would be classified as “attainment” and its plants would be subject to much less

regulation (see Chay and Greenstone 1998). Clearly, the optimality of this regulatory ceiling depends

crucially on the existence and magnitude of the health effects of pollution above and below it.

         Before proceeding, a case study of changes in TSPs pollution and infant mortality in

Pennsylvania before and after the 1981-82 recession illustrates many of the basic findings of this study.

                                                      9
As mentioned above, Pennsylvania is a particularly compelling example since it is known that many steel

plants, a major emitter of particulate matter, shut down during this period, especially in and around

Pittsburgh.10 In all of Pennsylvania, mean TSPs pollution was relatively stable at about 70-74 units from

1978-80 and then declined precipitously to about 53 units by 1982-83. At the same time, in 1978-80

infant deaths within one year of birth attributable to “internal” causes (e.g., respiratory and

cardiopulmonary deaths) were stable and occurred at the rate of about 1315-1380 per 100,000 births. But

from 1980-82, the internal infant mortality rate declined from 1,315 to 1,131, and remained at this lower

level in 1983-84. While not controlling for all changes that may have occurred in the absence of the

pollution decline, these numbers imply that a 1 mg/m3 decline in TSPs pollution may result in about 10-

11 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births, which is an elasticity of 0.5-0.6. Figure 2 illustrates the

striking correspondence of these time-series patterns.

         Underlying this 1980-82 change was a decrease in the number of infant deaths of 220, from 1,815

to 1,595, and an increase in the total number of births from 138,075 to 141,011. The 1980-82 decline in

the number of infant deaths occurring within 28 days of birth was 215, suggesting that the results are

driven almost entirely by a reduction in neonatal mortality. Also, it is noteworthy that while the total

number of births monotonically increased from 1978-82, they declined in 1983-84, suggesting that births

respond to the recession with a lag. Specifically, per-capita incomes in Pennsylvania fell in 1979-82

before rebounding by 1984.11

         The timing of the changes alone could support a causal interpretation of this case study since it is

unlikely that other factors were changing as precipitously from 1980-82. However, our analysis utilizes

every “case study” available in the U.S. from 1980-82 while using control groups and adjustment for


10
   Ransom and Pope (1995) use the “intermittent operation of a steel mill” as a quasi-experiment for examining the
health effects of pollution in Utah Valley, using a neighboring valley as a control group.
11
   A similar analysis of the Pittsburgh metropolitan area, consisting of Allegheny, Beaver, Butler, Fayette,
Washington, and Westmoreland counties, reveals nearly identical results. From 1980-82, TSP levels declined from
82.1 to 55.7 units, and the internal infant mortality rate fell from 1,273 to 1,043, implying that a one-unit decline in
TSPs results in almost 9 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births. Pittsburgh accounts for one-third of the total 1980-
82 decline in neonatal infant deaths in Pennsylvania, but only one-fifth of all births. Particularly striking is the fact
that in Pittsburgh, the bulk of the pollution declines (18.4 out of 26.4 units) and infant mortality declines (e.g., 61
out of the 71 less neonatal infant deaths) occurred in 1981-82. Taken literally, the results for PA and Pittsburgh
imply that there may be a nonlinearity in the effect of TSPs pollution on infant mortality at about 65-70 units.

                                                           10
potential confounding to account for changes in infant mortality rates that would have occurred in the

absence of the pollution declines.



                        Data Sources and Factors Associated with Infant Mortality

         To implement our evaluation strategy, we brought together an unprecedented amount of unique

and comprehensive data on county-level air pollution, infant births and deaths, county economic

conditions and characteristics, and other potential determinants of infant mortality for the 1978-1984

period. This database allows for a much broader examination, both across sites and over time, than has

previously been conducted. Here, we describe the data used in this study and review the factors that are

believed to be associated with infant mortality. More details are provided in the Data Appendix.

Data Sources

         Since infant death certificates cannot be directly linked to individual birth certificates for the

1978-84 period, the data for our analysis comes from merging a number of comprehensive databases.

The infant mortality information comes from the annual 1978-84 National Mortality Detail Files, which

are derived from the universe of death certificates. In addition to providing a census of all deaths in the

U.S., these files contain information on the date and cause of death and on the age, race, gender and

county of residence of the deceased. The births data come from the annual 1978-84 National Natality

Detail Files, which are derived from the universe of birth certificates and provide a census of all births in

the U.S. They contain information on the county of residence of the mother, the newborn’s healthiness,

the parents’ demographic characteristics, and the pregnancy and prenatal care histories of the mother.

         The infant births and deaths microdata were merged at the county by demographic group level for

each year to create infant age, race, and gender cells for each county. For each cell, the infant mortality

rate was calculated as the ratio of the total number of infant deaths of a certain type (age and cause of

death) in a cell in a given year relative to the total number of births in that cell in the same year.12 For

12
  There may be some measurement error in our measures of the infant mortality rate in each cell. For example,
suppose that two infants are born on November 1, 1980, and one dies on December 31, 1980, while the other dies on
January 1, 1981. The first infant’s birth and death will be used in the 1980 one-year infant mortality rate calculation.
The second infant’s birth will be used in the denominator of the 1980 rate, but his death will be counted in the

                                                          11
each year, the cell-level rates of death within 24 hours and 28 days of birth were also computed. The

individual microdata on the control variables available in the Natality Files were also aggregated into

annual demographic-county cells.

        The resulting annual infant mortality rate data, with the multitude of control variables from the

births data files, were then merged at the county level to annual information on total suspended

particulates (TSPs) pollution concentrations, per-capita income and unemployment rates, payments from

various transfer programs, and other county characteristics. The TSPs data were obtained by filing a

Freedom of Information Act request with the EPA that yielded the Quick Look Report data file, which

comes from the EPA’s Air Quality Subsystem (AQS) database. From this file, which provides the

location of each state and national pollution monitor as well as annual statistics on the number of recorded

observations and the annual geometric mean reading, we calculated the mean TSPs concentrations for

about 1,200 counties a year (see the Data Appendix).

        The per-capita income in each county during the period of interest comes from the Bureau of

Economic Analysis’ annual county-level series, which is the most comprehensive county income data

available. The county unemployment rate data come from the Employment and Unemployment for State

and Local Areas publications of the BLS. We obtained county-level information on several different

categories of transfer payments from the Regional Economic Information System (REIS). These include

separate series for expenditures on medical care for low-income individuals (primarily Medicaid and local

assistance programs); Medicare; AFDC; Food Stamps; SSI; other forms of income maintenance; and

Unemployment Insurance.

        Although county-level information on Medicaid recipiency is unavailable for our period, we

obtained state-level data from the Health Care Financing Administration on the number of Medicaid

recipients, the cost per recipient, and Medicaid payments to medical vendors. Since weather conditions

are viewed by some as a potential confounder (Samet, et al. 1998), we obtained monthly temperature and


numerator of the 1981 one-year death rate. However, since about 40% and 70% of all infant deaths within a year of
birth occur in the first 24 hours and 28 days after birth, respectively, the magnitude of this measurement error is
unlikely to be substantial. Also, there will be virtually no measurement error in our measures of the infant death
rates within one-day and one-month of birth.

                                                        12
precipitation data for each state from the National Weather Service. Our annual data on manufacturing

and non-manufacturing employment levels in each county come from the County Business Patterns files.

Finally, for 1980, we collected a wealth of additional information on county characteristics, including

demographic and socioeconomic variables, crime rates, physician and hospital bed to population rates,

and fiscal and tax variables from the 1983 County and City Data Book. The Data Appendix describes the

data in greater detail and lists the full set of control variables used in this study.

         The proposed research design applied to this array of detailed data provides a unique opportunity

to examine the validity of the claim that pollution has a causal impact on infant mortality. Table 1

presents summary information, by year, on the 1,077 counties with TSPs pollution data in both 1980 and

1982, which is the sample used in the pre-post quasi-experimental comparisons. First, note that these

counties consistently account for about 80% of all 3.3-3.7 million births that occur in the U.S. in a given

year, which makes this the most comprehensive study to date. 13 As with Pennsylvania, the number of

births in the entire country appears to respond to the recession with a lag. While trending up from 1978-

82, the number of births declined in 1983.

         The next set of rows of Table 1 present infant fatalities per 100,000 live births. “Internal” causes

are deaths associated with common health problems such as respiratory or cardiopulmonary deaths.

“External” causes are “non-health” related deaths attributable to factors such as accidents and

homicides. 14 The internal infant mortality rate is about 1.1-1.3 deaths within a year of birth per 100

births, while infant deaths due to external causes are much rarer.15 40 and 70 percent of all “internal”

infant deaths within a year of birth occur within the first 24 hours and 28 days of birth, respectively.



13
   Most states rely on the World Health Organization’s definition of a live birth, which is “the complete expulsion or
extraction from its mother of a product of conception, irrespective of the duration of pregnancy, which, after such
separation, breathes or shows any other evidence of life, such as the beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical
cord, or definite movement of voluntary muscles…” (National Center for Health Statistics 1981).
14
   “Internal” and “external” deaths span all possible causes of death. Deaths with a 9th International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) code from 001 to 799 are classified as internal, while those with ICD codes from 800 to 999 are in
the external category. The 1979-84 mortality files use the 9th ICD, while the 1978 file uses the 8th ICD. We
developed a cross-walk from the 8th to 9th ICDs.
15
   Although external deaths account for only about 0.4% and 3% of all deaths within one-month and one-year of
birth, respectively, their relative importance increases dramatically among older children. For example, in 1984
external deaths accounted for 43.5% of all deaths among 1-4 year olds and 77.2% of deaths among 15-19 year olds.

                                                          13
Consequently, post-neonatal deaths make up a small fraction of all internally related deaths within the

first year of birth. On the other hand, about 90 percent of all “external” infant deaths within a year of

birth occur in the post-neonatal period. Finally, the black infant mortality rate is nearly two times greater

than the white infant death rate (OTA 1988), and increased slightly from 1978-84 (a 1.91 to a 1.98 ratio).

         Figure 1B presents national trends in the internal infant mortality rate, average TSPs pollution,

and per-capita income across counties from 1978-84. From the figure, it is clear that air quality improved

dramatically from 1980-82 in percentage terms. Per-capita income decreased by less than 3% from 1978-

80 and remained relatively stable during the key 1980-82 period before rebounding in 1983 and 1984.

TSPs, on the other hand, fell by over 20% in 1980-82 (from 70.6 to 56.3 units) but were relatively steady

in the “pre” period and exhibit some mean reversion in the “post” period. Internal infant mortality within

a year of birth decreased steadily from 1978-84, with slightly larger percentage declines from 1980-82

than in the rest of the period.16

         The rest of Table 1 presents 1978-84 trends for a subset of the large number of control variables

used in the analysis. Next, we discuss the factors that are believed to be associated with infant health and

how our analysis adjusts for them. Importantly, we find that: 1) the magnitude of changes in these

variables is small when compared to the pollution changes that occurred in the 1980-82 period; 2) there

are virtually no confounding changes in any of these factors; and 3) the estimates from our research

design are insensitive to the inclusion of these covariates as controls.

Socioeconomic Status, Health Behaviors, and Access to Medical Care

         A correlation between socioeconomic status (SES) and infant mortality has been documented in

the U.S. and abroad.17 One channel through which SES may affect health outcomes is through maternal

health habits. Maternal cigarette smoking, drug usage, and alcohol intake are all associated with SES and

infant health outcomes (Meara 1998). Since direct information on these behaviors is unavailable for


16
   At the beginning of the century, about 14 infants died within a year of birth out of every 100 births. This figure
was 10, 5, 3, and 2 by 1918, 1938, 1950, and 1970, respectively. By 1989 less than 1 out of every 100 infants died
within a year of birth, and currently about 0.75% of infants die before 1 year of age (Vital Statistics of the United
States and Historical Statistics of the United States).
17
   There is a contentious debate about whether these associations are causal, or whether they reflect the influence of
an unobserved factor that is correlated with both measures of socioeconomic status and health. See Meara (1998).

                                                          14
1978-84, we use measures of income, education, race, marital status, and other demographic

characteristics of the parents to control for these factors. Controlling for income may be particularly

important since, although small when compared to the pollution shocks, there were differential income

shocks across counties during the 1980-82 period. In addition, income is believed by many to have a

direct effect on health (e.g., Ettner 1996).18 In Table 1 our measures of parental demographic and SES

characteristics suggest that the SES status of parents is generally rising from 1978-84, although the

fraction of births to single mothers and to immigrant mothers increase during the period.19 Since Ruhm

(1999) find a negative correlation between changes in unemployment rates and mortality at the state level,

our analysis also controls for changes in unemployment rates at the county level.20

        SES status may also operate through access to quality health care.                 Prenatal care visits,

particularly those in the first trimester, are believed to be effective at increasing birth weights and

reducing infant mortality (Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983, Institute of Medicine 1985). Our data contains

information on the number of prenatal care visits, the month in the pregnancy of the first visit, whether

the birth occurred outside of a hospital, and whether a doctor was present at delivery. Table 1 shows that

while the average number of prenatal care visits was stable during the period, the likelihood that the first

visit was in the first trimester increased slightly.

        There are other medical interventions that may affect an infant’s health.             For example, the

presence of a local specialized neonatal intensive care unit or a public clinic is correlated with a decrease

in infant mortality rates (Institute of Medicine 1985, Menard, et al. 1998). Also, some researchers have

found that expansions of state Medicaid programs are associated with improved infant health outcomes

(Currie and Gruber 1996).21 Since these expansions did not begin in earnest until 1984, they are unlikely



18
   It should be noted that our measures of income are at the county level.
19
   The following states do not report the mother’s marital status until 1980: California, Connecticut, Georgia,
Maryland, Michigan, Montana, New York, Nevada, Ohio, and Texas. These states are not used in the % Single
Mother calculations for 1978 and 1979 in Table 1.
20
   Ruhm (1999) uses a fixed-effects analysis of stacked 1972-91 state-level data. Interestingly, he finds little
evidence of a systematic relationship between changes in income and mortality. We find no evidence that changes
in either per-capita income or unemployment rates at the county level are related to infant mortality changes.
21
   Hanratty (1996) also documents a health insurance-infant health relation. In both cases, the “treatment” is
measured at a much more aggregate level than the county level.

                                                       15
to be a source of confounding in this study. Nevertheless, we have county-level controls for transfer

payments from Medicaid and other medical assistance programs for low-income individuals and state-

level controls for the number of Medicaid recipients and the cost per recipient. Notably, 1980-82 changes

in Medicaid expenditures were almost identical in counties with large and small pollution reductions.

         More generally, since our key variables are measured at the county level, the analysis controls for

all unobserved infant health determinants that vary differentially across states over time by including

unrestricted state-time effects. The estimates are insensitive to their inclusion. The analysis also controls

for all permanent unobserved differences in geographic or population characteristics across counties since

it is based on within county first-differences. Finally, we find abrupt trend breaks in differences across

counties in TSPs pollution and infant mortality rates centered in 1980-82. Therefore, any alternative

explanation for the observed relationship between changes in infant mortality and pollution needs to

exhibit similar trend breaks in differences across counties within the same state in order to be viable. 22

Maternal and Infant Health Endowments

         The literature on the “production” of infant health emphasizes the importance of a mother’s

ability to support a fetus for nine months. This ability, frequently referred to as the maternal health

endowment, is believed to affect an infant’s survival probabilities (Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983,

Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1991).23

         Although maternal health endowments are not directly observable, the natality files contain

several variables that should be associated with these endowments. Table 1 presents information on the



22
   This rules out many unobservable factors such as the diffusion of birth technology. The two most notable,
discrete changes in birth technology during the last 30 years were the advent of respiratory therapy techniques and
improvements in mechanical ventilation in 1974 and the introduction of surfactant therapy in October 1989. The
impact of advances in the former had largely been diffused by the late 1970s (OTA 1988: 41).
23
   In addition to its direct effects, the maternal health endowment may interact with the local availability of abortion
services to affect the distribution of health outcomes for fetuses that are brought to term (Grossman and Joyce 1990).
That said, 1980-82 is one of the few periods in which both pregnancy and abortion rates are stable among all
females and among teenage women in the U.S. According to the OTA (1988: 41), “Among adolescents, the
percentage of pregnancies ended by abortion remained virtually unchanged between 1980 and 1982.” Some states
changed Medicaid funding for abortions in 1981. However, these policies may not have impacted pregnancy and
abortion rates until 1984 (Levine, Trainor, and Zimmerman 1995), and our analysis absorbs any differential changes
in pregnancy and abortion rates across states by including state-time effects. Reliable county-level information on
abortion providers and the number of abortions performed is not publicly available for the 1978-84 period.

                                                          16
fraction of mothers who are teenagers; the fraction who are 35 years or older; the share of mothers who

had a prior fetal death; and the percentages with at least two previous live births and with no prior

pregnancies. The first two variables, in particular, are strongly associated with poor infant health.24 The

percentage of births attributable to teenagers declined from 16% in 1978 to 13% in 1984, while the share

of births from women over 35 climbed from 4.6% to 6.3%. The fraction of mothers who had previously

had a fetal death rose from 16% to 20%, while more than one-third of mothers had not given birth before.

        Measures of the newborn’s health endowment at birth also predict infant mortality. Chief among

them is birth weight. For example, 75 percent of all neonatal deaths and 30 percent of all post-neonatal

infant deaths occur among low birth weight infants, whose weight is less than 2,500 grams or about 5.5

pounds (OTA 1988). Coory (1997) finds that gestational age (e.g., prematurity) has an independent effect

on infant mortality even after controlling for low birth weight status.                    Similarly, congenital

malformations, such as incomplete pulmonary development and genetic disorders, are predictors of

mortality (Stewart and Hersh 1995, Philip 1995). It has also been documented that twins have lower

survival rates than singleton births. Finally, the APGAR test, which is administered to newborns 1

minute and 5 minutes after their birth, is designed to provide a snapshot of the newborn’s general

condition. This test is scored on a scale of 1 to 10 and scores below 7 indicate problems.

        Table 1 presents national averages for these measures of the healthiness of newborns from 1978-

84. Although small in magnitude, most of these variables exhibit changes during the period of interest. It

is plausible that TSPs concentrations may also affect these factors. Consequently, in addition to using

these variables as controls in the infant mortality analysis, this study also examines the impact of changes

in particulates pollution on infant birth weight.

Evidence on the Pathophysiologic Link between Air Pollution and Infant Death

        Strong theory and evidence in the biological literature on the pathophysiological mechanism

through which air pollution may affect infant health would increase the credibility of any findings.




24
   Rees et. al. (1996) find that much of the correlation between poor infant health outcomes and mother’s age may be
attributable to the higher incidence of low birth weight for infants of teenagers and women older than 35.

                                                        17
Unfortunately, the underlying biological pathways that link air pollution and infant mortality are largely

unknown. The strongest evidence on the mechanism comes from controlled experiments on animals

ranging from guinea pigs to monkeys. These studies have found that increased exposure to air pollution

can cause the bronchial system to constrict, which impairs lung functioning (Amdur 1996). Although

these findings are consistent with some non-experimental evidence from humans, the confidence with

which they can be extrapolated to humans is unknown. As one review article noted, “Neither clinical

experience nor review of the literature identify a direct pathophysiologic mechanism that can be used to

explain the relationship between inhaled particles and mortality” (Utell and Samet 1996: 187).25 There is

even less evidence on the mechanism for infants.

         Consequently, it is not surprising that the few previous studies that have examined pollution and

infant mortality have used different outcome variables. For example, while one study limits its analysis

to neonatal deaths (Joyce, Grossman, and Goldman 1986), another argues that post-neonatal mortality is

more likely to be affected by environmental factors (Woodruff, Grillo, and Schoendorf 1997). Similarly,

these studies disagree on which causes of death are more likely to be related to pollution. One study

examines all infant deaths, while another emphasizes deaths attributable to sudden infant death syndrome

(SIDS). These disagreements can only be resolved by direct evidence on the biological pathways.

         As a result of this uncertainty, we examine infant deaths within 24 hours, 28 days (neonatal), and

one year of birth. In addition, we separately examine infant deaths due to internal health reasons and

deaths due to external “non-health” related causes such as accidents and homicides. Internal infant deaths

are not disaggregated further, since coroners assign the vast majority of them to two vague categories.

That is, roughly 70% of all deaths are classified as resulting either from “certain conditions originating in

the perinatal period” or from “congenital anomalies.” Since there is no obvious causal pathway through

which air pollution should affect external causes of death, the observed association between the external

mortality rate and TSPs pollution is used as a check on the internal consistency of our findings.26

25
   Pope, et. al. (1999) is an example of a study that attempts to identify the biological mechanisms through which
particulate air pollution and cardiopulmonary deaths are linked. Using a time-series of daily information on 90
elderly subjects, they find a relationship between PM10 particulate pollution and elevated pulse rates.
26
   In other words, the measured association between pollution and external infant deaths may account for

                                                         18
         Finally, despite the scarcity of evidence on causal pathways in the biological literature, this study

attempts to address whether fetal exposure to pollution has adverse health consequences. There is strong

evidence that maternal cigarette smoking can retard fetal development and reduce the birth weight of

infants.27 Since air pollution may work through a similar mechanism, we examine the effects of pollution

changes on infant birth weight. In addition, fatalities that occur soon after birth are thought to reflect poor

fetal development. Consequently, the estimated effects of particulates pollution reductions on death rates

within 24 hours and 28 days of birth also provide evidence on this potential pathophysiologic pathway.



           Differential Changes in Air Pollution and Infant Mortality during the Recession

         Figures 3A, B, and C provide an overview of trends from 1978-84 in TSPs concentrations,

internal infant mortality rates, and per-capita income, by TSP change groups. The counties are divided

into three groups with “Big, Middle, and Small” 1980-82 changes in pollution (based on change

quartiles). 28 First, Figure 3A illustrates the striking differences across counties in pollution reductions

from 1980-82. The quartile of counties with the largest reduction experienced a 35% decline in TSPs

from 1980-82, on average, while the county group with the smallest reduction had almost no average

change in pollution. The “Middle Change” set of counties experienced a 20% pollution reduction. Also

note that the “Big Change” group exhibits more reversion to the mean in pollution in 1983 and 1984.

         Figure 3B shows that the group of counties that had the largest pollution reductions during the

recession also had the biggest declines in internal infant mortality in the narrow 1980-82 period. While

the infant mortality rates of the three groups track each other reasonably well before 1980, there is a clear

relative shift down in infant mortality in the largest pollution decline group in the key period. There is



unobserved secular factors that affect all types of infant death. Using the language of “quasi-experimentation”, our
research design has the feature of an interrupted time series design with both nonequivalent control groups and
nonequivalent dependent variables (see Cook and Campbell 1979).
27
   For example, Sexton and Hebel (1984) and Evans and Ringel (1999) provide experimental and “quasi-
experimental” evidence, respectively, that maternal smoking reduces infant birth weight by up to 430-550 grams.
One potential mechanism is that smoking slows fetal growth by depriving the fetus of oxygen.
28
   Figure 3B is for deaths within one year of birth. The Small Change and Big Change groups consist of the
quartiles of counties with TSP changes greater than –7.4 units and less than –20.4 units, respectively. The Middle
Change group consists of all other counties (see Table 3).

                                                         19
also a trend break in the infant mortality rates of the “Middle Change” county group relative to the “Small

Change” group during 1980-82. In fact, the relative trends in pollution and infant mortality correspond

with each other remarkably well for the entire 1978-84 period. For example, in the post-recession period,

there is a reversion back in both the pollution levels and infant mortality rates of the counties with large

pollution reductions relative to the other counties. Other noteworthy facts are that the three county groups

have similar baselines for infant mortality rates in 1978 (about 1.3 deaths per 100 births) and that they

have nearly identical percentage increases (about 4%) in the number of live births from 1980-82.

        Based on these raw numbers, the elasticity of infant mortality rate changes with respect to

pollution changes varies between 0.2-0.5, depending on the groups and years used for comparison. The

fall in infant mortality that may be due to differential pollution declines is not implausibly large when

compared to the secular fall in deaths that occurred during the period. A rough calculation suggests that

these extremely large pollution reductions may account for about 20-30% of the overall decline in infant

mortality rates from 1978-84. Taken together, these plots of the raw data seem to provide “smoking gun”

evidence of a link between pollution and infant mortality.

        Since we show below that income changes are the most important observable confounder in our

research design, Figure 3C plots per-capita income for each of the three pollution change groups in Figure

3A. There is some systematic covariance between pollution changes and income changes in 1980-82.

However, the figure shows that the differences in income shocks across counties with big and small

pollution reductions are very small in magnitude during the 1980-82 evaluation period. Specifically,

income fell by only 2.6% more in big pollution change counties than in small pollution change counties,

on average. Interestingly, counties with large pollution declines rebounded from the recession at a slower

rate than other counties, and the initial differences across county groups in per-capita income in 1978 are

not large, varying between about $12,600-$13,000 (in $1982-84).

        Figures 4A and 4B provide a geographical overview of the location of counties that experienced

the largest pollution and infant mortality declines from 1980-82, respectively. In the figures, a county’s

shading indicates the size of the reductions in TSPs pollution concentrations and in the internal infant

death rate, with darker shading implying a larger reduction. Two noteworthy points are that the two maps

                                                    20
correlate very well visually, and that the relationship between changes in TSPs pollution and infant

mortality that was apparent in the Pennsylvania “case study” (recall Figure 2) can also be seen here. The

comprehensiveness of this study is unique.



                                    Research Design and Econometric Specification

          Here, we lay out the research designs and implied econometric models used to estimate the

impact of air pollution on infant mortality. For simplicity, it is assumed that the “true” effect of exposure

to particulates pollution is homogeneous across infants and over time.

Conventional Cross-Sectional Designs

          A general cross-sectional model of the determination of infant mortality can be written as:

(1) yjt = f(xjt, zjt, wjt) + εjt,

where yjt is the infant mortality rate in county j in year t, xjt is the average particulate pollution reading

across all monitors in the county, zjt is per-capita income, wjt is the vector of all other determinants of

county-level infant mortality rates (parental attributes and behavior, county characteristics, etc.), and f is

the “non-parametric” conditional mean function of yjt. f(•) and wjt are defined so that E(εjt|xjt, zjt, wjt) = 0.

          Empirical implementation of equation (1) is not practical for two reasons. First, the model

presumes that the researcher can measure and control for all of the confounding determinants of infant

mortality, wjt. In reality, wjt could be of extremely high dimension, and many of its elements may not be

observable to the researcher (e.g., maternal behaviors). Second, f(•) is a general conditional expectation

that is a function of the joint distribution of yjt, xjt, zjt, and wjt. Consequently, estimation of the effects of

interest is practically infeasible due to the “curse of dimensionality”.

          One common approach to reducing the dimensionality of this evaluation problem is to assume

that the effects of the covariates are additive and linear. This results in the linear regression model:

(2) yjt = xjtβ + zjtθ + wjt′Π + εjt,           εjt = αj + ujt,

where αj are permanent unobserved determinants of mortality.               Standard least-squares analysis of

equation (2) will lead to inconsistent inference if there are any nonlinearities or interactions in the true

effects, or if the researcher cannot control for all of the factors in wjt that covary with pollution levels.

                                                            21
         Table 2 presents the associations of TSPs pollution levels with other potential correlates of infant

mortality across counties in 1980.29 The Small and Big categories correspond to the counties in the

lowest and highest quartiles of pollution, respectively. The Middle category is comprised of the counties

in the middle two quartiles. The table presents the means of the variables for each group and the F-

statistic testing for significant differences in these means. If pollution levels were randomly assigned

across counties, one would expect very few significant differences. However, it is clear that TSP levels

covary with many potential determinants of infant health. The differences in the sample means across the

pollution groups are significant for almost every variable, particularly for mother’s education, race, and

marital status, prenatal care usage, the fraction of mothers who are teenagers, and county-level

demographics, population densities, crime rates, and government revenues.30

         These differences are meaningful only to the extent that the variables predict infant mortality. A

direct measure of the importance of confounding due to observables is the sample correlation between

TSP levels and the predicted internal infant mortality rates from a regression of mortality on the other

covariates. This correlation, which measures the association between pollution and the component of the

outcome that can be predicted by the controls, is consistently 0.12-0.16 for each cross-section from 1978-

84.31 In addition, a regression of the predicted mortality rates (per 100,000 live births) on a constant and

TSPs concentrations results in estimated pollution slope coefficients that vary between 1.6-2.5 and are

always significant at well below the 1-percent level (t-ratios of 4.1-5.3). We conclude that “conventional”

cross-sectional comparisons will not credibly account for all competing explanations. Below, we find that

estimates based on cross-sectional research designs may be downwardly biased due to confounding.



29
   We focus on 1980 since the County Data Book variables can be added. The cross-sectional correlation of TSPs
with the other covariates is similarly large in all years from 1978-84.
30
   The R-squared from a regression of TSP levels on the variables in Table 2, the county-level transfer payments
variables, and the state-level Medicaid variables is 0.69 for 1980. For the years in which the County Data Book
variables are not measured, the R-squareds from the TSPs pollution regressions vary from 0.60-0.73. An analogous
analysis reveals that per-capita income appears to be even more strongly associated with many factors.
31
   The variables used to predict infant mortality rates are income, the unemployment rate, the natality file variables,
the transfer payment variables, and the state-level weather and Medicaid variables. The sample for these regressions
is all counties for which data exists (about 2,300-2,600 counties), and the R-squareds vary between 0.39-0.44. The
correlations are very similar when the transfer payment, weather, and Medicaid variables are excluded from the
regressions. All calculations use the number of births in each county as weights.

                                                          22
Quasi-Experimental Design

         The ideal research design that reduces the dimensionality of the inference problem is a controlled

experiment in which different levels of pollution exposure are randomly assigned across mothers/infants.

Random assignment ensures that differential pollution exposure is independent of other factors that

determine infant mortality. Consequently, it would not be necessary to measure and control for zjt and wjt

in order to obtain unbiased estimates of the effect of pollution on infant mortality. However, randomized

clinical trials are unethical.

         Our solution is to use sharp, differential changes in air pollution across sites in 1980-82 to

account for confounding changes in a multitude of other factors. This “quasi-experimental” research

design compares changes in infant mortality rates in counties that had large reductions in pollution to

changes in counties with small or no pollution reductions during the recession. A plausible presumption

is that the omitted variables problem is dramatically reduced when the research design moves from cross-

sectional comparisons to comparisons of changes across counties during the narrow 1980-82 time frame.

         We divided counties into three groups with “Big, Middle, and Small” 1980-82 changes in

pollution (based on change quartiles) and performed an analysis similar to Table 2. Few variables exhibit

changes that vary systematically with pollution changes, and the magnitudes of the F-statistics testing for

systematic differences across the groups are much smaller (table available from the authors).                       Not

surprisingly, per-capita income changes do appear to covary with pollution changes since recessionary

shocks drive some of the pollution changes. In addition, the variation in TSPs pollution changes across

counties from 1980-82 is quite substantial.32

         More direct evidence on the quality of the design comes from the sample correlation between

1980-82 changes in TSPs pollution and predicted changes in the internal infant mortality rate from a

regression of mortality changes on changes in the other covariates.33 This correlation is 0.007, which is


32
   The R-squared from a regression relating 1980-82 TSP changes to changes in all other control variables, pre-
adjusted for income changes, is only 0.14. Based on the sum of squares, the variation in 1980-82 changes in
pollution is 65-70% as much as the variation in pollution levels across counties in 1980, and 110-120% when
compared to the 1983 cross-sectional variation in pollution levels (see Appendix Figures for the scatter plots).
33
   The variables used to predict 1980-82 changes in the infant mortality rate are the lag change in the mortality rate,
changes in income, the unemployment rate, the natality file variables, the transfer payment variables, and the state-

                                                           23
about 20-times smaller in magnitude than the cross-sectional correlations. Also, the pollution slope

coefficient from a regression of predicted mortality rate changes on TSPs changes is 0.5 and insignificant

(t-ratio around 0.2).

         We conclude that there is little systematic correlation between the 1980-82 pollution changes and

changes in our vast list of observable predictors of infant death. At least with respect to the observable

controls, this research design appears to emulate the dimensionality reduction ensured by controlled

experiments. Consequently, the large, sharp, and precisely timed reductions in pollution from 1980-82

provide a compelling test of the pollution-infant mortality link.

         Assuming linearity of the effects of pollution, the quasi-experimental model in the ideal case is:

(3) dyjt = yj82 – yj80 = xj82β - xj80β + εj82 - εj80 = dxjtβ + dεjt.

We use a fixed effects estimator applied to the pooled three years of data from 1980-82 to implement this

model. In the “almost ideal” situation, there may be a weak relation between pollution changes and

changes in the other determinants of infant mortality, which can be controlled for using linear regression

adjustment. This generates the model:

(4) dyjt = dxjtβ + dzjtθ + dwjt′Π + dεjt.

A comparison of the estimates from equations (3) and (4) provides an indirect test of the validity of our

“quasi-experimental” assumption that the treatment is close to randomly assigned. We find that the quasi-

experimental estimates are insensitive to the inclusion of a plethora of detailed controls, which is

reassuring evidence on the quality of the research design.

         Since the analysis is based on first-differences, any permanent unobserved differences across

counties, αj, are controlled for. Also, given that the key variables are measured at the county level, the

analysis can “non-parametrically” absorb all unobserved health determinants that vary across states over

time by including unrestricted state-time effects. In this case, only comparisons across counties within

the same state are used to identify the treatment effect. Further, since differences across counties in pre-




level weather and Medicaid variables. The sample for the regression is all counties for which data exists (about
2,500 counties), and the R-squared is 0.77. The sum of 1980 and 1982 births in each county are used as weights.

                                                            24
recession trends in infant mortality may be another confounder, the analysis controls for lag changes in

infant mortality rates before the recession.

         More formally, we estimate the following dynamic model of changes in infant mortality:

(5) dyjt = dxjtβ + dzjtθ + dwjt′Π + dyjt-1γ + dεjt,          dεjt = λst + dujt,

where dyjt-1 is the 1979-80 change in infant mortality for county j, and λst are state effects in mortality
changes. Define T tj =(xj1,…,xjt,zj1,…,zjt); then the assumption that E(ujt|T tj ) = 0 implies that the lag levels

of pollution and income before the recession, as well as lags of the mortality rates, can be used as

instrumental variables for dxjt, dzjt, and dyjt-1.34 This condition, which makes the reasonable presumption

that the treatments are pre-determined, allows for differential trends and dynamic feedback from y to T of

an unspecified form. Consequently, it is much weaker than the strict exogeneity condition underlying

identification of equations (3) and (4). Again, we find that the estimated effects of pollution changes are

almost identical across these various specifications. This is not surprising given that Figure 3B suggests

that the differential trends are small and will tend to lead to understatements of the impact of pollution.

         Finally, income shocks have the greatest systematic correlation with 1980-82 pollution changes

out of all the observables we can measure. If higher incomes lead to improved infant health outcomes,

then these confounding shocks may bias our estimates of the pollution effects downward. As a result, we

further refine our treatment and control group analysis by “matching” counties with differential pollution

changes but identical income changes in the 1980-82 period. This approach admits the possibility that

income shocks have a nonlinear effect on infant mortality and allows one to examine potential

interactions in the effects of pollution shocks and income shocks.

         Table 3 presents the F-statistics testing for significant differences in the sample means of 1980-82

changes in the control variables across groups of counties with different pollution reductions but similar

income changes. The groups of counties are classified and matched based on the quartiles of pollution



34
  We focus on total changes over the entire 1980-82 window due to the ambiguity concerning the exact timing of
the changes. For example, some of the measured 1980-81 decline in TSPs may have been concentrated in the final
months of 1981 and, therefore, impacted infants born in 1982. In addition, it is not obvious whether per-capita
income in 1982 is a “pre- or post-exposure” variable. Using the accumulated 1980-82 changes in the treatment and
controls as a proxy for true changes circumvents many of these timing issues.

                                                       25
and income changes during the period (see the table notes). It appears that matching counties based on

this crude subclassification scheme effectively eliminates most of the perceptible differences in changes

in the observables between counties with different pollution changes. Only one-in-five F-statistics are

significant at conventional levels, and the magnitude of the F-statistics is particularly small for key

controls, such as mother’s education, race, and marital status, the usage of prenatal care, and the fraction

of mothers who are teenagers. Therefore, 1980-82 income shocks may provide a reasonable single-index

summary of changes in all of the confounding factors. Figure 3C suggests that the magnitude of potential

biases is very small. These same county groups are matched and compared in the below analysis.

        Before proceeding, we note the potential for censoring bias in our estimates of the impact of

pollution. The analysis is based on the population of live births. Since air pollution may damage the

fetus before birth, it may also affect the likelihood of a miscarriage or stillbirth. Consequently, the large

pollution reductions during the recession may have resulted in a reduction in fetal deaths, and our analysis

will understate the impact of pollution on infant mortality by conditioning on fetuses that make it to a live

birth. To the extent that a disproportionate number of the “marginal” fetuses that are born alive are in the

low end of the birth weight distribution, our estimates of the effects of pollution changes on infant birth

weight will also be contaminated by these selection biases. To preview the results, we find evidence

consistent with this potential selection mechanism. Since machine-readable data on fetal deaths at the

county level are not available for the period of interest, a direct examination of the impact of the pollution

reductions on fetal deaths is left for future research.



                        “Conventional” Estimates of the Effects of Air Pollution

        For the series of cross-sections from 1978-84, we replicate the conventional cross-sectional

approach to estimating the association between particulates pollution and infant mortality across counties.

Table 4 presents the cross-sectional regression estimates for 1980, which is of interest since the analysis

can control for the county characteristics available in the County Data Book. The first set of rows contain

the estimates of the effects of mean TSPs pollution and per-capita income on the number of internal infant

deaths within a year of birth per 100,000 live births. Since Ruhm (1999) suggests that infant mortality

                                                          26
rates may fall during a recession, we also present the estimated unemployment rate effects. The table

columns correspond to regression specifications in which additional sets of covariates are controlled for.

        In column 1, the unadjusted correlation between air pollution and internal infant death rates is a

very imprecise zero. Columns 2 and 3 show that controlling for per-capita income and unemployment

rates has little effect on the estimated pollution coefficient and that none of the variables have a

systematic relation with infant mortality.      Parental demographic and socioeconomic characteristics,

maternal health endowment and medical history, prenatal care usage, and infant health endowment are

included as controls in columns 4 and 5. Although the pollution coefficient has the expected sign and

grows in magnitude, it is still very imprecisely estimated. The estimated effects of per-capita income and

unemployment rates are also insignificant.

        The specifications in columns 6-10 sequentially control for the county characteristics variables,

state-level information on temperatures and precipitation, the state-level Medicaid variables, the county-

level transfer payments variables, and unrestricted state effects. It now appears that TSPs pollution has a

systematic impact on the internal infant mortality rate. The estimates suggest that a one-unit reduction in

mean TSP levels results in about 1-1.1 fewer internal infant deaths per 100,000 live births, which implies

an elasticity of approximately 0.06. These estimates are about one-tenth as large as the pollution effects

derived from the Pennsylvania case study and from Figures 3A and B. On one hand, the pollution

estimates are very stable across these columns, even when unrestricted state effects are included to absorb

any systematic differences across states. For the most part, however, the table provides no evidence that

the effect of pollution on infant mortality is either large or important.

        The fit of the regressions in columns 6-10 is quite good, with R-squareds ranging from 0.61 to

0.98 when state indicators are included. This reduction in the mean squared error of the regressions

explains the gain in the precision of the estimates. Although the estimated effects of per-capita income

and unemployment rates have intuitive signs, they are small in magnitude, rarely significant at

conventional levels, and not stable across specifications. For example, they fall by about 40% and 25%,

respectively, when transfer payments and Medicaid assistance are controlled for.



                                                       27
        Table 5 summarizes the cross-sectional regression results for each of the other years. The first

four columns present the estimated effect of air pollution on internal infant death rates from four different

specifications for each cross-section (the rows). The second set of columns provides the estimated per-

capita income effects from the same specifications. The sample sizes and R-squareds of the regressions

are shown in brackets.

        There is wide variability in the estimated pollution effects, both across specifications within a

given year and also across the years.        The estimates from the 1978 and 1982 cross-sections are

particularly imprecise due to the very poor fit of the regressions. For the 1979, 1981, and 1984 cross-

sections, the R-squareds of the regressions are quite high. However, the estimated pollution coefficients

are not significant and their sign is either positive or negative, depending on the set of variables controlled

for. In fact, when state effects are controlled for in column 4, the estimates from all three years imply that

counties with higher pollution levels have fewer internal infant deaths. The 1983 cross-section is the only

year, other than 1980, in which pollution concentrations seem to have a significant impact on infant

mortality rates (see Appendix Figures for the scatter plots and regression lines). However, the estimates

are somewhat sensitive to the set of control variables.

        While the largest estimates from the cross-sectional analyses imply that a 1 mg/m3 decline in TSP

levels results in about 1-2 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births, the modal estimate suggests an

imprecise, zero-impact of pollution. Overall, there is little evidence of a systematic association between

particulates pollution and infant survival rates in these cross-sectional research designs. In addition, the

results are very sensitive to the year analyzed and the set of variables used as controls. Finally, Tables 4

and 5 also provide little evidence that per-capita income has a significant impact on infant mortality.



                                     “Quasi-Experimental” Estimates

Basic Results

        The national average concentration of total suspended particulates pollution fell by more than

20% in the 1980-82 period. This is, by far, the largest two-year decline in air pollution ever recorded in

the U.S. In addition, the average 1980-82 change in TSPs in the quartile of counties with the smallest

                                                      28
decline was only –1.3 mg/m3, while the average change in the quartile of counties with the largest decline

was –30.2 mg/m3. This difference is 1.5 times larger than the standard deviation of TSP levels before the

recession (e.g., 20 units in 1980). Given these discontinuous differences across counties in pollution

reductions, it seems unlikely that any other factors changed in a way that could lead to a spurious

correlation between declines in infant mortality and pollution.

        Table 6 presents the results from estimating equations (3) and (5) relating 1980-82 changes in

internal infant death rates within one year of birth to changes in air pollution. The first column contains

the “fixed-effects” results, in which all three years of mortality data from 1980-82 are pooled and

regressed on pollution levels, per-capita incomes, and county-specific intercepts. Strikingly, the pollution

coefficient is about 3-4 times larger than the largest estimate from the cross-sectional regressions. In

addition, it is very precisely estimated. Changes in particulate matter concentrations appear to have a

substantive and significant impact on changes in internal infant death rates, with a one-unit decline in

TSPs associated with 3.6 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births. The estimate implies that in areas with a

25-30 mg/m3 reduction in TSP levels during the recession (e.g., Pittsburgh), there were about 100 fewer

infant deaths per 100,000 births than there otherwise would have been. This is almost a 10 percent

decrease in the average rate of infant deaths in a county, and suggests an infant mortality-pollution

elasticity of about 0.3. The estimated effect of per-capita income changes, on the other hand, is small and

insignificant, and the pollution estimate is insensitive to the inclusion of income as a control.

        The next six columns of the table present the results from various specifications of equation (5).

Here, pollution and income levels in 1979 and 1980 and infant mortality rates in 1978 and 1979 are used

as instruments for the 1980-82 changes in pollution and income and the 1979-80 lagged change in infant

mortality rates. The lagged levels of the variables of interest are valid instruments for their changes under

the assumption that these variables are pre-determined conditional on the county effects. This approach is

robust to differential trends in infant mortality rates before the recession and dynamic feedback of an

unrestricted form. Consequently, the resulting two-stage least squares estimates are purged of biases due

to non-stationarities and mean reversion that may contaminate the fixed-effects estimates.               The

“Instrumental Variables” columns 1-6 sequentially control for additional sets of covariates.

                                                      29
        Although specification 1 controls for the lagged mortality rate change and for differential pre-

recession trends, the estimated effect of pollution on infant mortality is identical to the fixed-effects

estimate. The sampling errors are larger since the estimate is based only on the variation in overall 1980-

82 changes in pollution attributable to across county differences in pre-recession levels. The estimate is

significant at the 5-percent level, however. As large sets of controls are added in specifications 2-6, the

estimated pollution effect remains very stable at about 3.5-4.5 per unit of TSPs, even when unrestricted

state-year effects are included in the final two specifications. This is remarkable given that these models

explain approximately 85-percent of the variation in 1980-82 changes in infant mortality rates across

counties (R-squareds of 0.81-0.87). Among the counties in our sample, the internal infant death rate fell

by an average of about 101 per 100,000 births from 1980-82. Since these counties experienced an

average pollution decline of about 14 units, the estimates suggest that about 55-percent of the overall

reduction in infant mortality from 1980-82 may be the result of the dramatic pollution reductions.

        In direct contrast to the “conventional” estimates, the estimates of the pollution effects based on a

simple comparison of 1980-82 “pre-post” changes across counties are much larger in magnitude,

significant at conventional levels, and very stable across specifications. The stability of the estimates, in

particular, suggests that the analysis may be uncovering a true causal relationship between particulates

pollution and infant mortality. In addition, among all of the other coefficients, only the coefficients on the

indicators for birth weights less than 1000 grams and between 1000-1500 grams have t-ratios as large as

the pollution coefficient t-ratio. This suggests that the evaluation “signal-to-noise” ratio in this design for

identifying the pollution effects is quite high. The estimated effects of changes in per-capita income, on

the other hand, are very imprecise and unstable, as are the estimated unemployment rate effects.

        The final three columns of the table show the results from specifications in which changes in

pollution and income are not instrumented for by lagged levels. Here, only the lagged change in mortality

is instrumented for since it is clearly not exogenous. These estimates of the pollution effects may be

attenuated if correcting for differential trends and feedback relations is important. However, they provide

a benchmark for the analysis below that matches counties based on income shock subclassifications.

Although slightly reduced, the pollution coefficient estimates are significant at well below the one-percent

                                                      30
level and only vary between 3.3-3.5 across specifications, even when state-year effects are included. The

smaller sampling errors highlight the efficiency loss associated with the more robust IV estimates. The

estimated income and unemployment rate effects are inconsequential and unstable.

           In both the “IV” and “No IV” cases, controlling for the health of the infant at birth leads to

reduced estimates of the mortality effects of pollution. This suggests that declines in pollution may also

impact other health outcomes such as birth weight. It also implies, however, that air pollution has a direct

effect on survival probabilities even conditioning on the birth weight of the infant.

Evidence on a Potential Pathophysiologic Mechanism

           As discussed above, there is convincing evidence that maternal cigarette smoking damages the

health of the fetus before birth. For example, Sexton and Hebel (1984) analyze a clinical trial in which

pregnant smokers are randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, and women in the former group

are discouraged from smoking. They find that smoking rates at the eighth month of pregnancy are lower

in the treatment group than in the control group and that the mean birth weight of the infants of the

mothers in the treatment group is significantly higher.35 The effects of air pollution and cigarette smoking

may work through similar mechanisms. The results presented in Panels A and B of Table 7 are used to

address whether fetal exposure to particulates pollution has adverse health consequences.

           The first four columns of Panel A show the estimated impact of the 1980-82 pollution reductions

on infant death rates within 28 days and 24 hours of birth, based on regression equation (5). Columns 1

and 3 correspond to a specification that does not include the natality file control variables. The estimated

pollution coefficients for neonatal deaths and deaths within one day are 3.9 and 2.3, respectively. In

addition, they are both significant at conventional levels. Columns 2 and 4 show that controlling for the

natality file variables has almost no impact on the estimated pollution effects, even though these

regressions explain about 90-percent of the variation in mortality rate changes (R-squareds of 0.87 and

0.92).      The estimated effects of per-capita income are imprecise and insignificant, and changes in

unemployment rates have virtually no association with changes in mortality rates.


35
     They find no evidence of impacts on the gestational age (e.g., premature births) or the Apgar scores of the infant.

                                                            31
        When compared to the same specifications in Table 6, the estimates imply that reductions in

neonatal mortality account for practically all of the total decrease in internal infant deaths from 1980-82

attributable to the pollution declines. Similarly, about 55 percent of the infant mortality rate changes

induced by the pollution reductions are driven by fewer deaths within the first 24 hours after birth. These

findings are particularly striking since only about 70 and 40 percent of all internal infant deaths occur

within the first month and day after birth, respectively (see Table 1).

        Air pollution appears to have a disproportionate impact on the probability of death immediately

after birth. When compared to the dependent variable means, the estimates imply that about 75-percent of

the overall decrease in neonatal mortality rates from 1980-82 may be due to the pollution declines. They

also imply that death rates within 24 hours of birth would have increased from 1980-82 in the absence of

the pollution reductions. These findings suggest that maternal exposure to particulates pollution during

the gestation period compromises fetal health.

        The effect of the pollution changes on the average birth weight of infants is presented in the final

column of Panel A. Here, we use a fixed-effects analysis of the pooled, annual data from 1980-82 due to

the increased precision of the estimates. A one-unit reduction in TSPs concentrations is associated with a

0.2 gram increase in the average birth weight of infants in a county. While it is statistically significant,

the estimated pollution coefficient is small in magnitude. It suggests that in counties in which pollution

levels declined 25-30 units, infant birth weights increased by only 6 grams, on average, which is an

elasticity of about 0.006. The estimated effect of income changes on birth weight is insignificant.

        Panel B of Table 7 provides a more detailed picture of the effects of air pollution on the entire

distribution of birth weights. Here, the fixed-effects model is used to estimate the effect of pollution

changes on changes in the probability of an infant being born in a particular birth weight category. The

columns correspond to eight different outcome variables that are equal to the cumulative fraction of births

in birth weight categories ranging from 1000g to 4500g.

        There are two striking results. First, the incidences of both low (less than 2500g) and “relatively”

low (less than 3000g) birth weight births fall substantially with declines in pollution (columns 4 and 5).

For every unit reduction in particulates pollution, there are 3.0 and 13.6 fewer infants born with a birth

                                                      32
weight less than 2500g and 3000g, respectively, per 100,000 births. While the implied elasticities are

about 0.04-0.05, the estimated effects are both highly significant and of the same order of magnitude as

the estimates of the infant mortality effects. Second, these estimates prevail despite the fact that pollution

reductions are also associated with increased probabilities of “extremely” low (less than 1000g) and

“very” low (less than 1500g) birth weight births (columns 1 and 2).

         These results imply that our estimates of the impact of the pollution reductions on infant birth

weight may be biased down due to censoring. That is, if higher pollution concentrations also increase the

likelihood of a miscarriage or stillbirth, then conditioning on fetuses that are born alive will lead to

selection bias since declines in pollution levels may also result in lower fetal death rates.                     If a

disproportionate number of the “marginal” fetuses that survive are in the very low end of the birth weight

distribution, then the estimated effects on the incidence of very low and extremely low birth weight births

will be contaminated by particularly severe biases. The evidence in Panel B is consistent with this

potential biological mechanism as a selection mechanism.

         Interestingly, the pattern of these results is nearly identical to the patterns found in experimental

and “quasi-experimental” studies of the birth weight effects of maternal smoking. Sexton and Hebel

(1984) find that the incidence of low birth weight births is lower in the treatment group, which is

encouraged to stop smoking, than in the control group, which is not. However, the probability of a very

low birth weight birth, as defined above, is slightly higher in the treatment group. In fact, the ratio of the

magnitudes of these opposing effects (2.63) is virtually identical to the one derived from Panel B (2.34 =

0.297/0.127). Similar evidence comes from the study by Evans and Ringel (1999), which uses state-level

excise taxes on cigarettes as an instrumental variable for the smoking rates of pregnant women. The

authors also document opposing effects in these birth weight categories, with a ratio equal to 2.09.36

         To gauge the credibility of our sample selection theory, we examined 1980-82 changes in fetal

death rates in Pennsylvania and in the six counties comprising the Pittsburgh metropolitan area.37 The

36
  It is worth noting that the estimates in Panel B are more precise than the estimates in both of the smoking studies.
37
  Machine-readable data on fetal deaths are unavailable for this period. Consequently, we obtained fetal death
information from the 1980, 1981, and 1982 publications of the Vital Statistics of the United States. In the Vital
Statistics, fetal deaths include stillbirths, miscarriages, and abortions. Our analysis examines all fetal deaths.

                                                          33
data indicate that fetal death rates in Pennsylvania and Pittsburgh fell in the same years in which the large

pollution reductions occurred; at the rate of about 2 fewer fetal deaths per 100,000 pregnancies for every

unit decline in TSPs.38 Suppose that the vulnerable fetuses that survive have extremely low birth weights.

This figure is large enough to reverse the sign of the estimated effects on the incidence of very low birth

weight in Panel B. It also suggests that the estimated effects on the probability of low birth weight may

be biased down by 40-percent. The implied bias for the incidence of birth weights less than 3000g is

small. These crude calculations suggest that information on the resolution of all pregnancies, not just

those that end in a live birth, is needed for a complete analysis of the effects of pollution, or any other

factor, on infant health. We will address this issue in future research.

Effects by Race and Gender of the Infant

        One advantage of having births and deaths microdata is that the race and gender of all infants in

each county are known. As a result, infant death rates and mean values of the natality file controls can be

separately calculated for each race-gender cell within a county. We stratify our analysis by race for two

related reasons: 1) the black infant mortality rate is almost two-times greater than the white rate; and 2)

race is correlated with many important factors, including the socioeconomic status of the parents and their

access to quality health care. We also bifurcate the analysis by gender since there is evidence that infant

boys may be more susceptible to relevant risk factors such as respiratory distress syndrome than infant

girls (Papageorgiou, et al. 1981).

        The first set of columns of Table 8 present the estimated impact of county-level pollution changes

on the death rates of black infants. The pooled fixed-effects estimate in the first column implies that

black infant mortality rates may be more sensitive to pollution reductions than infant mortality as a whole.

The estimated pollution coefficient, 5.7, is highly significant and about 1.6 times greater than the estimate

for the whole population, although the implied elasticity is similar to before. The next four columns show

that the pollution coefficient increases when the lagged levels of the variables are used as instruments. Its



38
   Although their sample size of 935 women is too small for a reliable conclusion, Sexton and Hebel find that
pregnant women in the group discouraged from smoking have a lower incidence of still births than their counterparts
in the control group.

                                                        34
magnitude suggests that nearly the entire overall decline in black mortality rates from 1980-82 is

attributable to declining pollution levels. However, compared to the estimates in Table 6, these estimates

are imprecise and less stable across specifications, particularly when state-year effects are included. This

is not surprising given the much smaller population used in this analysis.

         Although the sampling errors are large, these results indicate that black survival rates respond

more to pollution reductions.39 There are several potential explanations for this. First, black infants may

be particularly susceptible to pollution for biological reasons, although this seems unlikely. Another,

more likely possibility is that there are racial differences in both the health endowment of pregnant

women and their access to medical care which may interact with the effects of declines in pollution.

Thirdly, since pollution levels are measured at the county level, different racial groups may experience

different pollution changes within the same county if there is residential segregation. Finally, black

women may be disproportionately located in the counties that were more heavily impacted by the

pollution reductions. We revisit these issues below.

         The rest of Table 8 presents the estimated effects of pollution on the mortality rate of female

infants. The fixed-effects estimate is significant and precise and suggests that the impact of pollution on

girls is slightly lower than for boys. The instrumental variables estimates are noticeably lower and

statistically insignificant, but revert back to the fixed-effects estimate when controls for birth weight and

state-year effects are included. It appears that female infant deaths are less responsive to air pollution and

that pollution reductions account for a smaller proportion of the overall decline in female mortality rates

from 1980-82. However, the effects of the pollution changes on the birth weights of girls are very similar

to the results shown in Panel B of Table 7 (results available from the authors). This suggests that boys are

less likely to survive for more than a year at a given birth weight than girls. Neither per-capita incomes

nor unemployment rates have a significant association with either black or female infant mortality rates.



39
   We also examined the effects of pollution changes on the birth weights of black infants, as in Panel B of Table 7
(results available from the authors). The pattern of effects across birth weight categories suggests that the fetal death
sample selection problem may be more severe for black fetuses than for the whole population. Consistent with this
possibility, we found that while the black neonatal mortality rate in Pennsylvania declined slightly more than the
white rate from 1980-82, the relative decline in the fetal death rate of blacks was much greater (U.S. Vital Statistics).

                                                           35
The Internal Validity of the Results

         One test of the internal consistency of our results is the estimated association between 1980-82

pollution changes and changes in infant mortality attributable to external causes, such as accidents and

homicides. On one hand, a weak association does not necessarily prove that our estimates of the pollution

effects are identifying the true causal impact. On the other hand, a significant, positive relationship would

mitigate confidence in our findings since there is no obvious reason why air pollution should impact

accident and homicide rates among infants.

         Table 9 presents estimates of the association between the recession-induced pollution reductions

and the external infant mortality rate from various specifications of equations (3) and (5). Column one

shows that the “fixed-effects” relationship is small and statistically insignificant. The next four columns

show a small and insignificant negative correlation between changes in pollution and external mortality

rates from 1980-82 when the lagged external rate is controlled for. When lagged pollution levels are used

as instruments for pollution changes in columns 6-8, this negative association becomes stronger,

potentially due to the negative serial dependence in external infant deaths. Accounting for state-year

effects reduces the estimated correlation substantially. The final two columns show that there is also a

very weak, negative relation between air pollution and neonatal deaths due to accidents and homicides.

         On the whole, these correlations provide no evidence that our estimates of the pollution effects in

Tables 6 and 7 are the result of spurious relations. In fact, there is weak evidence that external infant

death rates increased slightly in counties with large pollution reductions, perhaps due to the unobservable

effects of the recession (e.g., behavioral changes).40

Estimates by Subclassification on Income Shocks

         As discussed earlier, differential income shocks across counties are the most substantive

observable confounder in our research design. In addition, Table 3 suggests that 1980-82 changes in

income may provide a reasonable single-index summary of changes in almost all of our control variables.



40
  For the 1980 cross-section, TSP pollution levels have a statistically significant, positive association with infant
deaths attributable to external causes, based on the same specifications as in columns 6-10 in Table 4. This further
highlights the problems with using cross-sectional research designs to make causal inferences.

                                                          36
However, the functional forms of the relations between income changes and changes in infant mortality

rates and TSPs pollution are not known. As a result, we derive another set of estimates in which counties

are classified into groups on the basis of the sizes of their pollution and income changes during the period.

Our procedure matches and compares county groups with different changes in air pollution but nearly

identical changes in per-capita income during the recession. This approach is more robust to confounding

due to income shocks and allows us to examine potential interaction effects of pollution and income

shocks on changes in infant mortality rates. In addition, adjustment by subclassification on per-capita

income shocks will remove most sources of bias if this subclassifying variable is a valid single index for

most confounding changes (Cochran 1968, Rosenbaum and Rubin 1984, and Powell 1987).

        To implement this matching estimator, we classified counties into “Small/Middle/Big” pollution

shock and income shock categories based on the magnitudes of their 1980-82 declines in TSPs pollution

and per-capita income, respectively. The Small and Big categories consist of the counties in the bottom

and top quartiles of pollution changes and income changes, while the Middle category contains the 25-75

interquartile range of counties. The intersection of these two sets of subclassifications yields nine cells

(e.g., Big TSPs Shock/Small Income Shock, Small TSPs Shock/Small Income Shock, etc.).

        Table 10 presents the “first-stage” changes in pollution and income (first 2 columns) and the

“reduced-form” change in the internal infant mortality rate (column 3) from 1980-82 for each of these

county groups. County groups within the same subset of rows (the 3-row groups divided by solid lines)

have similar pollution shocks, on average, while the corresponding county groups across subsets of rows

have similar income shocks. Consequently, the effects of pollution changes, holding income shocks

constant, can be estimated by comparing corresponding county groups across sets of rows, while the

effects of income changes are derived by comparing groups within a set of rows. The estimated changes

have been adjusted using the “No Instruments” (1) specification in Table 6. The results are insensitive to

regression adjustment, as the unadjusted, raw changes produce very similar results. To provide an

overview of the baseline conditions that prevailed in counties before the recession, the remaining columns

of the table present the average characteristics of the counties in each county group in 1980.



                                                     37
        The “first-stage” results suggest that our crude subclassification scheme works reasonably well,

as the matched county groups have fairly similar pollution and income shocks. Comparing the relevant

county groups in column 3 reveals an impressive relationship between air pollution changes and internal

infant mortality rate changes and little association between income changes and infant deaths. All of the

counties with large and medium-sized pollution reductions from 1980-82 (first six rows) experienced

much larger declines in the infant mortality rate than the counties with small pollution reductions (last

three rows). In fact, there is little change in the infant death rate in the county groups with no reduction in

pollution, suggesting that infant mortality rates would have been stationary from 1980-82 in the absence

of the unprecedented fall in pollution levels. Also, with the exception of 1980 TSP levels, the baseline

average characteristics of counties in 1980 are similar in the county groups being compared. Finally,

even the smallest county group cell contains 64 counties with over 100,000 births per year.

        Table 11 presents estimates of the impact of particulates pollution derived from Table 10. They

are calculated by dividing the differences between matched groups in 1980-82 average mortality rate

changes by the matched group differences in 1980-82 average pollution changes. We show the estimates

based on comparing “Medium and Small” and “Large and Small” pollution change groups with Small,

Medium, and Big income shocks that are, on average, similar between the matched comparison groups.

The brackets contain the difference in average income changes between the matched groups, and show

that the matching is reasonably accurate. While the estimated effects of pollution changes vary from

about 4 to 12, the estimates are very stable across the different income shock categories within both sets

of pollution change comparisons. There appear to be virtually no interaction effects between pollution

changes and income changes in the determination of changes in infant mortality.

        Figure 5 illustrates the 1979-83 time-series patterns of differences in pollution levels and internal

infant death rates between the medium and small pollution change groups that had small income shocks

from 1980-82 (the first entry in Table 11). Both the unadjusted raw differences (Panel A) and the

regression-adjusted differences (Panel B), using the covariates in the “No Instruments” (1) specification

in Table 6, are plotted. In both graphs, the correspondence of the two series, especially the timing of the

abrupt trend breaks centered in 1980-82, is remarkable. The striking “saw-tooth” patterns that emerge in

                                                      38
both series provide compelling evidence of a causal relationship between changes in pollution and infant

mortality. In particular, it seems unlikely that any unobserved factors changed differentially in these

comparison groups in the same saw-tooth manner during the key period. The graphs for the five other

matched comparison groups in Table 11 exhibit similar saw-tooth patterns in pollution levels and infant

death rates from 1979-83.

        Although there are no obvious interaction effects between changes in pollution and income, the

estimated impact of pollution reductions is systematically higher in the comparisons between medium and

small pollution change county groups than in the comparisons between big and small pollution change

groups. The last row of Table 11 presents the weighted average of the estimated pollution effects within

each column, with weights equal to the total number of births in the comparison groups in 1980 and 1982.

The average elasticities are shown in parentheses. For every one-unit reduction in mean TSPs, there are

about 8.4 and 4.4 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births in counties with medium and large declines in

pollution, respectively, when compared to counties with no change in pollution. Due to the differences in

initial pollution levels in 1980, the implied elasticities of 0.45 and 0.35 are closer.

        In order to “cross validate” these results, we chose another, possibly more arbitrary, method of

deriving matched group comparison estimates for the 1980-82 period. In particular, we matched counties

with differential pollution changes but similar levels of manufacturing employment in 1980. Since

manufacturing activity in 1980 may be a reasonable proxy for the likely economic impact of the

recession, matching counties with similar manufacturing employment levels may absorb confounding

economic shocks in a similar, albeit less direct, way as matching on income shocks. This approach is

intuitively appealing when counties with very low 1980 manufacturing employment are matched. In this

case, it may be that neither county group was economically impacted by the recession; however, one of

the two groups experienced a pollution reduction due to its proximity to neighboring counties that were

heavily impacted. Similar to the previous classification scheme, we subclassify counties into the bottom

and top quartiles and the 25-75 interquartile range of 1980 manufacturing employment.

        The full results from this matching design are reported in the Appendix Table, Panels A and B.

The weighted averages of the Medium vs. Small and Big vs. Small pollution change estimates are 8.4 and

                                                       39
5.0, respectively. These findings are virtually identical to before, even though the compositions of

counties in these groups are different from the compositions in the “matched income change” groups.41

Nonlinearities in the Pollution-Infant Mortality Relationship

         The matched group analysis appears to reveal a systematic nonlinearity in the impact of pollution

reductions on internal infant mortality rates at the county level. Besides being a point of debate in the

epidemiological literature, the identification of potential nonlinearities and discontinuities in the

pollution-infant health relationship is crucial for determining the optimal design of air pollution

regulatory policy. Although a definitive analysis of this question is not possible with the available data

from this period, we describe our attempts at addressing this issue.

         There are several potential explanations for the differential responses observed at the county

level. First, individual infants may have nonlinear reactions to pollution reductions that depend on the

initial level of exposure.     Second, if there are heterogeneous responses to pollution declines, then

differences in average population characteristics across counties could generate variation in the estimated

pollution effects. Third, since TSPs pollution is measured at the county level, one could observe different

responses across counties if different populations are benefiting from the pollution reductions due to

residential segregation. Finally, differential responses could also result from differences across counties

in the within-county distribution of maternal health endowments and other predictors of infant mortality.

         Given the data constraints, we cannot directly examine the plausibility of the final two

explanations. However, the right panel of Table 10 provides some evidence on the relevance of the first

two hypotheses. Although most of the observable characteristics of counties in 1980 are similar in the big

and medium pollution change groups, air pollution levels in 1980 are a notable exception. Also, the

fraction of mothers who are nonwhite is slightly higher in the medium change group than in the big

change group. Consequently, another rationale for the racial differences in the estimated pollution effects

documented in Table 8 is that black mothers may have different baseline exposure levels to particulates.




41
   We also derived estimates of the pollution effects by matching counties on the basis of 1980-82 unemployment
rate changes. Using identical procedures, the weighted averages of the pollution effect estimates are 9.6 and 4.9.

                                                         40
         Although our analysis cannot convincingly pinpoint the relative importance of the first two

hypotheses, the evidence indicates that both may play a role. We included interactions of 1980-82

pollution changes with 1980 county characteristics in regression equation (5). While the estimated main

effects of pollution remain highly significant, none of the interactions have significant coefficients.

However, the interaction with 1980 pollution levels has the largest t-ratio (1.7), and the interaction with

the fraction of mothers who are black in 1980 has the second largest t-ratio (1.0). The t-ratios are much

smaller for all of the other interactions, including the variables in the final columns of Table 10.

         Focusing on the infant nonlinear response hypothesis, we estimated the impact of the 1980-82

pollution changes separately for county groups formed from the intersection of quartiles of 1980 pollution

levels and quintiles of 1980-82 pollution changes (results available from the authors). The analysis

reveals apparent discontinuities and thresholds in the effects of particulates pollution.42 Although the

sampling errors are large enough to preclude definitive conclusions, the hypothesis of nonlinear infant

responses cannot be rejected. Interestingly, this implies that comparisons between the big and medium

pollution change groups in Table 10 will lead to biased estimates of the impact of pollution, since the

medium change groups have lower initial levels of TSPs. Only the small change groups provide valid

counterfactuals since they experienced virtually no change in TSP levels, on average.



                                                      Conclusion

         Based on our quasi-experimental research design, we find a significant impact of pollution

reductions on decreases in infant mortality rates at the county level, with a 1 µg/m3 decline in suspended

particulates associated with about 4-8 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births (a 0.35-0.45 elasticity).

The results are driven almost entirely by fewer deaths occurring within one month and one day of birth,

suggesting that pollution exposure adversely impacts the fetus before birth. The estimated birth weight

42
   We examined two other methods for estimating the response function. First, we used the one-step series approach
suggested by Porter (1997) to estimate the equation: dyjt = m(xj82) – m(xj80) + dεjt = g(xj82, xj80) + dεjt, where m(•) is
the “nonparametric” conditional mean function of interest. We also used locally weighted regressions (Cleveland
1979) to estimate m(•). In both cases, the estimated response functions were broadly consistent with the results
from “binning” the county groups. However, the estimated threshold points were very sensitive to the specification
of the polynomial series in the first approach and to the choice of bandwidth in the second approach.

                                                           41
effects of the pollution changes provide evidence consistent with this pathophysiologic mechanism and

exhibit similarities to previous findings on the birth weight effects of maternal smoking. Importantly, the

estimates are remarkably stable across a variety of specifications. The analysis also reveals potential

nonlinearearities in the relationship between particulates pollution and infant mortality at the county level.

All of these findings are masked in “conventional” analyses based on less credible research designs. The

timing and location of the abrupt trend breaks in both pollution levels and infant mortality rates centered

in 1980-82 provide convincing evidence that particulate matter has a causal impact on infant health.

         Overall, the estimates imply that about 2,500 fewer infants died from 1980-82 than would have in

the absence of the dramatic reductions in particulates pollution. The relative health effects of fine and

large particles have recently become an extremely controversial topic in the public debate on federal air

pollution regulations.43 Since reliable measures of the concentrations of finer particles are not available

for the 1978-84 period, this study has focused on the health consequences of total suspended particulates,

which include both large and small particles. Consequently, our findings cannot be used to shed any light

on the current controversy.

         Future work should focus on developing both credible theory and evidence on the biological

pathways through which air pollution affects infant health (e.g., the ways in which pollution may affect

fetal development before birth). A serious examination of the factors underlying the nonlinear pollution-

infant death relation observed at the county level is also called for. Finally, we will use the large

differences across counties in pollution reductions induced by the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendment as

another quasi-experimental design for evaluating the infant health-pollution relation. Mean TSP levels

were higher in the early 1970s and their changes were nearly as large as the ones documented for the

1980-82 period. Consequently, in addition to cross validating the results from this study, this research

design may identify a different range of the pollution-infant death function.




43
  With the passage of the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendment, the EPA began regulation of the emission of all
particulates (a.k.a., TSPs). Since 1987, the EPA has shifted its regulatory efforts to curbing the emission of finer
particles. In 1987 and 1997 the regulations were changed to apply only to emitters of PM-10s, which are particles
with an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to 10 micrometers, and emitters of PM-2.5s, respectively.

                                                          42
                                              DATA APPENDIX

Variables from the 1978-1984 National Mortality Detail Files
        The 1978-1984 National Mortality Detail Files are an annual census of deaths in the U.S, derived
from the Standard Certificate of Death. The data contain the universe of deaths and information on the
deceased’s county of residence, race, gender, age at death, and cause of death. Since infant deaths cannot
be directly linked to individual births for this period, the microdata are aggregated into race-gender-age at
death by county of residence cells. The total number of infant deaths (deaths within 1-day, 28 days, and
1-year of birth) within a demographic-county cell is used as the numerator for the infant mortality rate.

Variables from the 1978-1984 National Natality Detail Files
         The 1978-1984 National Natality Detail Files are an annual census of births in the U.S, derived
from the Standard Certificate of Live Birth. Each file contains the universe of births and information on
the county of residence of the mother, socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of the parents, the
mother’s usage of medical services, the health endowment and medical history of the mother, and the
infant health endowment. The microdata on births are aggregated into race-gender by maternal county of
residence cells. The total number of births within a demographic-county cell is used as the denominator
for the infant mortality rate. The following variables are used as controls in the analysis. The word
“indicator” refers to an indicator variable at the individual-level. The cell observation contains the
fraction of individual observations for which the indicator is one.

Socioeconomic and Demographic Characteristics
Mother
county of residence
continuous years of education
indicators for years of education < 12, 12-15, 16+
unmarried indicator
immigrant indicator

Father
continuous years of education
indicators for years of education < 12, 12-15, 16+
age

Infant
white skin color indicator

Medical System Utilization
number of prenatal care visits
first prenatal care visit in months 1 or 2, indicator
first prenatal care visit in month 3, indicator
first prenatal care visit in months 4, 5, or 6, indicator
first prenatal care visit in months 7, 8, or 9, indicator
delivery outside of hospital, indicator
physician present at delivery, indicator

Maternal Health Endowment and Medical History
indicators for mother’s age 10-14, 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40+
1 previous fetal death, indicator
2 or more previous fetal deaths, indicator
last pregnancy terminated in live birth, indicator

                                                        43
last pregnancy did not terminate with a live birth, indicator
only 1 previous live birth, indicator
2 or more previous live births, indicator
1-11 months since termination of last pregnancy, indicator
12-17 months since termination of last pregnancy, indicator
18 or more months since termination of last pregnancy, indicator
1 previous termination before week 20 of gestation, indicator
2 or more previous terminations before week 20 of gestation, indicator

Infant Health Endowment
indicator for gender of birth
not a singleton indicator (twins or greater birth)
indicators for weeks of gestation < 20, 20-30, 31-35, 36-38, 39-40, 41, 42+
continuous birth weight
indicators for birth weight < 1000 grams, 1000-1499, 1500-1999, 2000-2499, 2500-2999, 3000-3499,
         3500-3999, 4000-4499, 4500+
interaction of low birth weight (<2,500 grams) and premature birth (gestation<36 weeks) indicators
any reported congenital malformation, indicator
1 minute apgar score
5 minute apgar score

Total Suspended Particulates (TSPs) Pollution Data
         The data on suspended particulates pollution levels in each county were obtained by filing a
Freedom of Information Act request with the EPA. This yielded the Quick Look Report data file, which is
derived from the EPA’s Air Quality Subsystem (AQS) database. This file contains the universe of
recordings of TSPs pollution concentrations from each of the approximately 4,000 EPA air monitors that
were located throughout the U.S. during the period of interest, as well as the location of each monitor.
For each county, the annual concentration of TSPs used in this study is the weighted average of the
annual geometric means of each monitor in the county, with the number of observations per monitor used
as weights.
         Our analysis relies on the presumption that the pollution concentration readings used accurately
reflect the “true” exposure of individuals to TSPs. The readings from the TSPs monitors are used to
determine which counties are heavily regulated under the Clean Air Act Amendments. To preclude the
possibility that counties or states place monitors to fabricate the appearance of favorable pollution
concentrations, the Code of Federal Regulations contains very precise criteria that govern the siting of a
monitor.44 Among the most important criteria is that the monitors capture representative pollution
concentrations in high population areas. Moreover, the EPA must approve the location of all monitors
and requires documentation that the monitors are actually placed in the approved locations.

County-Level Per-Capita Income Data and Unemployment Rate Data
        Ideally, data would be available on the incomes of women giving birth in each county. In its
absence, the analysis uses the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ annual county-level series on per-capita
income (deflated to $1982-84). It is “the sum of wage and salary disbursements, other labor income,
proprietors’ income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, rental income of
persons with capital consumption adjustment, personal dividend income, and transfer payments to
persons, less personal contribution for social insurance” (Bureau of Economic Analysis 1994). This is the



44
 This discussion results from the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 1995, title 40, part 58 and a conversation with
Manny Aquilania and Bob Palorino of the EPA’s District 9 Regional Office.

                                                        44
most comprehensive measure of income available at the county level and is superior to less broad
measures, such as labor income, which do not capture all of the resources available to individuals.
       The analysis also controls for the annual, civilian unemployment rate in each county, which
comes from the Employment and Unemployment for State and Local Areas, published annually by the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

County-Level Data on Transfer Payments
        From the Regional Economic Information System (REIS), we obtained county-level information
on medical transfer payments and payments for income maintenance and unemployment insurance. The
analysis controls for each of the following payment sub-categories, both in terms of total payments to the
county and per-capita payments (in $1982-84):

Medical Care for Low Income Individuals (primarily Medicaid and state and local government general
        assistance medical programs)
Medicare Payments
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
Food Stamp Payments
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Other Income Maintenance Payments (e.g., general assistance benefits and earned income tax credits)
Unemployment Insurance Benefit Payments (UI)

        In addition, we also collected data on the number of AFDC recipients and the number of AFDC
recipient children in each county from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. However,
these series are available for only a few years (1980, 1982, 1983, and 1984) and cover most of the
counties in our sample only in 1980.

State-Level Medicaid Data
       County-level data on Medicaid recipiency is unavailable for the period of interest. Instead, from
the Health Care Financing Administration we obtained annual, state-level information on the number of
Medicaid recipients, the average cost per Medicaid recipient, and payments to medical vendors from the
Medicaid program. Data for Arizona is missing in all years.

State-Level Temperature and Precipitation Data
        We obtained data on precipitation and temperature from the National Weather Service, which is a
subdivision of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The National Weather Service has
weather stations located throughout the United States that record local precipitation and temperature. The
publicly available annual data contain state-level averages of precipitation and temperature in each month
of the year. These variables are used as controls in the analysis since temperature and precipitation
covary with pollution levels, and it is thought that they may also affect health (Samet, et al. 1998).

County Manufacturing Employment Data
         In some of our analysis, we match and compare counties with similar levels of manufacturing
activity before the recession. Consequently, we use data on employment levels in manufacturing in each
county from the annual County Business Patterns data files.

Variables from the Bureau of Health Professionals Area Resource File
County-level data are available on a number of medical variables for a subset of the counties in our
sample. These include (years of availability in parentheses):
       # of health care facilities with “intermediate” Medicaid beds (1978, 1980, 1982)
       # of “intermediate” Medicaid beds (1978, 1980, 1982)
       # of health care facilities with Medicaid beds of any type (1978, 1980)

                                                   45
        # of Medicaid beds of any type (1978, 1980)

Variables from the 1983 County and City Data Books
        The following are the list of variables taken from the 1983 County and City Data Book (CCDB).
Approximately every 5 years, the Census Bureau releases a new version of the CCDB, which contains
county-level information that is not readily available on an annual basis. Most of the information comes
from the 1980 Census of Population and Housing. The crime data comes from the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation; the medical data comes from the American Hospital Association and the American Medical
Association; the spending and tax variables come from the Census of Governments. See “Source Notes
and Explanations” in the CCDB for more detailed explanations of the variables and their sources. These
variables are used as controls in the 1980 cross-sectional regressions.

Presence of Health Care Providers and Facilities
physicians per 100,000 in 1980
hospital beds per 100,000 in 1980

Population and Demographic Variables
population per square mile in 1980
% of population white in 1980
% of population female in 1980
% of population aged 65 and over in 1980
% of population over 25 with at least a high school degree in 1980
% of population over 25 with at least a college degree in 1980
% of population in urban area

Socioeconomic Variables
civilian labor force (aged 16 or older) unemployment rate
% of employment in manufacturing in 1980
% of families below the poverty level in 1979
log-median value of owner occupied housing units in 1980

Crime Variables
crime rate per 100,000 in 1981
all serious crimes known to police per 100,000 in 1981
property crimes per 100,000 in 1981

Spending and Tax Variables
per-capita government revenue in 1977
per-capita total taxes in 1977
per-capita property taxes in 1977
per-capita general expenditures in 1977
% of spending on education in 1977
% of spending for police protection in 1977
% of spending on public welfare in 1977
% of spending on health in 1977
% of spending on highways in 1977




                                                   46
                                          REFERENCES

Amdur, Mary. 1996. “Animal Toxicology.” In Richard Wilson and John Spengler, editors. 1996.
Particles in Our Air. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Chappie, Mike and Lester B. Lave. 1982. “The Health Effects of Air Pollution: A Reanalysis.” Journal
of Urban Economics, 12: 346-76.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 1998. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6826.

Cleveland, William S. 1979. “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatterplots.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74: 829-36.

Cleveland, William S., and T.E. Graedel. 1979. “Photochemical Air Pollution in the Northeast United
States.” Science, 204: 1273-78.

Cleveland, William S., B. Kleinder, J. E. McRae, and J. L. Warner. 1976. “Photochemical Air Pollution:
Transport from the New York City Area into Connecticut and Massachusetts.” Science, 191: 179-81.

Cochran, William. 1968. “The Effectiveness of Adjustment by Subclassification in Removing Bias in
Observational Studies.” Biometrics, 24: 205-13.

Cook, R. Dennis. 1980. “Smoking and Lung Cancer,” in R. A. Fisher: An Appreciation, eds. S. Fienberg
and D. Hinkley, New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. 182-91.

Cook, Thomas D., and Donald T. Campbell. 1979. Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues
for Field Settings. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.

Coory M. 1997. “Does Gestational Age in Combination with Birthweight Provide Better Statistical
Adjustment of Neonatal Mortality Rates than Birthweight Alone?” Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology,
11(4): 385-91.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6): 1263-96.

Dockery, Douglas W., et al. 1993. “An Association Between Air Pollution and Mortality in Six U.S.
Cities.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 329(24): 1753-9.

Dockery, Douglas W. and C. Arden Pope. 1996. “Epidemiology of Acute Health Effects: Summary of
Time Series Studies.” In Richard Wilson and John Spengler, editors. Particles in Our Air. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Ettner, Susan. 1996. “New Evidence on the Relationship Between Income and Health,” Journal of
Health Economics, 15: 67-85.

Evans, William N. and Jeanne S. Ringel. 1999. “Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve Birth Outcomes?”
Journal of Public Economics, 72: 135-54.

Fumento, Michael. 1997. Polluted Science, American Enterprise Institute: Washington, D.C.


                                                 47
Grossman, Michael and Theodore J. Joyce. 1990. “Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and Birth
Weight Production Functions in New York City.” Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5, pt. 1): 983-1007.

Hanratty, Maria, 1996. “Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health.” American Economic
Review, 86(1): 276-84.

Hastie, T. J., and R. J. Tibshirani. 1990. Generalized Additive Models. Monographs on Statistics and
Applied Probability No. 43. Chapman and Hall: London.

Holland, W. W., A. E. Bennet, I. R. Cameron, et al. 1979. “Health Effects of Particulate Pollution:
Reappraising the Evidence.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 110: 625-59.

Institute of Medicine. 1985. Preventing Low Birthweight. National Academy Press: Washington, D.C.

Joyce, Theodore J., Michael Grossman, and Fred Goldman. 1989. “An Assessment of the Benefits of Air
Pollution Control: The Case of Infant Health.” Journal of Urban Economics, 25(1): 32-51.

Lave, Lester B. and Eugene P. Seskin 1977. Air Pollution and Human Health. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Levine, Phillip B., Amy B. Trainor, and David J. Zimmerman. 1995. “The Effect of Medicaid Abortion
Funding Restrictions on Abortions, Pregnancies, and Births.” NBER Working Paper No. 5066, March.

Lipfert, Frederick W. 1984. “Air Pollution and Mortality: Specification Searches Using SMSA-Based
Data.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 11: 208-43.

Lipfert, Frederick W. and Ronald E. Wyzga. 1995. “Air Pollution and Mortality: Issues and
Uncertainties.” Journal of Air Waste Management Association, 45: 949-66.

Meara, Ellen. 1998. “Why is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status?” Mimeograph, Department of
Economics, Harvard University.

Menard M.K., Q. Liu, E. A. Holgren, W. M. Sappenfield. 1998. “Neonatal Mortality for Very Low Birth
Weight Deliveries in South Carolina by Level of Hospital Perinatal Service.” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 179(2): 374-81.

Mendelsohn, Robert and Guy Orcutt. 1979. “An Empirical Analysis of Air Pollution Dose-Resonse
Curves.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 6.

National Center for Health Statistics. 1981. State Definitions and Reporting Requirements for Live
Births, Fetal Deaths, and Induced Terminations of Pregnancy. Hyattsville, MD.

Özkaynak H. and G.D. Thurston. 1987. “Associations Between 1980 U.S. Mortality Rates and
Alternative Measures of Airborne Particle Concentration.” Risk Analysis, 7:449-61.

Papageorgiou, A.N., E. Colle, E. Farri-Kostopoulos, and M.M. Gelfand. 1981. “Incidence of Respiratory
Distress Syndrome following Antenatal Betamethasone: Role of Sex, Type of Delivery, and Prolonged
Rupture of Membranes.” Pediatrics, 67(5): 614-17.

Philip, Alistair G. S. 1995. “Neonatal Mortality Rate: Is Further Improvement Possible?” Journal of
Pediatrics, March, 126 (3): 427-33.

                                                 48
Pope, C. Arden, III, et. al. 1995. “Particulate Air Pollution as a Predictor of Mortality in a Prospective
Study of U.S. Adults.” American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, 151: 669-74.

Pope, C. Arden and Douglas W. Dockery. 1996. “Epidemiology of Chronic Health Effects: Cross-
Sectional Studies.” In Richard Wilson and John Spengler, editors. Particles in Our Air. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Pope, C. Arden III, et. al. 1999. “Oxygen Saturation, Pulse Rate, and Particulate Air Pollution: A Daily
Time-Series Panel Study.” American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, 159: 365-72.

Porter, Jack. 1997. “Nonparametric Regression Estimation for a Panel Data Model with Additive
Individual Effects.” Mimeograph, Department of Economics, Harvard University.

Powell, James. 1987. “Semiparametric Estimation of Bivariate Latent Variable Models.” Social Systems
Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Working Paper 8704.

Ransom, Michael R., and C. Arden Pope III.           1995.   “External Health Costs of a Steel Mill.”
Contemporary Economic Policy, 8: 86-97.

Rees J.M., S.A. Lederman, and J.L. Kiely. 1996. “Birth Weight Associated with Lowest Neonatal
Mortality: Infants of Adolescent and Adult Mothers.” Pediatrics, 98(6 Pt. 1): 1161-6.

Rosenbaum, Paul and Donald Rubin. 1984. “Reducing Bias in Observational Studies Using
Subclassification on the Propensity Score.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79: 516-24.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz. 1983. “Estimating a Household Production Function:
Heterogeneity and the Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birthweight.” Journal of Political
Economy, 91 (4); 723-46.

Rosenzweig, Mark. R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1991. “Inequality at Birth: The Scope for Policy
Intervention.” Journal of Econometrics. 50: 205-28.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 1999. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Mimeograph, University of North
Carolina Greensboro.

Samet, Jonathan, Scott Zeger, Julia Kelsall, Jing Xu, and Laurence Kalstein. 1998. “Does Weather
Confound or Modify the Association of Particulate Air Pollution with Mortality?” Environmental
Research Section A, 77: 9-19.

Sexton, Mary and J. Richard Hebel. 1984. “A Clinical Trial of Change in Maternal Smoking and Its
Effect on Birth Weight.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 251: 911-15.

Spix, C., J. Heinrich, D. Dockery, J. Schwartz, G. Volksch, K. Scwinkowski, C. Collen, and H.E.
Wichmann. 1994. “Summary of the Analysis and Reanalysis Corresponding to the Publication on Air
Pollution and Daily Mortality in Erfurt, E. Germany 1980-1989,” in Critical Evaluation Workshop on
Particulate Matter: Mortality Epidemiology Studies. Raleigh, NC.

Stewart D.L. and J.H. Hersh. 1995. “The Impact of Major Congenital Malformations on Mortality in a
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.” Journal of the Kentucky Medical Association, August, 93(8): 329-32.



                                                   49
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. 1988. Healthy Children: Investing in the Future,
OTA-H-345. U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington D.C.

Utell, Mark and Jonathan Samet. 1996. “Airborne Particles and Respiratory Disease: Clinical and
Pathogenetic Considerations.” In Richard Wilson and John Spengler, editors. 1996. Particles in Our Air.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wang, Xiaobin, Hui Ding, Louise Ryan, and Xiping Xu. 1997. “Association Between Air Pollution and
Low Birth Weight: A Community-based Study.” Environmental Health Perspectives, 105: 514-20.

Wilson, Richard. “Introduction.” In Richard Wilson and John Spengler, editors. 1996. Particles in Our
Air. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Woodruff, Tracey J., et al. 1997. “The Relationship Between Selected Causes of Postneonatal Infant
Mortality and Particulate Air Pollution in the United States.” Environmental Health Perspectives, 105(6):
608-12.




                                                   50
Table 1: Sample Statistics, 1978-1984

                                           1978            1979            1980            1981            1982           1983            1984
Number of Counties in Sample               1,024           1,044          1,077           1,072           1,077           1,016            980
Total Births in Sample                   2,604,110       2,746,661      2,854,529       2,876,724       2,937,341       2,782,800       2,788,988
Total Births in U.S.                     3,338,300       3,499,795      3,617,981       3,635,515       3,685,457       3,642,821       3,673,568

Fatalites Per 100,000 Live Births
Internal Causes
   At 1 Day                                515.2           492.0           471.7           453.2          450.3           431.8          417.3
   At 1 Month                             950.5           898.6           855.7           811.8           778.6           729.7          704.0
   At 1 Year                              1337.2          1278.8          1229.2          1168.4          1124.5          1080.1         1050.8

External Causes
  At 1 Month                                4.6             3.5            2.7             4.4             4.3             2.8             3.2
  At 1 Year                                 41.6            35.4           38.4            33.9            33.9            30.7            28.5

At 1 Year All Causes, by Race
   Whites                                 1194.4           1142           1099.4          1048.2          1003.8           963.4          937.6
   Blacks                                 2284.6          2160.3          2128.1          2006.5          1971.5          1918.9         1854.4

Mean County-Level Pollution, Income, and Unemployment Rate
TSPs Concentration                       69.1        69.0                 70.5            66.4            56.1            56.8            59.6
Per Capita Income (1982$s)             $12,804     $12,779               $12,449         $12,500         $12,406         $12,745         $13,333
% Unemployment Rate                       6.1         5.9                  7.2             7.7             9.8             9.7             7.6

Mean Parental Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics
% Mother H.S. Dropout                  22.8           18.1                 17.6            16.8            16.3            15.4            14.7
Mother's Years of Education            12.2           12.4                  12.4           12.4            12.5            12.6            12.7
Father's Years of Education            12.8           12.9                  12.9           13.0            12.9            13.1            13.2
% Single Mother                        17.6           18.3                 19.6            20.0            20.4            21.4            22.1
% Black                                17.8           17.7                 17.4            17.2            17.2            16.7            16.8
% Immigrant Mother                     11.0           11.3                 11.8            12.6            12.7            12.4            12.7

Mean Medical Services Utilization
% Prenatal Care in 1st Trimester            72.0           73.7            74.6            74.8            74.9            75.6            75.8
Number of Prenatal Visits                   9.6             8.8             9.2             9.2             9.3            9.3             9.3
% Born Outside Hospital                     0.87           0.90            0.96            1.01            1.01            1.07            1.02
% Doctor Present at Birth                   96.9           97.4            97.1            96.3            97.0            96.7            96.5

Mean Maternal Health Endowment
% Teenage Mother                            16.1           15.5            15.0            14.3            13.7            13.2            12.5
% Mom >34 Years                              4.6            4.7             4.7             4.8             5.4             5.9             6.3
% Prior Fetal Death                         16.1           17.1            17.7            18.9            19.3            19.8            20.5
% >= 2 Prior Births                         24.7           24.6            24.3            24.3            24.3            24.4            24.5
% No Prior Pregnancy                        37.2           37.1            36.6            36.8            36.3            35.9            35.2

Mean Infant Health Endowment
% Extremely Low Birth Weight                0.56           0.55            0.56            0.57            0.58            0.59            0.60
% Very Low Birth Weight                     1.20           1.18            1.18            1.19            1.20            1.21            1.21
% Low Birth Weight                           7.2            7.0             6.9             6.9             6.8             6.9             6.7
% Gestation < 31 Weeks                       0.9            0.9             1.0             1.4             1.4            1.4             1.4
% Gestation > 40 Weeks                      23.9           23.7            25.3            29.7            29.4            28.8            29.1
% Congenital Malformation                   -----          0.92            0.84            0.92            0.98            1.00            1.03
APGAR 1 Minute                              8.10           8.06            7.99            8.00            7.96            7.95            7.94
APGAR 5 Minute                              9.11           9.08            9.01            9.03            8.98            8.95            8.94
Notes: All of the sample statistics, except the fatality, pollution, income, and unemployment rate measures were calculated from the 1978-1984
Detail Natality Public-Use files. The number of deaths and their causes are derived from the 1978-1984 National Mortality Detail Files. The
county-level pollution concentrations are the weighted average of the geometric mean concentrations of each monitor in the county, using the
number of observations per monitor as weights. TSPs are measured in micrograms per cubic meter. The per-capita income data come from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis' county-level series and are deflated to $1982-84 by the CPI. The unemployment rates come from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. The total number of births in each county are used as weights in calculating the sample means. The birth weight categories are
defined as follows: extremely low birth weight is less than 1000 grams; very low birth weight is less than 1,500 grams; and low birth weight is less
than 2,500 grams. The sample consists of the 1,077 counties with data on TSPs concentrations in both 1980 and 1982.
Table 2: Sample Means by TSPs Pollution Groups in 1980 Cross-Section
                                                              TSPs Groups                                   Test of Equality
                                                 Small           Middle                    Big                F-Statistic
                                                  (1)              (2)                     (3)                     (4)
Total Births                                   397,242         1,449,495                1,101,773                 -----

Mean County-Level Pollution, Income, and Unemployment Rate
TSPs Concentration                              44.3                   61.1              91.8                    1340*
Per Capita Income (1982$s)                    $12,135                 $12,203           $12,730                   7.8*
% Unemployment Rate                             6.9                     7.2               7.4                     2.2

Mean Parental Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics
% Mother H.S. Dropout                          18.4                     19.7              14.9                    22.2*
Mother's Years of Education                    12.6                     12.4              12.2                    15.6*
Father's Years of Education                    13.0                     12.9              12.8                     3.7
% Single Mother                                16.1                     19.8              20.4                    12.8*
% Black                                        13.4                     19.7              15.5                    14.3*
% Immigrant Mother                              9.7                      9.5              15.0                    28.5*

Mean Medical Services Utilization
% Prenatal Care in 1st Trimester                     76.5               74.9              73.4                    6.5*
Number of Prenatal Visits                            10.4               10.1              7.6                    100.0*
% Born Outside Hospital                               1.2                0.8               1.1                    5.0*
% Doctor Present at Birth                            97.1               97.5              96.6                    5.9*

Mean Maternal Health Endowment
% Teenage Mother                                     13.6               15.2              15.5                    11.6*
% Mom >34 Years                                       5.0               4.6               4.7                      4.1
% Prior Fetal Death                                  18.5               16.9              18.3                    10.9*
% >= 2 Prior Births                                  23.7               23.4              25.7                    44.5*
% No Prior Pregnancy                                 36.0               36.6              36.8                     0.9

Mean Infant Health Endowment
% Extremely Low Birth Weight                         0.53               0.58              0.54                     4.5
% Very Low Birth Weight                              1.11               1.23              1.13                     9.5*
% Low Birth Weight                                    6.5                7.1               6.8                    13.5*
% Gestation < 31 Weeks                               0.92               1.07              0.96                    13.1*
% Gestation > 40 Weeks                               25.8               25.5              25.0                     1.4
% Congenital Malformation                             1.1                0.9               0.7                    13.5*
APGAR 1 Minute                                       8.22               8.07              7.81                    76.1*
APGAR 5 Minute                                       9.23               9.10              8.82                    94.6*

Mean County Level Characteristics
Unemployment Rate                                      6.4               6.4                6.9                   5.5*
% Manufacturing                                       20.2              22.8               21.5                   6.4*
% Poverty                                              8.4               9.0                9.5                   4.9*
% White                                               88.8              82.5               80.0                  27.6*
% Female                                              51.4              51.6               51.3                  12.9*
% Urban                                               68.5              80.1               88.0                   54.6*
% > 65 Years Old                                      12.4              10.8               10.1                  34.6*
% >= 12 Year of Educ                                  68.8              67.1               69.2                   7.6*
% >= 16 Year of Educ                                  17.2              17.0               17.0                    0.1
Population per Sq. Mile                               627              2439               1568                   18.8*
No. Doctors / 100,000 People                         161.0             184.2              195.4                   6.0*
No. Hospital Beds / 100,000                          623.2             632.8              581.8                    2.1
Crimes / 100,000                                     5,487             5,534              6,737                  33.4*
Serious Crimes / 100,000                             5,010             5,034              6,039                  30.6*
Per Capita Government Revenues                       $788              $694               $830                   25.2*
% Gov't Expenditures on Health                         6.7              6.6                6.3                     0.5
% Gov't Expenditures on Educ.                         48.2              47.3               45.4                   7.7*
January Temperature                                   35.5              33.1               35.2                    5.3*
January Precipitation                                 2.74              2.70               3.27                   11.3*
July Temperature                                      75.1              75.9               76.4                    2.9
July Precipitation                                    4.06              3.30               1.93                  111.9*
Notes: See notes to Table 1. The "County Level Characteristics" come from the 1983 County Data Book. The 1199
counties with pollution data in 1980 were divided into three categories based on their mean level of TSPs in that year.
The "Small" category, col. (1), contains the 25% of counties with pollution concentrations less than 50.0 units, and the
"Large" category, col. (2), contains the 25% of counties with concentrations greater than 74.0 units. The "Middle"
category, col. (3), contains the remaining 50% of counties. Column (4) presents the F-statistics testing the equality of the
means across cols. (1) - (3).
* indicates significance at the 1% level
Table 3: F-Statistics for 1980-82 Changes in Observables by TSPs Pollution Shock Groups, Matching on Income Shock Groups
                                              Big TSPs - Small TSPs                      Medium TSPs - Small TSPs                            Big TSPs - Medium TSPs
                                                  Income Shock:                               Income Shock:                                       Income Shock:
                                        Small        Medium           Big            Small        Medium         Big                    Small        Medium         Big
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)                     (7)            (8)         (9)
% Change in Births 1980-82               0.01          1.58           0.01           0.02          0.01         0.01                    0.01           3.14        0.02

Change in Mean County-Level Pollution and Income
TSPs Concentration                   664.80*     1219.91*            760.21*           278.61*        289.47*         83.58*           210.77*        607.20*        575.64*
Per Capita Income (1982$s)             0.07        8.98*              8.68*              4.69           5.22           0.17              2.79           1.25          17.11*
% Unemployment Rate                   6.85*        2.03               29.2*             11.68*          4.49          10.67*             0.09           0.53          8.93*

Change in Mean Parental Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics
% Mother H.S. Dropout                 0.22         0.68          0.21                  19.34*           3.24           1.45              5.77          10.44*          0.65
Mother's Years of Education           0.29        18.55*          0.28                  0.46            5.70           0.01              0.01           7.24*          0.48
Father's Years of Education           0.01        11.20*         8.38*                  1.20            5.47           0.01              0.48            2.28         13.60*
% Single Mother                       0.09         1.48          0.03                  8.33*            0.06           0.41              4.71           1.63           0.88
% Black                               0.28         2.46          0.58                  23.46*           0.06           0.02             6.92*           5.40           1.24
% Immigrant Mother                   6.78*         1.47          1.71                  7.06*            1.64          36.27*             0.70          9.68*          27.20*

Change in Mean Medical Services Utilization
% Prenatal Care in 1st Trimester        0.22            0.29          0.11               0.16          0.79            1.07              0.52           3.13           0.58
Number of Prenatal Visits               2.22            0.01          0.76               3.07          0.53            0.01              0.11           0.54           1.09
% Born Outside Hospital                7.06*            0.85          5.10               0.01          7.09*           2.52              6.59           4.05           1.02
% Doctor Present at Birth               1.95            2.87          8.32*              0.70           1.07           3.47              3.67           0.90           2.19

Change in Mean Maternal Health Endowment
% Teenage Mother                     1.12               1.29           0.08            12.95*           1.63           0.03              1.69           0.01           0.03
% Mom >34 Years                      4.79               0.01           2.02             6.10            0.01           0.15             14.14*          0.01           1.78
% Prior Fetal Death                 7.59*              9.36*          15.31*            5.01            2.49           0.74              1.58           4.21          34.28*
% >= 2 Prior Births                  0.47              16.41*          1.87             0.10            2.30           1.03              0.78          11.63*         8.19*
% No Prior Pregnancy                14.17*              6.12           1.15            30.55*           3.32           3.51              0.01           1.01           0.62

Change in Mean Infant Health Endowment
% Extremely Low Birth Weight         0.25               6.47           1.27             0.36            1.77           0.71             0.79            2.84          5.56
% Very Low Birth Weight              1.41               0.80           0.25             0.24            0.04           1.52             2.21            0.82          0.60
% Low Birth Weight                   0.01               3.25           3.26             3.39            0.03           2.32             1.51            4.56          0.27
% Gestation < 31 Weeks               0.28               1.91           3.15             8.37*           0.39           0.14             1.86            6.44          6.94*
% Gestation > 40 Weeks               0.89               0.05           0.35             1.37            0.14           1.69             0.03            0.54          4.91
% Congenital Malformation            0.11               1.90           1.48            69.39*          8.49*           0.30            33.01*           2.99          0.80
APGAR 1 Minute                       0.07              11.86*          4.14             0.92            0.04           0.08             0.13           22.01*         4.90
APGAR 5 Minute                       4.14              15.29*          4.73             1.47            0.01           0.25             1.48           26.56*         4.62
Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 2. The entries are F-statistics testing the equality of 1980-82 mean changes in the variables for the two groups of counties being compared.
The county groups that are compared in each column have differential changes in TSPs but similar changes in per-capita income, on average. The "Small" and "Big"
categories consist of the counties in the bottom and top quartiles of pollution changes and income changes, while the Middle category contains the 25-75 interquartile range of
counties. Each column compares two of the nine cells that can be formed from the intersection of the two sets of subclassifications. For example, column (1) tests whether
the mean change in each variable is equal in the Big TSPs Shock/Small Income Shock and Small TSPs Shock/Small Income Shock cells. See the notes to Table 10 for more
details on the nine county groups.
* indicates significance at the 1% level
                                  Table 4: 1980 Cross-Sectional Estimates of the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Rates
                                                        Internal Infant Deaths, Within 1-Year of Birth
                                                          (estimated standard errors in parentheses)
                                                               Infant Deaths Due to Internal Causes (per 100,000 Births)
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)                                    (9)            (10)

Mean TSP                          0.005           0.070         -0.135           5.391           3.608          1.092           1.068           1.025           1.102          1.025
                                (12.087)        (12.150)       (12.223)        (15.078)        (16.128)        (0.523)         (0.543)         (0.538)         (0.543)        (0.567)

Per-Capita Income                                -0.607          0.081          -7.850          -9.940         -1.390          -0.876          -0.822          -1.540         -0.930
(1/100)                                         (11.026)       (11.850)        (17.179)        (17.902)        (0.749)         (0.984)         (0.975)         (0.784)        (1.052)

Unemployment Rate                                                0.182           0.914           1.265         -0.123          -0.094          -0.089          -0.112         -0.097
                                                                (1.146)         (1.226)         (1.277)        (0.050)         (0.072)         (0.071)         (0.053)        (0.075)

1979 Mortality Rate                                                                                                                             0.123
                                                                                                                                               (0.028)

Parent Demographics                 N               N               N              Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
Medical History                     N               N               N              Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
Prenatal Care                       N               N               N              Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
Infant Health at Birth              N               N               N              N               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
Weather                             N               N               N              N               N               Y               Y              Y               N               N
County Data Book                    N               N               N              N               N               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
State Medicaid                      N               N               N              N               N               N               Y              Y               N               N
Inc. Assist. Sources                N               N               N              N               N               N               Y              Y               N               Y
State Effects                       N               N               N              N               N               N               N              N               Y               Y

R-squared                         0.00            0.00            0.00           0.18            0.19            0.61            0.61           0.62            0.97            0.98
Dep. Variable Mean                1228            1228            1228           1229            1229            1217            1212           1212            1221            1222
Sample Size                       1199            1199            1199           1186            1169            1152            1097           1097            1153            1106
Notes: See notes to Tables 1-3. The regressions use data from 1980 only and are weighted by the total number of births in each county. The underlying microdata are aggregated
to the county-level. Internal causes of death are from common health problems, such as respiratory and cardiopulmonary deaths. The control variables are listed in the Data
Appendix and in Tables 1-3: Parental Demographics [mother’s age, education, marital status, foreign-born: father’s age, education], Medical History [gender and race of baby, #
previous fetal deaths, # previous terminations, twins or greater birth, last pregnancy live vs. terminated, order of child (1st, 2nd, 3rd or more), time since last pregnancy, born in
hospital, physician present], Prenatal Care [dummies for first visit (e.g., 1st trimester), total # of visits], Infant Health at Birth [birth weight, length of gestation (e.g., premature
birth), Apgar scores (1 and 5 minute), reported congenital malformation, interaction of low birth weight and premature birth]. The Weather variables are temperature and
precipitation in each month, by state. The County Data Book variables are measured at the county-level. They include population density, poverty rate, overall crime rate, serious
crime rate, property crime rate, physicians per-capita, hospital beds per-capita, fraction of the population in urban area, fraction of the population white, female, over the age of 65,
with at least a high school degree, with at least a college degree, fraction employed in manufacturing, median value of houses, county taxes, revenues, and expenditures, property
taxes, fraction of expenditures on health, welfare, police, education, and highways. State Medicaid includes # of Medicaid recipients, avg. cost per Medicaid recipient, and
Medicaid payments to medical vendors all measured at the state-level. Income Assistance Sources are measured at the county-level and include # of AFDC recipients, # of AFDC
recipient children, income assistance from food stamps, AFDC payments, SSI, other income maintenance, Medicaid and medical vendor payments, Medicare, Chamus, and
Unemployment Insurance all in total amounts and per-capita. State Effects are separate indicator variables for each state.
                            Table 5: Cross-Sectional Estimates of the Effect of Pollution and Income on Infant Mortality Rates
                                                      Internal Infant Deaths, Within 1-Year of Birth
                                                         (estimated standard errors in parentheses)
                                                   Effect of Mean TSP                                        Effect of Income (1/100)
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (1)          (2)           (3)                                   (4)

1978 Cross-Section                     -0.722            -2.147           -7.670            -5.591            -8.640            -8.120           -2.280            -8.480
                                      (18.453)          (19.463)         (25.693)          (26.785)          (22.001)          (23.251)         (39.618)          (42.115)
                                    [1219, 0.02]      [1185, 0.02]     [1065, 0.03]      [1074, 0.05]      [1219, 0.02]      [1185, 0.02]     [1065, 0.03]      [1074, 0.05]

1979 Cross-Section                     0.483             -0.011           -0.364            -0.384            -0.203            -0.300           -1.250            -1.420
                                      (0.456)           (0.429)          (0.513)           (0.534)           (0.528)           (0.485)          (0.767)           (0.791)
                                    [1200, 0.46]      [1178, 0.58]     [1079, 0.60]      [1088, 0.98]      [1200, 0.46]      [1178, 0.58]     [1079, 0.60]      [1088, 0.98]

1981 Cross-Section                     0.360             0.171            -0.108            -0.107            1.550             0.740            0.497             0.306
                                      (0.531)           (0.478)          (0.596)           (0.624)           (0.516)           (0.452)          (0.697)           (0.714)
                                    [1136, 0.44]      [1129, 0.59]     [1067, 0.60]      [1076, 0.97]      [1136, 0.44]      [1129, 0.59]     [1067, 0.60]      [1076, 0.97]

1982 Cross-Section                     3.950             2.897            -7.663            -8.108            -1.820            -4.000           -27.020           -25.160
                                      (19.75)           (20.847)         (26.149)          (26.921)          (15.611)          (16.008)         (25.788)          (24.669)
                                    [1134, 0.21]      [1128, 0.23]     [1058, 0.26]      [1074, 0.28]      [1134, 0.21]      [1128, 0.23]     [1058, 0.26]      [1074, 0.28]

1983 Cross-Section                     1.499             0.945            1.729             2.001             -0.320            -0.514           -0.743            -0.516
                                      (0.550)           (0.523)          (0.672)           (0.692)           (0.441)           (0.403)          (0.561)           (0.551)
                                    [1109, 0.47]      [1106, 0.58]     [1039, 0.59]      [1055, 0.98]      [1109, 0.47]      [1106, 0.58]     [1039, 0.59]      [1055, 0.98]

1984 Cross-Section                     0.659             -0.712           -0.609            -0.714            -0.048            -0.054            0.548            0.638
                                      (0.542)           (0.514)           (0.655)          (0.661)           (0.442)           (0.388)           (0.648)          (0.633)
                                    [1071, 0.44]      [1067, 0.59]      [998, 0.60]      [1014, 0.98]      [1071, 0.44]      [1067, 0.59]      [998, 0.60]      [1014, 0.98]

Parent Demographics                      Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y                 Y
Medical History                          Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y                 Y
Prenatal Care                            Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y                 Y
Infant Health at Birth                   N                 Y                 Y                 Y                 N                Y                 Y                 Y
Weather                                  N                 N                 Y                 N                 N                N                 Y                 N
State Medicaid                           N                 N                 Y                 N                 N                N                 Y                 N
Inc. Assist. Sources                     N                 N                 Y                 Y                 N                N                 Y                 Y
State Effects                            N                 N                 N                 Y                 N                N                 N                 Y
Notes: See notes to Table 4. The numbers in brackets are the number of counties and R-squareds, respectively, for the internal infant mortality rate regressions. The dependent
variable is the number of infant deaths attributable to internal causes per 100,000 live births.
                   Table 6: Estimated Effects of Pollution Based on 1980-82 Changes, Internal Infant Deaths Within 1-Year of Birth
                                                       (estimated standard errors in parentheses)

                                                                   Infant Deaths Due to Internal Causes (per 100,000 Births)
                               Fixed                                    Instrumental Variables                                                   No Instruments
                               Effects          (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (1)                       (2)              (3)

Mean TSP                        3.601          3.602          4.319          3.483          4.227         4.720          3.607          3.477          3.314          3.218
                               (0.545)        (1.833)        (1.988)        (1.935)        (2.296)       (2.686)        (2.454)        (1.200)        (1.233)        (1.407)

Per-Capita Income              -0.228         -10.230        -17.580        -7.480         -19.540        -30.850        -22.203        0.019          1.400         -1.390
(1/100)                        (2.028)        (9.946)       (16.651)       (16.279)       (24.183)       (28.682)       (23.193)       (3.611)        (3.598)        (4.470)

Unemployment Rate                                            -0.202         -0.124          0.031        -0.062         -0.000          0.019         -0.005          0.191
                                                             (0.210)        (0.203)        (0.293)       (0.262)        (0.286)        (0.092)        (0.092)        (0.105)

Lag Mortality Change                           0.725          0.751          0.752          0.752         0.752          0.753          0.750          0.751          0.752
                                              (0.043)        (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.011)

Parent Demographics               N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
Medical History                   N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
Prenatal Care                     N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
Infant Health at Birth            N              N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y             N              Y              Y
Weather                           N              N              N              N              Y              N              N             N              N              N
State Medicaid                    N              N              N              N              Y              N              N             N              N              N
Inc. Assist. Sources              N              N              N              N              Y              N              Y             N              N              N
Year Effects                      N              Y              Y              Y              Y              N              N             Y              Y              N
State-Year Effects                N              N              N              N              N              Y              Y             N              N              Y
County Effects                    Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y

R-squared                       0.99*          0.57           0.81           0.84           0.86           0.86           0.87           0.81           0.84          0.86
Dep. Variable Mean              1171          -101.5         -101.4         -101.5         -101.0         -101.5         -101.9         -101.2         -101.5        -101.5
Sample Size                     3488           1044           1035           1021           967            1021           975            1065           1049          1049
Notes: See notes to previous tables. There are 1077 counties with pollution observations in both 1980 and 1982. The regressions are weighted by the total number of births in
each county and year. The estimates of the standard errors are based on the Eicker-White formula to correct for heteroskedasticity. The “Fixed Effects” column is based on a
regression which uses the pooled 1980, 1981, and 1982 data and includes county indicators. All other columns are based on regressions of 1980-82 changes in the infant mortality
rate on changes in the other variables. In the “Instrumental Variables” columns, 1979 and 1980 TSP concentrations and per-capita incomes and 1978 and 1979 infant mortality
rates are used as instruments for 1980-82 changes in TSPs and income and 1979-80 changes in the infant mortality rate. In the “No Instruments” columns, 1979-80 changes in the
infant mortality rate are instrumented with 1978 and 1979 infant mortality rates.
(*) indicates the R-squared in the levels regression. All other R-squareds are from regressions in changes.
 Table 7: Effects of Pollution on Death Rates within 28 Days and 24 Hours of Birth and on Birth Weight,
                                        Based on 1980-82 Changes
                                 (estimated standard errors in parentheses)

A. Effects on Early Infant Mortality Rates and Birth Weight
                                       Infant Deaths                              Infant Deaths                      Birth
                                      Within 28 Days                             Within 24 Hours                     Weight

Mean TSP                                 3.927               3.451             2.265             2.047               -0.213
                                        (1.581)             (1.709)           (1.202)           (1.194)              (0.056)

Per-Capita Income                       -14.240              -14.670          -4.900             -6.460               15.636
(1/100)                                 (8.293)             (13.997)          (6.382)           (10.209)             (21.293)

Unemployment Rate                                           -0.090                              -0.027
                                                            (0.175)                             (0.125)

Lag Mortality Change                     0.729               0.755             0.731             0.757
                                        (0.040)             (0.009)           (0.039)           (0.005)

Parent Demographics                         N                  Y                 N                   Y                  N
Medical History                             N                  Y                 N                   Y                  N
Prenatal Care                               N                  Y                 N                   Y                  N
Year Effects                                Y                  Y                 Y                   Y                  N
County Effects                              Y                  Y                 Y                   Y                  Y

R-squared                                 0.61                0.87             0.66                0.92               0.96*
Dep. Variable Mean                        -74.7               -74.2            -19.2               -19.1             3337.3
Sample Size                               1044                1035             1044                1035               3488


B. Effects on Birth Weight by Birth Weight Category
                                           Cumulative Birth Weight Categories
                          <1000g        <1500g       <2000g        <2500g      <3000g       <3500g         <4000g      <4500g

Mean TSP                   -0.086       -0.127        0.018         0.297       1.355        1.490          0.353       -0.249
(1/10,000)                 (0.041)      (0.058)      (0.074)       (0.124)     (0.226)      (0.297)        (0.233)      (0.198)

Per-Capita Income           0.010        0.077       -0.446        -1.122      -2.050       -0.239          0.105        0.305
(1/1,000,000)              (0.152)      (0.237)      (0.302)       (0.500)     (0.920)      (1.210)        (0.950)      (0.800)

County Effects                Y            Y            Y              Y          Y            Y             Y              Y

Dep. Var. Mean              0.006        0.012        0.025           0.069     0.233        0.603         0.892        0.980

Notes: See notes to Table 6. The regressions are weighted by the total number of births in each county and year. The estimates
of the standard errors are based on the Eicker-White formula to correct for heteroskedasticity. For the “Infant Deaths Within 28
Days and 24 Hours” columns, 1979 and 1980 TSP concentrations and per-capita incomes and 1978 and 1979 infant mortality
rates are used as instruments for 1980-82 changes in TSPs and income and 1979-80 changes in the infant mortality rate. All of
the birth weight results are based on fixed-effects analyses of the pooled 1980, 1981, and 1982 data. The dependent variables in
the “Cumulative Birth Weight Categories” are equal to the fraction of births with birth weights less than the specified amount.
(*) indicates the R-squared in the levels regression.
                              Table 8: Estimated Effects of Pollution by Race and Gender of Infant, Based on 1980-82 Changes
                                                       Internal Infant Deaths, Within 1-Year of Birth
                                                          (estimated standard errors in parentheses)

                                                      Black Infant Deaths                                                        Female Infant Deaths
                                Fixed                      Instrumental Variables                            Fixed                    Instrumental Variables
                                Effects           (1)          (2)        (3)                   (4)          Effects           (1)        (2)        (3)                     (4)

Mean TSP                         5.725         11.272           7.380         10.807         30.097           3.078          1.254          1.303           2.462          2.923
                                (1.545)        (4.259)         (4.265)        (4.983)       (20.220)         (0.626)        (1.714)        (1.778)         (1.653)        (2.433)

Per-Capita Income               -0.819         -17.060         -15.710        -21.800        -286.34          2.949         -3.020         -11.850         -16.560        -11.340
(1/100)                         (6.314)       (18.474)        (24.438)       (24.422)       (214.68)         (2.551)        (8.443)       (13.436)        (13.222)       (25.779)

Unemployment Rate                                               0.122          0.090         -1.422                                        -0.250          -0.291         -0.117
                                                               (0.333)        (0.320)        (1.332)                                       (0.172)         (0.167)        (0.228)

Lag Mortality Change                            0.030           0.032          0.032          0.033                          0.001         -0.042           0.011         -0.002
                                               (0.044)         (0.048)        (0.043)        (0.061)                        (0.052)        (0.050)         (0.048)        (0.046)

Parent Demographics                N               N              Y              Y               Y              N              N               Y              Y              Y
Medical History                    N               N              Y              Y               Y              N              N               Y              Y              Y
Prenatal Care                      N               N              Y              Y               Y              N              N               Y              Y              Y
Infant Health at Birth             N               N              N              Y               Y              N              N               N              Y              Y
Year Effects                       N               Y              Y              Y               N              N              Y               Y              Y              N
State-Year Effects                 N               N              N              N               Y              N              N               N              N              Y
County Effects                     Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y

R-squared                        0.54*           0.01           0.05           0.26            0.22           0.60*          0.00           0.07            0.23           0.32
Dep. Variable Mean               1972           -141.0         -136.4         -130.8          -130.8          1044           -96.2          -97.6           -96.3          -96.3
Sample Size                      3030            843            767            731             731            3486           1043           1024            1003           1003

Notes: See notes to Table 6. In the “Black Infant Deaths” and “Female Infant Deaths” columns, the dependent variables are the black and female infant death rates within one-year
of birth per 100,000 live births, respectively. The Natality File variables are also measured separately by race and gender in each county. The regressions are weighted by the total
number of black and female births in each county and year. The estimates of the standard errors are based on the Eicker-White formula to correct for heteroskedasticity.
(*) indicates the R-squareds in the levels regressions. All other R-squareds are from regressions in changes.
               Table 9: Estimated Effect of Pollution on Infant Deaths Attributable to External Causes (e.g., Accidents and Homicides),
                                                              Based on 1980-82 Changes
                                                       (estimated standard error in parentheses)

                                                                Infant Deaths Due to External Causes (per 100,000 Births)
                               Fixed                    No Instrumental Variables                              Instrumental Variables
                               Effects                 Deaths Within 1-Year of Birth           Deaths Within 1-Year of Birth        Neonatal Deaths

Mean TSP                        0.173         -0.188         -0.235         -0.195         -0.224         -0.874         -0.809         -0.577         -0.145         -0.167
                               (0.152)        (0.210)        (0.232)        (0.239)        (0.299)        (0.410)        (0.398)        (0.524)        (0.124)        (0.138)

Per-Capita Income              -0.311          0.123          0.052         -0.029         -0.755          4.980          4.490         -1.950          0.923          2.470
(1/100)                        (0.618)        (0.563)        (0.691)        (0.710)        (0.889)        (2.676)        (2.719)        (5.627)        (0.612)        (1.126)

Unemployment Rate                                            -0.016         -0.018         -0.017          0.040          0.032         -0.024                         0.035
                                                             (0.017)        (0.018)        (0.021)        (0.035)        (0.036)        (0.051)                       (0.014)

Lag Mortality Change                          -1.345         -1.356         -1.380         -1.406         -1.392         -1.403         -1.424         -1.926         -1.930
                                              (0.449)        (0.449)        (0.443)        (0.443)        (0.433)        (0.433)        (0.435)        (0.072)        (0.070)

Parent Demographics               N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              N              Y
Medical History                   N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              N              Y
Prenatal Care                     N              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              N              Y
Infant Health at Birth            N              N              N              Y              Y              N              Y              Y              N              N
Year Effects                      N              Y              Y              Y              N              N              Y              N              Y              Y
State-Year Effects                N              N              N              N              Y              Y              N              Y              N              N
County Effects                    Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y

R-squared                       0.56*          0.65           0.66           0.67           0.68           0.65           0.65           0.66           0.94           0.94
Dep. Variable Mean              35.3           -4.52          -4.43          -4.19          -4.19          -4.33          -4.06          -4.06          1.68           1.68
Sample Size                     3488           1077           1065           1049           1049           1035           1021           1021           1044           1035

Notes: See notes to Table 6. The dependent variable is the number of infant deaths attributable to external causes, such as accidents and homicides, per 100,000 live births. The
regressions are weighted by the total number of births in each county and year. The estimates of the standard errors are based on the Eicker-White formula to correct for
heteroskedasticity.
(*) indicates the R-squared in the levels regression.
  Table 10: 1980-82 Change in Pollution, Income, and Internal Infant Mortality Rates (w/in 1-Year of Birth) for “Matched” Groups of Counties,
                                               And 1980 Characteristics of the County Groups
                                                  (estimated standard errors in parentheses)

Groups of Counties              1980-82 Change                                        1980 Mean Characteristics of the County Groups
Based on 1980-82                             Internal           Treatment and Outcome Levels        Demographic Characteristics                           Economic Cond.
Changes in                 Mean     Income    Death              Mean      Income    Death     Of Birth Mothers       Of Entire County                   Unemp.   Poverty
TSPs and Income            TSP     ($82-84)    Rate              TSP      ($82-84)    Rate    White % HSdo% White % HSdo %                               Rate %    Rate %

BPSY                      -27.12        515.4       -121.7        88.4       12,074       1,143.5       83.9         18.7         84.8         28.7        5.77         8.92
                          (1.09)       (40.1)       (77.3)
BPMY                      -25.74        -50.0       -141.0        92.9       12,572       1,192.5       82.9         12.2         81.3         30.3        6.96         9.20
                          (0.74)       (27.1)       (54.9)
BPBY                      -33.13       -647.8       -138.6        98.6       11,726       1,165.0       85.9         12.7         83.6         31.7        8.76        10.01
                          (1.10)       (40.3)       (78.1)

MPSY                      -10.71        418.3        -96.1        64.4       13,415       1,149.3       80.8         14.7         84.4         27.9        5.43         7.53
                          (0.77)       (28.2)       (55.0)
MPMY                      -12.24        -37.8       -110.8        67.8       12,151       1,329.5       74.7         22.0         79.5         33.9        7.17         9.56
                          (0.70)       (25.8)       (57.1)
MPBY                      -10.60       -546.4       -113.8        68.3       11,924       1,238.0       80.7         20.8         84.3         32.1        9.51         8.61
                          (0.93)       (33.9)       (65.4)

SPSY                         1.27       473.0        -12.7        53.8       13,352       1,267.1       72.3         17.6         78.3         32.5        6.38         9.19
                           (0.71)      (26.1)       (52.1)
SPMY                        -1.58       -0.33        -23.6        55.7       11,964       1,135.0       84.6         15.9         87.4         32.2        6.92         9.14
                           (0.80)      (29.1)       (60.8)
SPBY                        -1.55      -586.7         -6.1        55.1       12,443       1,149.5       84.9         18.7         89.0         30.1        9.28         8.48
                           (1.22)      (44.6)       (87.8)

Notes: See notes to Table 6. The estimates are regression-adjusted based on the No Instruments (1) specification in Table 6. The results are nearly identical without regression
adjustment. The groups were determined in the following way.
BPSY is the group of 72 counties (195,852 total births in 1980 and 1982) that had big TSP pollution reductions (mean reductions of more than 20 units) and positive income
shocks (per-capita income gains of greater than $125, $1982-84).
BPMY are the 133 counties (978,380 births) that had big TSP pollution reductions and small negative income shocks (per-capita income changes between -$375 and $125).
BPBY are the 71 counties (319,380 births) that had big pollution reductions and big negative income shocks (per-capita income reductions of more than $375).
MPSY are the 106 counties (665,909 births) that had medium-sized pollution reductions (reductions between 8 and 20 units) and positive income shocks.
MPMY are the 267 counties (1,529,483 births) that had medium pollution reduction and small negative income shocks.
MPBY are the 136 counties (547,906 births) that had medium pollution reductions and big negative income shocks.
SPSY are the 98 counties (773,144 births) that had small pollution reductions (mean reductions of less than 8 units) and positive income shocks.
SPMY are the 130 counties (563,279 births) that had small pollution reductions and small negative income shocks.
SPBY are the 64 counties (218,537 births) that had small pollution reductions and big negative income shocks.
   Table 11: Grouped Estimates of Pollution Effects Based on “Matching” on 1980-82 Income Changes
                             Internal Infant Deaths, Within 1-Year of Birth
                      [difference in income changes between groups in brackets]

                                              Medium vs. Small Poll. Change                   Big vs. Small Poll. Change

Small Income Shock                                            6.96                                          3.84
                                                             [-54.7]                                       [42.5]

Medium Income Shock                                           8.19                                         4.86
                                                             [-37.4]                                      [-49.7]

Big Income Shock                                              11.89                                        4.19
                                                              [40.2]                                      [-61.1]

Weighted Average                                               8.44                                         4.42
(elasticity in parentheses)                                   (0.45)                                       (0.35)

Notes: Table entries are the ratio of the difference in internal mortality rate changes and the difference in TSPs pollution changes
between county groups, 1980-82. Calculations are based on the entries in Table 10. The total numbers of births in the
comparison groups are used as weights in calculating the weighted averages and elasticities.
             Appendix Table: Grouped Estimates of Pollution Effects Based on Matching on the
                                1980 Level of Manufacturing Employment
                              Internal Infant Deaths, Within 1-Year of Birth

A. Reduced-Form 1980-82 Changes
(estimated standard errors in parentheses)
County Groups Based on               First-Stage Changes in Treatment                                 Outcome Change
TSPs and Manf. Employ.             Mean TSP                    Income                                  Internal Deaths
BPSE [89.9, $10,329]                 -34.52                      26.1                                       -142.3
                                     (1.67)                    (116.2)                                     (123.7)
BPME [87.0, $10,281]                 -29.75                     -115.7                                      -102.9
                                     (0.87)                     (60.8)                                      (64.8)
BPBE [95.8, $13,113]                 -26.99                      -17.8                                      -138.3
                                     (0.68)                     (47.7)                                      (50.8)
MPSE [61.2, $10,952]                 -12.45                      -32.9                                      -308.5
                                     (1.39)                     (97.0)                                     (103.2)
MPME [61.4, $10,691]                 -12.43                      -20.3                                      -100.7
                                     (0.72)                     (50.3)                                      (53.6)
MPBE [69.3, $13,048]                 -12.46                      22.1                                        -77.2
                                     (0.62)                     (43.5)                                      (46.3)
SPSE [50.0, $9,953]                   0.30                       128.0                                       14.7
                                     (1.84)                    (128.3)                                     (136.6)
SPME [55.1, $11,069]                  0.24                       65.6                                        -26.5
                                     (0.81)                     (56.5)                                      (60.1)
SPBE [54.8, $13,529]                  -2.20                      250.7                                        7.7
                                     (0.70)                     (47.9)                                      (51.7)

Notes: See notes to Table 6. The estimates are regression-adjusted based on the No Instruments (1) specification in Table 6. The
numbers in brackets are the 1980 mean level of TSPs pollution and the 1980 mean income per-capita (in $1982-84) of the
specified group, respectively. The information on county manufacturing employment levels comes from County Business
Patterns data. The groups were determined in the following way.
BPSE is the group of 83 counties (75,717 total births in 1980 and 1982) that had big TSP pollution reductions and a small level
of employment in manufacturing in 1980 (manufacturing employment less than 1,600).
BPME are the 138 counties (340,694 births) that had big TSP pollution reductions and a medium level of employment in
manufacturing in 1980 (manufacturing employment between 1,600 and 14,000).
BPBE are the 55 counties (1,077,201 births) that had big pollution reductions and a high level of employment in manufacturing
in 1980 manufacturing employment greater than 14,000).
MPSE are the 106 counties (111,847 births) that had medium-sized pollution reductions and small manufacturing employment.
MPME are the 252 counties (639,986 births) that had medium pollution reduction and medium manufacturing employment.
MPBE are the 151 counties (1,991,465 births) that had medium pollution reductions and high manufacturing employment.
SPSE are the 82 counties (67,566 births) that had small pollution reductions and small manufacturing employment.
SPME are the 143 counties (412,343 births) that had small pollution reductions and medium manufacturing employment.
SPBE are the 67 counties (1,075,051 births) that had small pollution reductions and high manufacturing employment.
B: “Matched” Group Estimates of Pollution Effects on Internal Infant Death Rates
[difference in income changes between groups in brackets]
                                   Medium vs. Small Poll. Change          Big vs. Small Poll. Change

Small Employ. in Manf. in 1980                                25.33                                        4.51
  (“Neighboring Counties”)                                  [-161.0]                                     [-102.0]

Medium Employ. in Manf. in 1980                               5.85                                         2.54
                                                             [-85.9]                                     [-181.3]

High Employ. in Manf. in 1980                                 8.27                                         5.89
                                                            [-228.6]                                     [-268.5]

Weighted Average                                               8.39                                         5.00

Notes: Table entries are the ratio of the difference in internal mortality rate changes and the difference in TSPs pollution changes
between county groups, 1980-82. Calculations are based on the entries in Panel A. The total numbers of births in the
comparison groups are used as weights in calculating the weighted averages and elasticities.
                               Figure 1: National Trends in Pollution, Income Per-Capita, and Infant Mortality Rates

                                                 A. National Trends in Total Suspended Particulates and Ozone Concentrations

                                       80                                                                                                                           0.08


                                       75                                                                                                                           0.075
        (Micrograms Per Cubic Meter)




                                       70                                                                                                                           0.07




                                                                                                                                                                            Ozone Concentration
             TSPs Concentration




                                                                                                                                                                             (Parts per Million)
                                       65                                                                                                                           0.065


                                       60                                                                                                                           0.06


                                       55                                                                                                                           0.055


                                       50                                                                                                                           0.05


                                       45                                                                                                                           0.045


                                       40                                                                                                                           0.04
                                            71    72     73    74    75   76    77   78    79    80     81    82    83    84     85     86    87   88    89    90
                                                                                                   Year
                                                              Mean Hourly TSPs Concentration                       Mean Hourly Ozone Concentration
                            Note: In the years 1971-3, the number of ozone monitors was insufficient to obtain a reliable estimate of national ozone
                            concentrations.
                            Source: Authors' tabulations from EPA's "Quick Look Reports" data file.


                                                       B. National Trends in Internal Infant Mortality Rates, Per-Capita Income,
                                                              and Total Suspended Particulates Concentrations, 1978-1984

                         1.1




                               1
Relative to 1978 Level




                         0.9




                         0.8




                         0.7
                                                 78                 79               80                81                82                  83               84

                                                                                                      Year
                                                      Mean TSPs Concentration             Internal Fatalities per 100,000 Live Births              Per Capita Income
                                                   Figure 2: Mean TSPs Concentrations and Internal Infant Mortality Rates,
                                                                     Trends in Pennsylvania, 1978-1984



                                            1500                                                                                          80


                                                                                                                                          75
                                            1400
Deaths in 1st Year Due to Internal Causes




                                                                                                                                          70
         Per 100,000 Live Births




                                                                                                                                               Mean TSPs Concentration
                                            1300

                                                                                                                                          65
                                            1200
                                                                                                                                          60

                                            1100
                                                                                                                                          55


                                            1000
                                                                                                                                          50


                                            900                                                                                           45
                                                     78          79               80           81     82             83              84
                                                                                               Year

                                                              Internal Infant Mortality Rate               Mean TSPs Concentration
                                 Figure 3: Trends in Pollution, Infant Mortality Rates, and Income Per-Capita
                                             By 1980-1982 Change in TSPs Concentration Groups


                                         A. Trends in Mean TSPs Concentrations, by 1980-1982 TSPs Change Group

                         1.15

                          1.1

                         1.05

                           1
Relative to 1978




                         0.95

                          0.9

                         0.85

                          0.8

                         0.75

                          0.7
                                    78                   79                80            81                  82     83                  84
                                                                                        Year
                                         Small Change (1978 TSPs = 57.6)        Middle Change (1978 TSPs = 66.6)   Big Change (1978 TSPs = 86.7)



                                     B. Trends in Internal Infant Mortality Rate, by 1980-1982 TSPs Change Group

                          1.15

                           1.1

                          1.05

                            1
      Relative to 1978




                          0.95

                           0.9

                          0.85

                           0.8

                          0.75

                           0.7
                                    78                    79               80             81                 82     83                  84
                                                                                         Year

                                     Small Change (1978 IMR = 1,315)            Middle Change (1978 IMR = 1,366)   Big Change (1978 IMR = 1,301)
                                   C. Trends in Per-Capita Income, by 1980-1982 TSPs Change Group

                   1.15

                    1.1

                   1.05

                     1
Relative to 1978




                   0.95

                    0.9

                   0.85

                    0.8

                   0.75

                    0.7
                           78                  79              80               81                 82       83                 84
                                                                               Year

                          Small Change (1978 Incm = $13,033)        Middle Change (1978 Incm = $12,772)   Big Change (1978 Incm = $12,627)
       Figure 4: 1980-1982 Changes in Pollution and Internal Infant Mortality Rates by County

                                A. 1980-82 Change in Mean TSPs Concentrations




                              B. 1980-82 Change in Internal Infant Mortality Rates




Notes: For Figure 3A Small Change refers to the 25% of counties where the change in mean TSPs concentrations was greater
than –7.4 mg/m3. Big Change are the 25% of counties where the change in mean TSPs was less than –20.4 mg/m3. Middle
Change are the remaining 50% of counties. For Figure 3B Small Change is the quartile of counties where the change in the
internal infant mortality rate was greater than 160.9 per 100,000 live births. Big Change is the quartile of counties where the
change in the internal infant mortality rate was less than –402 per 100,000 live births. Middle Change are the remaining counties.
                                                     Figure 5: Annual Differences in Internal Infant Mortality and TSPs Pollution
                                                                   Between Comparison Groups Used in Table 11

                                                           A. Unadjusted Differences Between the Groups with Medium and Small TSPs Changes
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                and Small Income Shocks during 1980-82

                                           -60                                                                                                     12
                                                           79                   80                      81                   82               83
                                           -80




                                                                                                                                                                Difference in Mean TSPs Concentrations
                                                                                                                                                   9
Difference in Internal Infant Mortality




                                          -100
       Per 100,000 Live Births




                                          -120
                                                                                                                                                   6

                                          -140

                                                                                                                                                   3
                                          -160


                                          -180
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                          -200


                                          -220                                                                                                     -3
                                                                                                        Year
                                                                      Internal Infant Mortality Rate                              Mean TSPs
        1
                   See text for how the Big/Medium/Small categories were determined for 1980-82 TSPs and per-capita income changes.


                                                            B. Adjusted Differences Between the Groups with Medium and Small TSPs Changes
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                and Small Income Shocks during 1980-82

                                          2000                                                                                                     12


                                          1500




                                                                                                                                                        Difference in Mean TSPs Concentrations
                                                                                                                                                   9
Difference in Internal Infant Mortality




                                          1000
       Per 100,000 Live Births




                                           500
                                                                                                                                                   6

                                                 0
                                                            79                   80                      81                  82               83
                                                                                                                                                   3
                                           -500


                                          -1000
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                          -1500


                                          -2000                                                                                                    -3
                                                                                                        Year
                                                                       Internal Infant Mortality Rate                             Mean TSPs
        1
                  See text for how the Big/Medium/Small categories were determined for 1980-82 TSPs and per-capita income changes.
                          Appendix Figures: Scatter Plots of Internal Infant Mortality Rates and Mean TSPs Pollution

                                                        1980 Unadjusted Scatter Plot
                            8000




                            6000
Internal Mortality Rate




                            4000




                            2000




                                  0
                                              0            50                     100                    150
                                                                1980 Mean TSP


1980 Scatter Plot Adjusted for Other Covariates
                                      .

                          8000

                          7000

                          6000

                          5000

                          4000

                          3000

                          2000

                          1000

                              0

                          -1000

                          -2000
                                          0       25      50          75      100            125         150
                                                                1980 Mean TSP
1983 Unadjusted Scatter Plot
                            8000




                            6000
Internal Mortality Rate




                            4000




                            2000




                                  0
                                              0         50                   100         150
                                                             1983 Mean TSP


1983 Scatter Plot Adjusted for Other Covariates
                                      .

                          8000

                          7000

                          6000

                          5000

                          4000

                          3000

                          2000

                          1000

                              0

                          -1000

                          -2000
                                          0       25   50          75      100     125   150
                                                             1983 Mean TSP
Unadjusted Scatter Plot for 1980-82 Changes
                                   4000
Internal Mortality Rate Change




                                   2000




                                         0




                                  -2000




                                  -4000
                                                 -100           -50                 0           50
                                                              1980-82 Change in Mean TSP


Scatter Plot for 1980-82 Changes Adjusted for Other Covariates
                                             .

                                 5000

                                 4000

                                 3000

                                 2000

                                 1000

                                     0

                                 -1000

                                 -2000

                                 -3000

                                 -4000

                                 -5000



                                         -100           -75     -50      -25         0     25   50
                                                              1980-82 Change in Mean TSP
