                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     COASE V. THE COASIANS


                                              Simon Johnson
                                              Andrei Shleifer


                                          Working Paper 7447
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7447


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 1999




We are grateful to Simeon Djankov, Ed Glaeser, Oliver Hart, Larry Katz, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-
de-Silanes, Gerry McDermott, Randall Morck, Raghu Rajan, Mark Ramseyer, and Peter Temin for helpful
conversations and the NSF and the MIT Entrepreneurship Center for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1999 by Simon Johnson and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Coase v. the Coasians
Simon Johnson and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 7447
December 1999
JEL No. D73, D78, G18, K23


                                          ABSTRACT

       The Coase theorem implies that, in a world of positive transaction costs, any of a number
of strategies, including judicially enforced private contracts, judicially enforced laws, or even
government regulation, may be the cheapest way to bring about efficient resource allocation.
Unfortunately, some Coasians have ignored the possibility that the last of these strategies may
sometimes be the best. This paper compares the regulation of financial markets in Poland and the
Czech Republic in the 1990s, when the judicial systems remained underdeveloped in both
countries. In Poland, strict enforcement of the securities law by an independent Securities and
Exchange Commission was associated with rapid development of the stock market. In the Czech
Republic, hands-off regulation was associated with a near collapse of the stock market. These
episodes illustrate the centrality of law enforcement in making markets work, and the possible role
of regulators in law enforcement.


Simon Johnson                                               Andrei Shleifer
Sloan School of Management                                  Department of Economics
MIT                                                         Harvard University
50 Memorial Drive, E52-562                                  Littauer M9
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
sjohnson@mit.edu                                            and NBER
                                                            ashleifer@harvard.edu
