                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FROM BISMARCK TO MAASTRICHT:
                   THE MARCH TO EUROPEAN UNION AND THE LABOR COMPACT



                                             Alan B. Krueger


                                           Working Paper 7456
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7456


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2000




This address was prepared for the Adam Smith Lecture at the European Association of Labour Economists
in Regensburg, Germany, September 25, 1999. The author thanks Andrew Clark, Victor Fuchs, Jim Hines,
Lisa Lynch, Marcus Scheuer, Ronald Schettkat and Coen Teulings for helpful discussions, and Melissa Clark
and Melissa Rekas for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Alan B. Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
From Bismarck to Maastricht: The March to European Union
and the Labor Compact
Alan B. Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 7456
January 2000
JEL No. J29


                                               ABSTRACT


        This paper considers the likely impact that European Union (EU) will have on the labor compact.
It is argued that, despite increased economic integration in Europe, countries will still be able to maintain
distinct labor practices if they are willing to bear the cost of those practices. The incidence of many social
protections probably already falls on workers. In addition, it is argued that imperfect mobility of capital,
labor, goods and services will limit the pressure that integration will place on the labor compact. Evidence
is presented suggesting that labor mobility among EU countries has not increased after the elimination of
remaining restrictions on intra-EU labor mobility in 1993. Moreover, immigration from non-EU countries,
which is much larger than intra-EU migration, has declined since 1993. Evidence is also reviewed
suggesting that the demand for social protection rises when countries are more open, and therefore subject
to more severe external shocks. This finding suggests that increased economic integration and European
Monetary Union could lead to greater demand for social protection. The U.S. experience with state
workers’ compensation insurance programs is offered as an example of enduring differences in labor
market protections in highly integrated regional economies with a common currency.


Alan B. Krueger
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@pucc.princeton.edu
