                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WOULD COLLECTIVE ACTION CLAUSES
                               RAISE BORROWING COSTS?


                                           Barry Eichengreen
                                             Ashoka Mody


                                          Working Paper 7458
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7458


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2000




Financial support for this research was provided by the World Bank’s Research Committee and the Ford
Foundation (through the Berkeley Project on New International Financial Architecture), Himmat Kalsi
provided the updated data on bond spreads and guidance on their interpretation. Anindita Sen and Galina Hale
helped us to assemble the data and develop the documentation. For helpful comments and advice we thank
Daniel Bond, Michael Buchanan, David Card, Thomas Duvall, Giovanni Ferri and the participants in a seminar
at the IMF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Barry Eichengreen and Ashoka Mody. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Would Collective Action Clauses Raise Borrowing Costs?
Barry Eichengreen and Ashoka Mody
NBER Working Paper No. 7458
January 2000
JEL No. F0, F3


                                            ABSTRACT

       We examine the implications for borrowing costs of including collective-action clauses in loan
contracts. For a sample of some 2,000 international bonds, we compare the spreads on bonds subject
to UK governing law, which typically include collective-action clauses, with spreads on bonds subject
to US law, which do not. Contrary to the assertions of some market participants, we find that
collective-action clauses in fact reduce the cost of borrowing for more credit-worthy issuers, who
appear to benefit from the ability to avail themselves of an orderly restructuring process. In contrast,
less credit-worthy issuers pay, if anything, higher spreads. We conjecture that for less credit-worthy
borrowers the advantages of orderly restructuring are offset by the moral hazard and default risk
associated with the presence of renegotiation-friendly loan provisions.


Barry Eichengreen                                              Ashoka Mody
Department of Economics                                        The Development Prospects Group
University of California                                       The World Bank
Berkeley CA 94720                                              Washington D.C. 20433
and NBER                                                       amody@worldbank.org
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

       Collective-action clauses to facilitate the orderly restructuring of problem debts are one of

the key elements of the so-called new international financial architecture. There is now

widespread agreement that the International Monetary Fund should no longer provide large-scale

financial assistance to prop up shaky currency pegs and bail out private investors (see e.g. Council

on Foreign Relations 1999), but any such commitment, by the IMF or the international policy

community more generally, will lack credibility so long as there do not exist other ways of

resolving financial crises. A loss of investor confidence that causes capital flows to reverse

direction, forcing an abrupt devaluation and increasing the burden of interest and amortization,

can make it impossibly expensive for an emerging-market economy to keep current on its external

debts. But because debt restructuring is so costly and disruptive, the international policy

community is reluctant to contemplate this scenario. Hence, the IMF’s commitment not to run to

the rescue of a shaky currency peg and to provide the hard currency needed to pay off private

investors may lack credibility. The consequent expectation that an international rescue operation

will be mounted, IMF statements to the contrary notwithstanding, therefore continues to create

moral hazard in international financial markets.

       This is the problem that collective-action clauses are designed to solve. While such

clauses have long been included in syndicated bank loan contracts, they are typically absent from

bonds issued under U.S. law. These American-style bonds lack sharing clauses to discourage

maverick investors from resorting to lawsuits and other ways of obstructing settlements beneficial

to the debtor and the majority of creditors alike. They require the unanimous consent of

bondholders to any restructuring, creating almost insurmountable hurdles to orderly negotiations

to alter payment terms. They lack clauses specifying who represents the bondholders and making
provision for a bondholders committee or assembly.

         The addition of sharing, majority-voting and collective-representation clauses to bond

contracts was thus suggested by the G10 in its post mortem on the Mexican crisis and echoed in a

series of G7 and G22 reports and declarations (see Group of Ten 1996, Group of Twenty Two

1998, Group of Seven 1998). The G-7 subsequently placed the issue on its work program for

reforming the international financial system. U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin endorsed it in

a speech designed to set the agenda for the spring 1999 meetings of the IMF’s Interim Committee

(Rubin 1999). G7 finance ministers embraced it in their Cologne Summit report on strengthening

the international financial architecture (Group of Seven 1999).

         Yet words have not led to deeds. This lack of progress is attributable in turn to the

opposition of the markets and some developing countries. Collective-action clauses, they object,

would raise borrowing costs. Easier restructuring, by heightening the temptation for borrowers to

walk away from their debts, would render the markets reluctant to lend. The consequences would

include “a prohibitive increase in borrowing costs at a time when trillions of dollars are needed for

infrastructure finance in [developing]... countries.”1

         The rebuttal is that making provision for orderly restructuring could render emerging-

market issues more attractive by minimizing acrimonious disputes, unproductive negotiations, and

extended periods when no debt service is paid and growth is depressed by a suffocating debt

overhang. As The Economist put it in a recent article, “the prospect of an orderly renegotiation



1
    Folkerts-Landau (1999), p.2.
                                              2
rather than a messy default might actually make some bonds more attractive.”2

         The analogy with domestic bankruptcy procedures supports this more optimistic

interpretation. Few market participants presumably would argue for the abolition of bankruptcy

laws and the reinstatement of debtor’s prison to discourage borrowers from walking away from

their debts; they would acknowledge the need to balance the ex ante bonding role against the ex

post efficiency advantages of being able to restructure problem debts. To be sure, recent

proposals may move too far from one extreme to the other. Given the legal immunity sovereign

borrowers enjoy and the special difficulties of seizing the assets of foreign borrowers in general, it

could be that collective-action clauses would too seriously weaken the bonding role of debt,

resulting in a prohibitive rise in the cost of borrowing for emerging markets. But this is an

empirical question.

         It is a question informed by remarkably little evidence. This is perplexing, since there in

fact exists a market in London on which British-style bonds with collective-action clauses are

issued and traded. Comparisons of the spreads on these bonds with spreads on otherwise

equivalent American-style instruments are an obvious way of evaluating the afore-mentioned

arguments.

         In practice, the comparison is not straightforward. Not only does one have to control for

borrower characteristics and market conditions affecting emerging-market spreads, but the choice

of governing law is presumably endogenous. Borrowers who anticipate having to restructure may



2
    Economist (1999), p.21.
                                               3
be attracted to instruments that anticipate this eventuality, as may be lenders who value quick

resolution. Alternatively, borrowers thought likely to default on their obligations may incur the

greatest surcharge if they issue a bond with collective-action provisions, encouraging them to opt

for bonds that exclude these clauses.3

       In addition, there is the fact that not all borrowers will be in the market at all times. When

financial conditions tighten, for example, high-risk borrowers tend to be rationed out of the

market. This selectivity will bias ordinary-least squares estimates of the relationship between

characteristics of the borrower and his loan contract, on the one hand, and the spread he pays, on

the other. This bias will contaminate efforts to recover the impact of collective-action clauses on

spreads even when these control for the endogeneity of the choice of governing law.

       This does not mean that collective-action clauses are impossible to analyze, only that this

must be done using a framework that takes these problems into account. In this paper we develop

such a framework. We attempt account both for the endogeneity of the choice of governing law

and for changes in the composition of the pool of borrowers. We implement the model using data

on emerging market bonds for the period 1991-1998.

       The results suggest that collective-action provisions in fact reduce borrowing costs for the

most credit-worthy issuers, who benefit from being able to avail themselves of orderly

restructuring. Less credit-worthy issuers, in contrast, do not enjoy lower spreads; if anything, the



3
  American-style bonds may be preferred, in other words, because the inability to reschedule and the
reputational damage on account of outright default renders to such debt a de facto senior status.


                                             4
opposite is true. We conjecture that for less credit-worthy borrowers the advantages of

provisions enabling restructuring are offset by the moral hazard and default risk associated with

the presence of renegotiation-friendly loan provisions.



2. Background

          International bonds governed by UK law typically include provisions aimed at ameliorating

collective-action problems.4 They enable the holders of debt securities to call a bondholder

assembly with the power to appoint a representative to negotiate with the debtor. That assembly

can pass extraordinary resolutions addressing issues relating to the settlement of defaults or other

modifications to the original bond covenant subject to the consent of bondholders holding a clear

majority of the outstanding principal (typically, 75 per cent).5 Its resolutions are binding on all

bondholders so long as the requisite majority has agreed. In contrast, many US-style bonds do

not even provide for an assembly, precluding any effort to modify payment terms (and other

bondholder rights) without the consent of each and every bondholder.6

          Bonds governed by UK law specify procedures for selecting a bondholder’s representative

and enumerate his responsibilities. This representative (typically the trustee) is empowered to



4
    For details on the material in this section, see Buchheit (1998a, b, c).
5
  Many bonds provide for lowering the necessary quorum to 25 per cent if 75 per cent of the
bondholders cannot be reached.
6
  Although there are exceptions. Some US-style bonds also provide for amendments, even to
payment terms, with the approval of a qualified majority of bondholders.

                                                5
communicate the bondholders’ negotiating terms to the debtor. Bonds governed by U.S. law, in

contrast, provide for a fiscal agent, but this entity lacks the power to represent the bondholders in

negotiations. (Some UK-style bonds provide for a fiscal agent as well.) The fiscal agent is an

agent of the issuer rather than of the bondholders. His responsibilities are essentially

administrative: he keeps track of interest and amortization payments and distributes these to the

holders of the debt securities.

        UK bonds governed by Trustee Deed Agreements, but not those involving fiscal agents,

generally prohibit individual bondholders from initiating litigation. The power to do so is vested

with the trustee, acting on the instruction of creditors holding a specified fraction (typically, at

least 25 per cent) of the principal, who is required to distribute any funds recovered in proportion

to the principal amount. De facto, then, these bonds include the equivalent of sharing clauses and

offer the debtor some protection against litigation. American-style bonds, in contrast, include no

such limits on litigation and no requirement to share the proceeds with other bondholders.7

        How could debt contracts have evolved so differently in the United States and United

Kingdom? The divergence appear to date only to the U.S. Trust Indenture Act of 1939. Section

316(b) of the Trust Indenture Act, which applies to the publicly-traded bonds of corporate

issuers, prohibits any reduction in the amounts due a bondholder without that bondholder’s

consent. This regulation was adopted in response to the belief that corporate insiders had taken

advantage of bondholders in the widespread defaults of the early 1930s by forcing through



7
  It is important to distinguish here between litigation and acceleration. Even in U.S.-style bonds
with a fiscal agent, acceleration by individual bondholders may be restricted in some cases.
                                              6
restructurings that enriched the holders of equity at the expense of holders of debt. New York-

law sovereign bond documentation since 1939 has generally followed the precedent set by the

Trust Indenture Act in shunning collective-action clauses even though the rationale for Section

316(b) does not obviously apply to sovereigns.

       Thus, the different provisions of U.S. and UK bond issues would appear to be an example

of historical path dependence, in which historical events in the distant past continue to influence

arrangements and outcomes in the present (Roe 1987).



3. Bond Issuance Under Different Laws

       Our data, drawn from the Capital Bondware database and augmented for the early 1990s

by the International Monetary Fund’s Emerging Market Group, is composed of 2619 bonds. In

principle, this is the universe of all fixed and floating rate bonds issued between 1991 and 1998 by

emerging markets.8 1160 bonds were subject to UK governing law, 840 to U.S. law, and the rest

to other laws (mainly Japanese and German).9 (See Table 1.) This high level of issuance under

UK law is not obviously consistent with the view that the market has a visceral aversion to


8
 Launch spreads were not reported for 358 bonds; these were principally bonds issued in
currencies other than the U.S. dollar, the Japanese Yen, and the German Deutsche Mark. For
1997 and 1998, we do have spreads on Italian Lira bonds, which increased in frequency in these
years, and also on bonds denominated in British pounds. For purposes of the regression analysis,
we lost an additional 44 observations owing to the absence of complementary country
characteristics.

9
  For 133 bonds, no law was specified. We have included them in the “other” laws category.
Also, three bonds had both UK and U.S. laws. We have categorized these as U.S. law bonds
(though none of our results is sensitive to this procedure).

                                             7
collective-action clauses. Note also that public issuers other than sovereigns have a greater

tendency to issue bonds governed by UK law than sovereigns and private issuers (Table 2). East

Asian borrowers tend to issue more frequently under UK law than borrowers from other

regions.10

           Spreads for bonds subject to UK law have been lower through most of the 1990s than

bonds subject to U.S. law. 11 This differential, while not large, is consistent over time (Table 1).

It not consistent across regions or types of borrowers. While East Asian issuers appear to pay

lower spreads under UK law, the same is not true of Latin American and Eastern European

borrowers. Private and non-sovereign public borrowers pay lower spreads under UK law, but not

sovereigns.12

           These patterns suggest that different borrowers may be affected differently by collective-

action clauses. They point to the possibility that more credit-worthy borrowers (East Asians as

opposed to Latin Americans for much of the 1990s) may enjoy lower spreads when their bonds

are subject to renegotiation-friendly UK governing law, in contrast to less credit-worthy

borrowers, for whom the advantages of provisions facilitating orderly restructuring may be offset


10
     We return to this point below.

11
  That these are launch spreads is important, since spreads at the time of issue behave differently
than spreads on the secondary market. In particular, in poor market conditions when secondary
spreads rise, launch spreads generally fall. This reflects the tendency for the number of issues to
decline and for only the most creditworthy borrowers to come to the market when global financial
conditions tighten. We return to this below.
12
   The comparison is not possible for other regions (the Caribbean and Sub-Saharan Africa, for
example), since we do not always observe bonds subject to both governing laws. This underscores
the importance of modeling governing law as a choice variable, as we do below.
                                           8
by moral hazard and additional default risk. Similarly, there is a hint that creditors prefer US law

when lending to sovereigns because of the moral hazard associated with the combination of easy

restructuring and sovereign immunity.

       On average, bonds issued under “other laws” carry lower spreads. We suspect that this is

picking up the impact on spreads of borrowers’ ability to access the German and, particularly, the

Japanese market, where for much of the period funds were cheap and plentiful. This makes it

hard to know what the low spreads on these issues really reflect. We focus, therefore, on the

comparison between bonds subject to UK and U.S. laws.

       Figure 1 underscores that analyzing the implications of the legal provisions of spreads

requires going beyond simple comparisons. There, issuers are categorized by their Institutional

Investor country credit rating. The frequency of a bond being governed by UK law relative to

U.S. law (henceforth we refer to this as the ratio of bonds subject to UK law) is highest in the

highest credit-rating categories. Thus, a common omitted variable -- credit quality -- could

conceivably explain the apparent association between issuance under UK law and low average

spread. Note, however, that the lowest credit rating category, 0-30, also has a relatively high

ratio of bonds subject to UK law, consistent with the notion that provisions facilitating orderly

restructuring are valued when the likelihood of default is high.13 Again, this points to the potential

for simple comparisons to mislead.


13
  This is emphasized by Petas and Rahman (1999). Pointing in the same direction is the fact that the
maturity of bonds tends to be relatively low in both the lowest and highest credit rating categories.
It would appear that while issuers with low credit quality are constrained to low maturities by the
market, issuers with higher credit quality value the bonding role of short-term debt.

                                              9
       Figure 2 underscores the importance of controlling for endogeneity and selectivity when

analyzing the impact of different governing laws. There is a strong inverse correlation between

the ratio of bonds issued under UK law and their spreads relative to U.S.-law bonds, as if

borrowers respond to price incentives. But the fact that the average spread (averaged over both

markets) covaries positively with the ratio of UK law to US law spreads suggests that the

phenomenon is in fact more complicated. Following the Mexican crisis, sentiment toward

emerging markets worsened, and aggregate bond issuance fell. But as Figure 2 shows, average

primary (launch) spreads also declined in 1995, since only relatively creditworthy borrowers were

still able to access the market.14 Moreover, it would appear that borrowers who retained market

access even under these difficult circumstances were also less subject (than those screened out) to

distrust arising from easy rescheduling, since the ratio of spreads under UK relative to US law

meanwhile declined. In contrast, in 1998, when there was a more widespread crisis and

generalized reduction in market access, spreads again widened, but this time the distrust

associated with easy rescheduling simultaneously rose (as reflected in the ratio of UK- to US-law

spreads).

       Again, these observations highlight the importance of correcting for both selectivity and

endogeneity when attempting to estimate the associated effects.




14
  We have shown elsewhere (Eichengreen and Mody 1998a) that in periods when investor sentiment
toward emerging markets is favorable, average (primary) spreads on new issues tend to be high, since
a large number of (less credit-worthy) issuers come to the market. Conversely, in periods when
investor sentiment turns against emerging markets, only countries with good credit ratings are able
to access the market; hence primary spreads tend to fall with the volume of new issues.
                                            10
4. Methodology

           The typical model employed in studies of emerging-market spreads is a linear relationship

of the form:



           log (spread) = BX + u1                                                             (1)



where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the spread, X is a vector of issue, issuer, and

period characteristics, and u1 is a random error.

           Such models are commonly estimated by ordinary-least squares. But OLS will be biased if

the choice of governing law is endogenous or the sample of observed issuers differs from the

population of potential issuers. To deal with simultaneity, we estimate equation (1) using

modified instrument variables. We first use a multinominal logit to determine the choice of

governing law (where we take US, UK and other as the three alternatives).15 We then construct

the fitted probability that a particular bond is governed by one of these laws and use the estimated

probabilities rather than the actual values in our second-stage regression.

           Even with the choice of governing law instrumented in this way, equation (1) will not

provide an unbiased estimate of the relationship between governing laws and spreads if not all

potential issuers are in the sample. The spread (and its relationship to issuer and issuer

characteristics) will be observed only when positive decisions to borrow and lend are made.

Assume that spreads are only observed when a latent variable B crosses a threshold B’ defined by:


15
     The full set of results for these multinominal logits is presented in Appendix 1.
                                                 11
       B’ = gX’ + u2                                                                              (2)



where X’ is the vector of variables that determines the desire of borrowers to borrow and the

willingness of lenders to lend, and u2 is a second error term. If the error terms in equations (1)

and (2) are bivariate normal with standard deviations s1 and s2 and covariance s122/s1s2, this is a

sample selection model a la Heckman (1979), and equations (1) and (2) can be estimated

simultaneously. They can be identified by the nonlinearity of the fitted probabilities in the selection

equation or by the inclusion of elements in X’ that are not also in X, and the resulting two-

equation system can be estimated by maximum likelihood.

       In what follows we report several estimates of our spreads equation: an OLS estimate, an

IV estimate which substitutes estimated probabilities for actual governing laws, a selectivity-

corrected model that estimates the issue and pricing decisions simultaneously, and a model that

both estimates the issue and pricing decisions simultaneously and controls for the endogeneity of

the choice of governing law.16 We regard the results obtained from this last model as definitive,



16
  Maddala (1983) describes a methodology for implementing a double selection model, which
extends Heckman’s approach by estimating two Inverse Mills ratios for the two choices (borrow
or not to borrow and the governing law under which to borrow). That approach is not
straightforward to apply here because the governing law involves three choices, whereas the
method proposed by Maddala is based on two probits (or a bivariate probit) implying a choice
between two options in each case. There is also a common-sensical justification for our
approach: namely, that a selectivity-correction should be used when not all outcomes are
observed, but that instrumental variables are appropriate when one observes the dependent
variable in all cases since the instrumental variables estimator is predicated on fewer strong
assumptions.
                                               12
but reporting all our results allows the reader to form his own opinion.



5. Data and Variables

       We estimated this model using data for primary spreads for developing-country bonds

issued in the period 1991-98. From Bondware we gathered data on the maturity of each issue,

whether it was privately placed, whether the issuer was a private or governmental entity, whether

the issue was denominated in dollars, yen or deutschmarks, whether the interest rate was fixed or

floating, and the governing law. Building on our earlier work on the bond market, we included as

measures of creditworthiness the external debt relative to GNP, debt service relative to exports, a

dummy variable for whether the country had concluded a debt restructuring agreement with

private or official creditors in the preceding year, international reserves relative to short-term

debt, the ratio of short-term debt to total commercial bank debt, the ratio of outstanding bank

credit to the private sector relative to GDP, the growth rate of real GDP, and the variance of the

export growth rate. Additional variables not considered in our earlier analysis of bond-market

spreads but included here are the ratio of short-term debt to total commercial bank debt, the ratio

of reserves to short-term debt, and the ratio of domestic private credit to GDP. We added these

because we found them to be important in a subsequent analysis of spreads on syndicated bank

loans (Eichengreen and Mody 1999b) and now suspect that they might also play a role in the bond

market.

       We also included a measure of country credit worthiness derived from Institutional




                                              13
Investor.17 Since the raw country credit rating is correlated with (and constructed by the rating

agencies partly as a function of) other issuer characteristics, its inclusion creates potential

problems of multicolinearity and complicates interpretation. We therefore employed the residual

from a first-stage regression in which the credit rating was regressed on the ratio of debt to GNP,

the debt rescheduling dummy, the ratio of reserves to GNP, the rate of GDP growth, and the

variance of export growth.18 Since this is a residual from a regression of credit ratings on

observable economic characteristics, we interpret it as capturing political risk.

           To proxy for industrial-country credit conditions, we used the yield on ten-year U.S.

treasury bonds. Ten-year rates are appropriate since the term to maturity of the underlying asset

roughly coincides with that on the international bonds in our sample. We also include a measure

of the yield curve, the log of the difference between the ten-year and one-year U.S. treasury

rates.19

17
  The advantage of the Institutional Investor data over the Moody’s/S&P ratings used by most
previous authors is more complete country coverage and more regular publication. (The data are
biannual.)
18
  In addition to entering these variables in levels, we included interaction terms for each,
interacting them with a dummy variable for Latin America. The coefficients on 9 of the 10
independent variables entered with coefficients that differed from zero at the 95 per cent
confidence level. (The one exception was the interaction term between the debt/GNP ratio and the
Latin America dummy.) The signs of the coefficients are intuitively plausible. Larger reserves, less
debt, faster growth and more stable export growth all improve the credit rating, while a recent
history of debt rescheduling worsens it. High reserves matter more for credit worthiness in Latin
America, while fast growth, stable exports and a recent history of rescheduling matter less. The
full equation is reported in Eichengreen and Mody (1998a).
19
  The average term to maturity was 6 to 8 years, depending on which of the samples used below
was considered. The ten-year note was also used by previous authors such as Cline and Barnes
(1997), which therefore enhances comparability. The use of the yield curve also brings into play
the role of short-term interest rates.
                                           14
          Finally, estimating equation (2) requires information on those who did not issue bonds.

For each country we considered for three types of issuers: sovereign, public, and private. For each

quarter and country where one of these issuers did not come to the market, we recorded a zero,

and where they did we recorded a one.



6. Basic Results

          Table 3 reports the basic results and different econometric treatments. Our preferred

estimates, correcting for both the endogeneity of the choice of governing law and the selectivity

associated with the borrowing decision, are in the fourth column. Country and borrower

characteristics generally enter with plausible signs and coefficients.20 Fast growing countries pay

relatively low spreads, for example, while countries with a recent history of debt-servicing

difficulties pay high ones. Borrowers from countries with good credit ratings, controlling for their

observable macroeconomics characteristics, pay relatively low spreads.21

          The critical variable is the dummy for UK (versus U.S.) law. Its coefficient is negative but

insignificantly different from zero at standard confidence levels. This zero coefficient is

inconsistent with the view that the markets severely penalize emerging-market borrowers using

collective-action clauses.22


20
     For a more complete discussion of these results, see Eichengreen and Mody (1998a).
21
  That is (to repeat), we include only the credit rating residual from a first-stage regression of the
credit rating on country characteristics.
22
 Other governing laws (mainly German and Japanese) enter with a negative coefficient. As noted
above, we suspect that this is picking up the impact on spreads of borrowers’ ability to access the
                                             15
       The other columns illustrate the sensitivity of this result to econometric treatment. The

OLS regression in the first column wipes out the negative (if insignificant) coefficient obtained

using our preferred treatment. The instrumental-variables estimate in the second column, which

substitutes fitted probabilities that a bond is governed by a particular law for the actual values,

yields a positive rather than a negative coefficient. On the other hand, correcting for selectivity

without controlling for the endogeneity of the choice of governing law (column 3), yields a larger

negative coefficient (with higher statistical significance) than the OLS estimates. It would appear

that the OLS estimates are not too different from our preferred estimates of the effect of UK

governing law because the biases imparted by failing to correct for selectivity and endogeneity

work in opposite directions.23




German and, particularly, the Japanese market, where for much of the period funds were cheap and
spreads were especially narrow.
23
  Correcting for endogeneity would increase the absolute value of the coefficient on UK governing
law if unobserved characteristics that lead to lower spreads also lead to a higher probability of
issuance under UK law. Thus, characteristics of borrowers which make UK-law issuers more
creditworthy than issuers under U.S. law are attributed to the UK law itself. Correction for selection
bias works in an offsetting manner. The negative coefficient on the Inverse Mills ratio, denoted
lambda, implies that borrowers not expected to float an issue who come to the market anyway do so
because they have unobserved characteristics that work to enhance their creditworthiness, which in
turn reduces the spreads that pay (see also Eichengreen and Mody 1998a). However, bonds not
predicted to be issued and placed under UK law gain less in terms of lower spreads than do bonds
similar in other respects but issued under U.S. law. This bias against the UK law could be
meaningful. For example, when market conditions turn poor, new issuance under UK laws would
decline and relative spreads increase. Petas and Rahman (1999) show for Kazakhstan and Philippines
that during the Russian crisis, the secondary spreads on UK bonds rose more than under US law
bonds.

                                              16
7. Differential Effects with Different Credit Ratings

       When we distinguish between more and less credit-worthy borrowers, we obtain sharper

results. In Table 4 we interact the dummy variables for governing law (or the predicted

probabilities of issuance under a particular law) with the four credit-rating categories in Figure

1.24 The omitted alternative is the lowest rating category (0-30 on the Institutional Investor

scale), for which the effect of the choice of UK governing law can therefore simply be read off

from the zero-one governing law dummy. Now there is a strong negative coefficient on UK law

for borrowers from the most credit-worthy countries. The coefficient on the interaction term

differs significantly from zero at the 95 per cent confidence level. The funding cost advantage of

the highest rated category, according to this estimate, is given by the sum of the coefficients on

the dummy variable for the UK governing law plus its interaction with the highest credit-rating

category, which is about -0.45. In other words, the spread paid by borrowers from countries with

high credit ratings are about 45 per cent lower when they opt for the UK law rather than the U.S.

law. A chi-squared test indicates that the sum of the coefficients differs from zero at the 95 per

cent confidence level.

       We can further analyze the robustness of these results, and of our specification generally,

by estimating the same model separately for each of our separate credit-rating categories.25 In


24
   Note that we now use the unadjusted credit ratings rather than the residuals from a first-stage
equation.
25
   We also estimate the probit for the issue decision separately for each subsample; the Inverse Mills
ratios in Table 5 are constructed from these subsample estimates. Note that the debt rescheduling
variable does not appear for subsamples for credit ratings above 50 because there were no post-1990
debt reschedulings for borrowers with those ratings (not surprisingly given how credit ratings are
constructed). In addition, we dropped the share of short-term debt in total debt, since this variable
                                               17
Table 5, column 1, we present results for low rated issuers, i.e., issuers with Institutional Investor

rating less than 50, and in column 2 for high rated issuers, i.e., issuers with ratings above 50.

Columns (3) through (6) further subdivide low and high rated issuers (0-30, 30-50, 50-70, and

70-100). Allowing for the possibility of differences across rating categories of other country and

issuer characteristics would seem sensible; there is no reason to think that the only place these

would show up is in the governing law variable. Strikingly, this more flexible set of estimates

only reinforces our results. We find a positive and significant coefficient on UK law for the low

credit category (column 1), and a negative coefficient and significant for the high categories. We

also now obtain a significant positive coefficient for the second lowest credit rating category

(0.28, with a t-statistic of 1.83). The further breakdown shows that the effects shift smoothly

from a large positive impact of UK governing laws on spreads to a substantial negative impact as

we move up the credit quality gradient. The impact is particularly strong at the two extremes (0-

30 and 70-100).26

       An explanation for this pattern is as follows. More credit-worthy emerging-market

borrowers value their capital-market access and are unlikely to walk away from their debts.

Including collective-action clauses in their loan contracts is not a significant source of moral

hazard. Indeed, in the exceptional circumstance that they have difficulties in servicing their debts,




had a correlation of nearly 0.5 with the debt/GDP ratio, and the maximum likelihood estimator
converged more smoothly without it. The same is the case of the dummy variable for fixed-rate
issues, which was highly correlated with the dummy variable for public issuers.
26
  The relatively small number of observations in the higher credit-rating categories required paring
down the number of explanatory variables.
                                            18
the fact that they can resort to provisions facilitating the orderly restructuring of their obligations

is viewed positively by the markets. For less credit-worthy borrowers, in contrast, the presence of

collective-action clauses significantly aggravates moral hazard and increases borrowing costs.

Still, the fact that collective-action clauses allow such borrowers to restructure in a more orderly

fashion is attractive to their creditors. The two effects tend to work in opposite directions,

resulting in a relatively small and insignificant overall impact on borrowing costs.



8. Limitations of the Analysis

        In this section we discuss some potential limitations of the analysis reported above. First,

there is the danger that we may be mismeasuring the presence or absence of collective action

clauses. We have information on the governing law (U.S., UK or other) for each bond issue. In

fact, there are a few instances where provisions for collective representation of the bondholders

are included in bonds governed by U.S. law and where no such provisions are included in bonds

governed by UK law. The standard treatment for this kind of measurement error is to instrument

the variable in question, which is what we do in the empirical analysis above. If it is the presence

or absence of collective action clauses rather than the choice of governing law per se that affects

emerging market spreads and if the governing law measures the presence of collective action

clauses with random error, then the use of instrumental variables should provide a reliable

indication of the magnitude and significance of the effect.

        Second, there is the possibility that we are picking up the characteristics of the market in

which the bond is issued (London or New York) and its implications for borrowing costs, rather

                                               19
than the impact of the associated governing law and contractual provisions.27 We have already

attempted to sort out these effects by including include in our empirical models a lengthy list of

economic and financial characteristics of the borrower and the market, which helps to control for

the impact of spreads on these other observable characteristics. But, to probe further, we added

British interest rates to the spreads equation as an additional, direct measure of UK market

conditions. Given its high correlation with U.S. rates, we entered the variable as the difference

between U.S. and UK Libor rates.

       This extension does not change our basic finding concerning the impact of choice of

governing laws on spreads. There is only a slight reduction in the size of the positive coefficient

on UK law for borrowers with high credit ratings and no discernible change in the point estimate

for less credit-worthy borrowers. There are no changes in levels of statistical significance.28 This

is confirmation that what we are picking up are the effects of governing laws and associated

contractual provisions and not local credit-market conditions.

       Third, there is the possibility that the markets began to focus on the implications of

collective action provisions only recently, and that they have therefore begun to price debt

securities accordingly only in recent quarters. Since the likelihood of default was low in the first



27
    The fact that bonds subject to “other” governing laws (mainly Japanese and German) have
unusually narrow spreads alert us to this possibility, since these markets may have been difficult for
some borrowers to access despite the fact that spreads were unusually low — especially in Japan —
for much of the period in question.
28
   The key results continue to hold whether we estimate the model on the full sample or separately for
countries with credit ratings above and below 50. The U.S.-UK interest differential tends to show
up with a positive and significant coefficient for the subsample of countries with low credit ratings,
but a zero coefficient for the subsample of countries with high credit ratings.
                                              20
half of the 1990s and the international policy community was not concerned to see that private

investors “took a hit,” there may have been no particular reason to focus on the presence or

absence of these provisions; since the inauguration of discussions of private sector burden sharing,

in contrast, legal protections have become a prominent concern. However, this hypothesis is

commonly invoked by authors seeking to explain why there appears to be little overall difference

in the spreads on issues governed by U.S. and UK law (Petas and Rahman 1999), where we in

fact find evidence of just such differential when we disaggregate by credit quality. This suggests

that previous authors may have invoked a spurious hypothesis in order to explain a “nonfact.”

        Be that as it may, we can test this hypothesis by estimating our model separately for the

earlier and later parts of the decade. Estimating the coefficients on governing laws (including

those interacted with the credit-rating categories) separately for 1991-1995 and 1996-1998, we

find that our key results hold for both subperiods: less credit-worthy borrowers who opt for UK

law pay higher spreads while more credit-worthy borrowers opting for UK law pay lower spreads

in both 1991-1995 and 1996-1998. Even before the Asian crisis and the recent policy debate,

then, it appears that the markets took cognizance of the implications of legal provisions for

default risk and restructuring costs.29




29

We also estimated the model for a variety of other subperiods and continued to obtain consistent
results, although levels of statistical significance varied. Levels of statistical significance were also
reduced when we allowed the coefficients on the other independent variables to vary between the
earlier and later periods. But as in Table 4, we continued to find relatively little impact on spreads for
borrowers from countries with low credit ratings, but a generally significant negative effect on spreads
for countries with high credit ratings.
                                                 21
9. Conclusions and Policy Implications

       This paper has marshaled the first systematic analysis of the impact on borrowing costs of

collective-action clauses designed to facilitate the orderly restructuring of emerging-market debt.

It does so through comparisons of American- and British-style bonds. The analysis is complicated

by the fact that borrowers are able to choose which type of security to issue. It is further

complicated by the fact that borrowers can decide whether to borrow, lenders whether to lend.

Our model attempts to take these complications on board.

       The results caution that the impact of contract structure is discernible only when

borrowers are disaggregated by credit quality. Results for the whole sample disguise differential

effects on borrowers with better and worse credit ratings. Collective-action provisions tend to

reduce the cost of borrowing for the more credit-worthy issuers, who benefit from being able to

avail themselves of an orderly restructuring process. For less credit-worthy issuers, in contrast,

there is evidence of higher spreads. While the point estimates are sensitive to the exact

specification and sample chosen, the data show that low rated borrowers (rating less than 50 on

the Institutional Investor scale) pay a premium while higher rated borrowers (with rating above

50) earn a discount when issuing under the UK law. We conjecture that for less credit-worthy

borrowers the advantages of provisions facilitating an orderly restructuring are offset by the moral

hazard and additional default risk associated with the presence of renegotiation-friendly loan

provisions.

       The results do not support the dire consequences predicted by some market participants of

including collective-action clauses in loan contracts. Moreover, the differential effects to which

                                             22
our analysis points suggest that collective-action clauses should become more attractive as

economic and financial development proceeds and emerging markets improve their credit

worthiness. If the goal of strengthen to reform the international financial architecture is to

strengthen market discipline by encouraging investors to more generously reward more credit-

worthy borrowers and penalize less credit-worthy ones, then the more widespread adoption of

collective-action clauses, which would reduce borrowing costs for the more credit-worthy while

raising them for their less credit-worthy counterparts, would seem to be a step in the right

direction.




                                              23
                             Appendix 1: Multinomial Logit Results



       In this appendix we report the results of estimating a multinomial logit for the choice

between the three governing laws, from which we construct the corresponding probabilities. The

logit is highly significant as an equation, explains 35 percent of the variation in the dependent

variable, and many of the individual coefficients enter with plausible signs. While some variables

point to a higher credit quality leading to a preference for UK over U.S. law, others suggest, as in

Figure 1, that especially low credit quality may lead to a preference for UK law.30 Issuers

choosing UK law tend to have low debt/GNP ratios. Public issuers other than sovereigns have a

lower probability of choosing UK law issuance relative to sovereigns; and private issuers,

presumably with the lowest credit, are least likely to issue under the UK law. Latin American

borrowers, whose credit quality has generally been lower historically than that of East Asian

issuers, also have a lower probability of choosing UK law. Working in the other direction, a low

credit rating residual (implying high political risk) and a low growth rate are positively associated

with the probability of preferring UK governing law. The probability of choosing UK law

increases when maturities are short and loan amounts are small, consistent either with low credit

quality or with higher credit quality issuers who may wish to rollover frequently (as discussed

above in the context of Figure 1).




30
  Strictly, because the multinomial logit estimates relative probabilities, the signs on the
coefficients for any one of the choices are not always the same as estimated when a full
accounting of the relative choices is made.
                                              24
Appendix Table 1 Multinominal logit results
Variable                                      UK governing law   Other governing laws
Log Amount                                          -0.46                -0.71
                                                  (-5.79)               (-7.04)
Maturity                                            -0.11                -0.13
                                                  (-6.49)               (-5.82)
Private placement                                   -0.27                -0.95
                                                  (-2.37)               (-5.54)
Log of 10 year US. Treasury Rate                    0.39                 1.18
                                                  (0.673)               (1.54)
Log (10 year - 1 year) Treasury Rate                0.39                 0.84
                                                   (4.26)               (6.45)
Credit Rating Residual                              -0.02               -0.007
                                                  (-2.67)               (-0.67)
Debt/GNP                                            -2.01                -1.00
                                                  (-4.11)               (-1.51)
Debt Service/Exports                                0.38                 1.12
                                                   (0.78)               (1.61)
GDP Growth                                          -6.61               -27.62
                                                  (-0.83)               (-2.74)
Standard Deviation of Export Growth                 -1.98                0.74
                                                  (-2.06)               (0.63)
Ratio of Short Term Debt to Total Debt              1.69                 -0.76
                                                   (2.21)               (-0.77)
Reserves/Short Term Debt                            -0.09                0.04
                                                  (-1.38)               (-0.46)
Ratio of Domestic Credit to GDP                     -0.23                0.22
                                                  (-3.27)               (2.44)
Dummy for :
 Public Borrower                                     -0.58               -0.77
                                                    (-1.39)            (-1.65)
 Private Borrower                                    -0.94               -1.32
                                                    (-2.14)            (-2.67)
 Supranational borrower                              0.22                -0.81
                                                    (0.28)             (-0.71)
 Israel                                              -0.15               3.09
                                                    (-0.12)             (3.63)
 Latin America                                       -1.47               -1.35
                                                    (-5.94)            (-4.01)
 Japanese Yen issue                                  2.22                4.10
                                                    (6.55)             (11.76)
 Deutch Mark issue                                   2.25                5.72
                                                    (4.52)             (11.72)
 Other currencies' issue                             2.07                3.31
                                                    (7.52)             (10.94)
 Fixed rate issue                                    -1.98               -0.74
                                                   (-11.07)            (-3.08)
 Manufacturing Sector                                0.14                -0.21
                                                    (0.62)             (-0.62)
 Financial Services Sector                           0.36                -0.14
                                                    (2.14)             (-0.63)
 Other Services                                      -0.09               0.34
                                                    (-0.32)             (0.93)
 Government entities                                 -0.29               -0.39
                                                    (-0.68)            (-0.82)
Constant                                             4.97                2.88
                                                    (3.56)              (1.59)
Lambda

Number of bonds                                      2551               2551
Pseudo R-square                                      0.36               0.36
Log of Likelihood                                  -1737.64           -1737.64
* US. Governing law is used as the base.



                                              25
                          Appendix 2: Data sources and construction of variables



    Bond characteristics
            The bond data set, obtained from Bondware, supplemented by the Emerging Markets
    Division of the International Monetary Fund for the early 1990s, covers the period 1991 to 1998
    and includes: (a) launch spreads over risk free rates (in basis points, where one basis point is one-
    hundredth of a percentage point) (b) the amount of the issue (millions of US$); (c) the maturity in
    years; (d) whether the borrower was a sovereign, other public sector entity, or private debtor; (e)
    the governing law under which the bond contract was written; (f) currency of issue; (g)
    borrower’s industrial sector: manufacturing, financial services, utility or infrastructure, other
    services, or government (where government, in this case, refers to subsovereign entities and
    central banks, which could not be classified in the other four industrial sectors); (h) the country
    and regional identity of the borrower.


    Country characteristics
    Variable               (billions)        Periodicity         Source               Series
    Total external debt    US$               annual              WEO                  D
    (EDT)
    Gross national         US$               annual              WEO                  NGDPD
    product (GNP,
    current prices)
    Gross domestic         National          annual              WEO                  NGDP
    product (GDPNC,
    current prices)
    Gross domestic         National          annual              WEO                  NGDP_R
    product (GDP90,
    1990 prices)
    Total debt service     US$               annual              WEO                  DS
    (TDS)
    Exports (XGS)          US$               annual              WEO                  BX
    Exports (X)            US$               monthly             IFS                  M#c|70__dzf
    Reserves (RESIMF)      US$               quarterly           IFS                  q#c|_1l_dzf
    Imports (IMP)          US$               quarterly           IFS                  q#c|71__dzf
    Domestic bank          National          quarterly           IFS                  q#c|32d__zf
    credit (CLM_PVT)1
    Short-term bank        US$               semi-annual         BIS
    debt (BISSHT)2


1
 Credit to the private sector.
2
 Cross-border bank claims in all currencies and local claims in non-local currencies of maturity up to
and including one year.
                                              26
    Variable            (billions)             Periodicity       Source             Series
    Total bank debt     US$                    semi-annual       BIS
    (BISTOT)3
    Credit rating       Scale                  semi-annual       Institutional
    (CRTG)                                                       Investor
    Debt rescheduling   Indicator              annual            WDT/GDF
    (DRES)4


CONSTRUCTED VARIABLES:
Debt/GNP                             EDT/GNP
Debt service/Exports                 TDS/XGS
GDP Growth                           0.25*ln[GDP90_t/GDP90_{t-1}]
Standard deviation of                Standard deviation of monthly growth rates of exports
export growth                        over six months
Reserves/Imports                     RESIMF/IMP
Reserves/Short-term debt             RESIMF/BISSHT
Ratio of short-term debt             BISSHT/BISTOT
to total debt
Ratio of Domestic Credit             CLM_PVT/(GDPNC/4)
to GDP
SOURCES:
International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) and International Financial
Statistics (IFS).
World Bank’s World Debt Tables (WDT) and Global Development Finance (GDF).
Bank of International Settlements’ The Maturity, Sectoral and Nationality Distribution of
International Bank Lending.
Credit ratings were obtained from Institutional Investor's Country Credit Ratings.
Missing data for some countries was completed using the US State Department's Annual
Country reports on Economic Policy and Trade Practices (which are available on the
internet from http:www.state.gov/www/issues/economic/trade_reports/).
U.S. interest rates
http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/releases/H15/data/b/tcm3y.txt



Total consolidated cross-border claims in all currencies and local claims in non-local currencies.
3

4
 Indicator variable, which is equal to 1 if a debt rescheduling took place in the previous year and zero
otherwise.
                                                 27
Table 1: Spreads, maturities, and bonds issued under different governing laws

                                                         Governing
                                                           Law
Year and indicator                              U.K.       U.S.      Other   Average*
1991      Spread                      259                  384        237      274
          Maturity                    4                      4         5        5
          Number of bonds             39                    15        48       102

1992     Spread                       348                  387       233        343
         Maturity                     4                     5         5          4
         Number of bonds              63                   61        65         189

1993     Spread                       339                  340       210        321
         Maturity                     4                     6         5          5
         Number of bonds              168                  113       99         380

1994     Spread                       203                  298       172        218
         Maturity                     5                     7         7          6
         Number of bonds              172                  74        89         335

1995     Spread                       169                  315       201        209
         Maturity                     5                     7         6          5
         Number of bonds              179                  83        82         344

1996     Spread                       188                  308       196        228
         Maturity                     5                    10         7          7
         Number of bonds              248                  166       101        515

1997     Spread                       220                  259       195        234
         Maturity                     6                    12         6          9
         Number of bonds              218                  216       87         521

1998     Spread                       379                  391       409        390
         Maturity                     7                     9         6          8
         Number of bonds              73                   112       48         233

Average* Spread                        236                 317       217         261
          Maturity                     5                      9       6           6
          Number of bonds              1160                840       619        2619
Note: * Figures for number of bonds   represent total number.




                                                    28
Table 2: Bond issuance by region and type of issuer
                                   Average credit                  Sovereign Issuer                            Public Issuer                         Private Issuer
Region and indicator                 ratings**       UK law       US law Other laws Average*        UK law   US law Other laws Average*   UK law   US law Other laws Average*
East Europe                             40.7
 Spread                                                365          211         267         303      224      278       209      224       319      411       143      318
 Maturity                                               6           12           7           7        4        5         5        5         5        7         5        5
 Number of bonds                                       40            6          70          116      12        4        17       33        33       10        27       70

Middle East and North Africa            40.8
 Spread                                                316          279         156         230      272      249       388      277       186      311       232      249
 Maturity                                               5            8           8           7        3       20         6       11         9        7         4        8
 Number of bonds                                       22           19          55          96        5        8         8       21        14       15         4       33

East Asia                               63.9
 Spread                                                125          174          66         116      76       118       86       87        106      238       152      138
 Maturity                                               5           23            8         12        5       13         6        7         5       10         6        6
 Number of bonds                                       13           16           22         51       144      60        107      311       381      119       76       576

Caribbean                               30.8
 Spread                                                489          376                     433      186                         186                350                350
 Maturity                                               5            8                       7        3                           3                  8                  8
 Number of bonds                                        4            4                       8        1                           1                  4                  4

Latin America                           37.6
 Spread                                                277          299         307         295      323      304       350      318       425      387       369      401
 Maturity                                               6           10           7           8        5        9         4        6         4        7         4        5
 Number of bonds                                       71           86          76          233      81       86        49       216       299      390       92       781

South Asia                              42.8
 Spread                                                301                                  301      137      160                138       187      235
 Maturity                                               4                                    4        7       10        10        7         7       34         3       16
 Number of bonds                                        4                                    4       13        1         1       15        14        8         1       23

Sub-Saharan Africa                      40.9
 Spread                                                115          198         156         166                         131      131                          205      205
 Maturity                                               7           12           5           7       17                  5       10        20       10         5       11
 Number of bonds                                        3            3           5          11        4                  6       10         2        1         3        6

Average*                                47.6
 Spread                                                303          277         234         267      164      231       155      181       248      352       254      288
 Maturity                                               6           11           7           8        5       11         6        7         5        8         5        6
 Number of bonds                                       157          134         228         519      260      159       188      607       743      547       203     1493
Note: * Figures for number of bonds represent total number.
        ** Institutional Investors' scale of 0 (low) to 100 (high). Applies only to bond issuers.




                                                                       29
Table 3: Governing laws and spreads: alternative econometric treatments
                                                        OLS with predicted     Selectivity correction   Predicted values for
Variable                                 OLS            values for governing   with no instrumental     governing laws and
                                                                laws                 variables          selectivity correction
Log Amount                               -0.039                -0.034                  -0.034                   -0.051
                                        (-2.235)              (-1.658)                (-2.068)                 (-2.689)
Maturity                                  0.002                 0.002                   0.002                  0.00004
                                         (0.763)               (0.496)                 (0.858)                  (0.015)
Private placement                         0.067                 0.058                   0.064                    0.036
                                         (2.447)               (1.826)                 (2.458)                  (1.198)
Log of 10 year US. Treasury Rate         -0.286                -0.259                  -0.226                   -0.205
                                        (-2.019)              (-1.815)                (-1.527)                 (-1.377)
Log (10 year - 1 year) Treasury Rate     -0.084                -0.071                  -0.039                   -0.020
                                        (-3.896)              (-2.938)                (-1.730)                 (-0.816)
Credit Rating Residual                   -0.034                -0.034                  -0.048                   -0.048
                                       (-20.646)             (-18.153)               (-26.576)                (-24.324)
Debt/GNP                                  0.959                 1.009                   1.577                    1.572
                                         (9.004)               (9.162)                (14.619)                 (14.159)
Debt Rescheduled in Previous Year         0.180                 0.159                   0.189                    0.183
                                         (4.396)               (3.884)                 (4.287)                  (4.157)
GDP Growth                               -8.123                -6.471                 -12.519                  -13.393
                                        (-4.555)              (-3.372)                (-6.725)                 (-6.967)
Standard Deviation of Export Growth       0.886                 1.011                   2.186                    2.238
                                         (4.247)               (4.670)                 (9.883)                  (9.843)
Short Term to Total Debt                  -0.19                -0.196                   0.714                    0.673
                                        (-0.109)              (-1.031)                 (4.195)                  (3.614)
Reserves/Short Term Debt                 -0.084                -0.085                 -0.009                   -0.008
                                        (-5.711)              (-5.835)                (-0.627)                 (-0.582)
Ratio of Domestic Credit to GDP          -0.028                -0.011                  -0.057                   -0.050
                                        (-1.985)              (-0.644)                (-3.780)                 (-2.913)
Dummy for :
 Public Borrower                         -0.079               -0.096                   -0.028                  -0.059
                                        (-1.018)             (-1.205)                 (-0.398)                (-0.820)
 Private Borrower                         0.122                0.111                   -0.034                  -0.078
                                         (1.465)             ( 1.277)                 (–0.462)                (-0.998)
 Supranational borrower                  -1.156               -1.199                   -1.044                  -1.092
                                        (-6.307)             (-6.471)                 (-6.425)                (-6.644)
 Israel                                  -2.148               -1.927                   -1.948                  -1.764
                                       (-13.430)             (- 9.555)               (-14.563)               (-10.196)
 Latin America                            0.418                0.434                    0.070                   0.052
                                        (10.678)             (10.557)                  (1.699)                 (1.188)
 Japanese Yen issue                      -0.238               -0.098                   -0.224                  -0.056
                                        (-4.269)             (-0.859)                 (-4.435)                (-0.530)
 Deutch Mark issue                       -0.047                0.196                   -0.028                   0.201
                                        (-0.749)              (1.245)                 (-0.505)                 (1.396)
 Other currencies' issue                 -0.013                0.033                   -0.059                   0.021
                                        (-0.193)              (0.413)                 (-0.944)                 (0.280)
 Fixed rate issue                         0.422                0.526                    0.383                   0.381
                                        (10.565)              (8.401)                 (10.262)                 (6.450)
 Manufacturing Sector                     0.109                0.094                    0.116                   0.114
                                         (1.984)              (1.709)                  (2.139)                 (2.089)
 Financial Services Sector               -0.081               -0.108                   -0.060                  -0.062
                                        (-2.022)             (-2.545)                 (-1.576)                (-1.519)
 Other Services                           0.229                0.257                    0.251                   0.264
                                         (3.526)              (3.915)                  (3.848)                 (4.003)
 Government entities                     -0.032               -0.055                    0.013                  -0.002
                                        (-0.414)             (-0.702)                  (0.194)                (-0.036)
 U.K. governing law*                      0.002                0.215                   -0.043                  -0.134
                                         (0.070)              (1.550)                 (-1.287)                (-1.017)
 Other governing law*                    -0.041               -0.301                   -0.056                  -0.432
                                        (-0.802)             (-1.352)                 (-1.214)                (-2.106)
Constant                                  5.472                5.282                    5.338                   5.546
                                        (16.623)             (14.119)                 (16.027)                (14.947)
Lambda                                                                                 -0.589                  -0.590
                                                                                     (-24.107)               (-24.191)
Number of bonds                          2235                  2217                     2217                    2217
Adjusted R-square                       0.6082                0.6134
Log of Likelihood                                                                    -4473.47                -4472.098
* US Governing law as the base.




                                                   30
Table 4: Implications of governing laws for different credit rating categories: pooled results
                                                                    OLS with predicted       Predicted values for
Variable                                          OLS               values for governing     governing laws and
                                                                            laws             selectivity correction
Log Amount                                       -0.049                    -0.036                     -0.052
                                                (-2.800)                  (-1.777)                  (-2.733)
Maturity                                          0.001                     0.001                    -0.0006
                                                (0.468)                   (0.479)                   (-0.258)
Private placement                                 0.073                     0.082                     0.061
                                                (2.676)                   (2.622)                    (2.054)
Log of 10 year US. Treasury Rate                 -0.222                    -0.219                     -0.161
                                                (-1.563)                  (-1.549)                  (-1.091)
Log (10 year - 1 year) Treasury Rate             -0.101                    -0.101                     -0.053
                                                (-4.584)                  (-4.080)                  (-2.128)
Credit Rating Residual                           -0.028                    -0.028                     -0.043
                                               (-13.785)                 (-10.724)                 (-16.270)
Debt/GNP                                          0.785                     0.789                     1.378
                                                (7.204)                   (6.988)                   (12.029)
Debt Rescheduling in Previous Year                0.166                     0.175                     0.188
                                                (3.933)                   (4.120)                    (4.144)
GDP Growth                                       -7.396                    -6.080                    -12.748
                                                (-4.115)                  (-3.120)                  (-6.534)
Standard Deviation of Export Growth               0.759                     0.855                     2.028
                                                (3.615)                   (3.839)                    (8.737)
Short Term to Total Debt                          0.067                    -0.131                     0.692
                                                (0.392)                   (-0.696)                   (3.743)
Reserves/Short Term Debt                         -0.082                   -0.076                    -0.0007
                                                (-5.609)                  (-5.199)                  (-0.051)
Ratio of Domestic Credit to GDP                  -0.052                    -0.039                     -0.072
                                                (-3.308)                  (-2.198)                  (-3.977)
U.K. governing law*                               0.071                     0.166                     -0.142
                                                (1.114)                   (1.034)                   (-0.930)
UK governing law interactions with:
 Rating 30-50                                    -0.055                    0.016                    -0.091
                                                (-0.856)                  (0.160)                  (-0.972)
 Rating 50-70                                    -0.049                    0.258                    0.177
                                                (-0.565)                  (1.866)                  (1.387)
 Rating 70-90                                    -0.434                    -0.269                   -0.307
                                                (-4.215)                  (-1.671)                 (-2.029)
Other governing law*                             -0.031                    0.229                    0.075
                                                (-0.265)                  (0.778)                  (0.279)
Other governing law interactions with:
 Rating 30-50                                     0.066                    -0.243                    -0.261
                                                 (0.552)                 (-1.231)                   (-1.489)
 Rating 50-70                                     -0.078                   -0.775                    -0.745
                                                (-0.566)                 (-3.376)                   (-3.618)
 Rating 70-90                                     -0.339                  -10.968                    -0.576
                                                (-2.108)                 (-3.798)                   (-2.407)
Constant                                          5.448                    5.159                     5.453
                                                (16.612)                 (13.980)                  (14.875)
Lambda                                                                                               -0.573
                                                                                                   (-22.573)
Number of bonds                                  2235                      2217                       2217
Adjusted R-square                               0.6149                    0.6252
Log of Likelihood                                                                                  -4444.011

Note: Dummy variables for public, private, supranational, Israel, Latin America, currencies, and
      industrial sectors are included in the regression but not reported here.
* US Governing law as the base.



                                                        31
Table 5: Credit rating categories and impact of governing law: desegregated results
                                       Credit rating less   Credit rating equal   Credit rating less Credit rating 30 or                    Credit rating 70 to
Variable                                   than 50          to or more than 50        than 30        more but less than Credit rating 50 or         100
                                                                                                             50          more but below 70
Log Amount                                      -0.061                -0.106            0.029              -0.065              -0.093             -0.128
                                               (-2.951)              (-3.025)          (0.449)            (-3.015)            (-2.530)           (-1.864)
Maturity                                         0.004                 0.002            0.015               0.004               0.005             -0.022
                                                (1.710)               (0.527)          (1.138)             (1.396)             (1.177)           (-1.402)
Private placement                                0.034                 0.078            0.077               0.043              -0.055              0.207
                                                (1.160)               (1.221)          (1.007)             (1.341)            (-0.832)            (1.718)
Log of 10 year US. Treasury Rate                -0.296                -0.213           -0.602              -0.051               0.264              0.091
                                               (-1.988)              (-0.739)         (-1.579)            (-0.301)             (0.851)            (0.090)
Log (10 year - 1 year) Treasuries               -0.058                -0.027           -0.091              -0.081              -0.109             -0.316
                                               (-2.312)              (-0.520)         (-0.910)            (-2.996)            (-1.873)           (-1.033)
Credit Rating Residual                          -0.032                -0.076           -0.019              -0.029              -0.088             -0.141
                                              (-11.073)             (-15.953)         (-1.494)            (-7.879)           (-13.563)           (-2.289)
Debt/GNP                                         1.596                 1.191            0.579               1.247               0.777              2.947
                                               (11.292)               (6.128)          (1.724)             (7.365)             (3.639)            (1.131)
Rescheduling in Previous Year                    0.117                                  0.163               0.110
                                                (3.080)                                (1.501)             (2.367)
GDP Growth                                      -6.059               -36.325          -10.772              -6.585             -37.039           -105.847
                                               (-3.230)              (-6.561)         (-2.299)            (-3.054)            (-6.482)           (-1.558)
Standard Dev. of Export Growth                   1.732                 4.583           -0.492               1.712               4.940              4.809
                                                (8.081)               (6.216)         (-0.810)             (7.137)             (6.392)            (1.624)
Ratio of Short Term to Total Debt                0.662                 1.102            0.041               0.072              -0.107
                                                (3.397)               (2.529)          (0.084)             (0.312)            (-0.220)
Reserves/Short Term Debt                        -0.062                 0.100           -0.038              -0.112              -0.023              0.224
                                               (-4.429)               (3.210)         (-1.460)            (-5.609)            (-0.612)            (1.193)
Ratio of Domestic Credit to GDP                 -0.199                -0.152           -0.097              -0.223              -0.199             -0.293
                                               (-7.591)              (-4.396)         (-1.941)            (-6.693)            (-5.852)           (-0.938)
 U.K. governing law*                             0.302                -0.810            1.229               0.279              -0.802             -0.879
                                                (2.092)              (-2.816)          (2.770)             (1.828)            (-2.857)           (-2.435)
 Other governing law*                            0.099                -0.923            1.779              -0.254              -1.308              0.935
                                                (0.459)              (-2.344)          (2.566)            (-1.083)            (-3.170)            (1.197)
Constant                                         5.751                 6.869            4.419               5.542               7.553              9.388
                                                (1.274)               (9.692)          (4.063)            (12.700)            (10.076)            (2.939)
Lambda                                          -0.479                -0.548          -0.057               -0.470              -0.664             -0.070
                                              (-17.747)             (-12.028)         (-0.979)           (-17.695)           (-17.958)           (-0.443)
Number of bonds                                  1395                   822              271                1124                 557                265
Log of Likelihood                            -2523.514             -1433.201         -512.055           -1866.668           -969.2234          -337.7328
Note: Dummy variables for public, private, supranational, Israel, Latin America, currencies, and
        industrial sectors are included as needed in the regression but not
      reported here.
* US Governing law as the base.




                                                                          32
                  Figure 1: Bond issuance by credit rating category




                                   Number of bonds

600
                                                                               UK.
                                                                               Governing
500                                                                            law

                                                                               US .
400                                                                            Governing
                                                                               law

300                                                                            Other
                                                                               governing
                                                                               law
200

100

   0
             0-30           30-50              50-70           70-90
                                 Credit rating




                                   Mean spread of bonds

(Basis points)
  500
 450
 400                                                                             UK.
                                                                                 Governing
 350                                                                             law
 300
                                                                                 US .
 250                                                                             Governing
                                                                                 law
 200
 150                                                                             Other
                                                                                 governing law
 100
  50
   0
                 0-30         30-50                   50-70        70-90
                                      Credit rating




                                 Mean maturity of bonds

 (Years)
  14

  12
                                                                                    UK.
                                                                                    Governing
  10                                                                                law

   8                                                                                US .
                                                                                    Governing
   6                                                                                law

                                                                                    Other
   4                                                                                governing
                                                                                    law
   2

   0
                 0-30         30-50                    50-70           70-90
                                      Credit rating



                                           33
             Figure 2: Comparison of issuance and spreads under
                         UK and US governing laws




                                                         (basis points)
3.0                                                           450

                                                              400         Average
                                                                          spreads
2.5
                                                              350

2.0                                                           300
                                                                          Ratio of
                                                              250         number of
1.5                                                                       UK law
                                                              200         bonds to
                                                                          US law
                                                                          bonds
1.0                                                           150
                                                                          Ratio of
                                                                          spreads of
                                                              100         UK law
0.5                                                                       bonds to
                                                              50          US law
                                                                          bonds
0.0                                                           0
      1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998




                                  34
                                          References

Buchheit, Lee C. (1998a), “Changing Bond Documentation: The Sharing Clause,” International
Financial Law Review (July), pp.17-19.

Buchheit, Lee C. (1998b), “Majority Action Clauses May Help Resolve Debt Crises,”
International Financial Law Review (August), pp.17-18.

Buchheit, Lee C. (1998c), “The Collective Representation Clause,” International Financial Law
Review (September), pp.19-21.

Cline, William and Kevin Barnes (1997), “Spreads and Risk in Emerging Market Lending,”
Research Paper no. 97-1, Washington, D.C.: Institute of International Finance.

Council on Foreign Relations (1999), Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System: The
New International Financial Architecture, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (1998a), “What Explains Changing Spreads on Emerging-
Market Debt? Fundamentals or Market Sentiment?” NBER Working Paper no. 6408 (February).

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (1998b), “Interest Rates in the North and Capital Flows to
the South: Is There a Missing Link?” International Finance 1, pp.35-58.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (1999), “Lending Booms, Reserves, and the Sustainability
of Short-Term Debt: Inferences from the Pricing of Syndicated Bank Loans,” NBER Working
Paper no.7113 (June).

Folkerts-Landau, David (1999), “Testimony Before a Hearing of the Committee on Banking and
Financial Services,” 20 May, http://www.house.gov/banking/52099fol.htm.

Group of Seven (1998), Declaration of G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors,
http://www.imf.org/external/np/g7/103098dc.htm.

Group of Seven (1999), “Strengthening the International Financial Architecture,” Report of G7
Finance Ministers to the Koln Economic Summit, Cologne, 18-20 June 1999,
http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/pr3210b.htm.

Group of Ten (1996), Resolving Sovereign Liquidity Crises, Washington, D.C.: Group of Ten.

Group of Twenty Two (1998), Report of the Working Group on International Financial Crises,
Washington, D.C.: Group of Twenty Two.

Heckman, James (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47,
pp.153-161.

Maddala, G.S. (1983), Limited Dependent Variables, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                            35
Petas, Peter and Rashique Rahman (1999), “Sovereign Bonds — Legal Aspects that Affect Default
and Recovery,” Deutsche Bank Emerging Markets (May).

Roe, Mark (1987), “The Voting Prohibition in Bond Workouts,” Yale Law Journal 97, pp.232-
280.




                                          36
