1. Introduction
Even though fiscal policy is a classic theme in macroeconomics, there is still no consensus about
the size or even the sign of its effects on private sector behavior. The research which attempts to
shed light on these issues has gained new impetus, also as a result of the astonishing
consequences of two instances of sharp fiscal retrenchment that occurred in Denmark and Ireland
in the 1980s.1 Both episodes, as well as the symmetric consequences of the Swedish fiscal
expansion of the early 1990s, appear to contradict the conventional view that an increase in the
government surplus is contractionary and raise two important questions. First, is there something
peculiar to the Danish, Irish and Swedish experiences, or are there comparable episodes in other
countries as well? If so, can one identify circumstances in which fiscal policy is more likely to
have such non-conventional effects?
As we shall see in Section 2, expansionary fiscal contractions can be explained by the
effects of fiscal policy on the market value of wealth and on expectations about future taxes. A
fiscal contraction often reduces interest rates, raising the market value of stocks, bonds and real
estate, thus stimulating aggregate demand. It can also drastically change people’s view of the
future and thus the valuation of their human capital. For instance, in a high-debt country, a fiscal
correction may reduce the likelihood of public sector default, thus improving confidence and
increasing consumption and investment.
Several empirical studies, reviewed in Section 3, have confirmed that expansionary fiscal
contractions do indeed happen. It is still an open question, however, under which conditions a
fiscal consolidation induces a boom or, conversely, a fiscal expansion brings about a recession.
Perotti (1999) finds that the outcome of a consolidation is more likely to be expansionary when
public debt is high or growing rapidly. Giavazzi and Pagano (1996) find that private sector
behavior following a fiscal impulse depends on the size and persistence of the impulse. Alesina
and Perotti (1995) and Alesina and Ardagna (1998) find that the composition of the fiscal

1

In Denmark, between 1983 and 1986, a reduction in the full-employment surplus of 7.2 percent of GDP
was accompanied by a boom in private consumption and investment. In Ireland, between 1987 and 1989,
a similar cut in the full-employment surplus (5.7 percent of GDP) was also accompanied by higher
growth. Shortly afterwards, in a symmetrical pattern, the Swedish fiscal expansion of the early 1990s was
associated with a sharp contraction in economic activity.

2

adjustment also matters: the private sector response may differ depending on whether the budget
is cut by slashing public sector wages and reducing social security benefits, or by raising taxes
and cutting public investment. The common finding of these studies is that the response of the
private sector to fiscal policy may be non-linear: both the magnitude and the sign of the response
appear to change depending on the conditions under which the impulse occurs and on its
characteristics.
This paper conducts a systematic search to determine which factors are more likely to give
rise to such non-linearities. We use two data sets. OECD data over the past thirty years contain a
rich set of fiscal variables and allow comparison with previous work. The World Saving Data
Base recently produced by the World Bank includes the most comparable panel of national
accounts from developing countries. While not as accurate and complete as OECD data, they
allow us to study a large number of still unexplored fiscal episodes and to compare the evidence
from developing countries with that from industrial countries.
Studies of the effects of fiscal policy on private sector behavior have typically looked at
consumption.2 This paper considers the problem from a slightly different angle: we investigate the
private sector behavior during fiscal episodes by concentrating on national saving. Looking at
national saving has the advantage of allowing us to compare our results directly with the
predictions of the Ricardian equivalence proposition. As is well known, models with infinite
horizons imply that, for given government spending, taxes and transfers have no effect on
national saving, that is, the Ricardian proposition holds. The standard overlapping generations
model predicts instead that an increase in taxes (or a reduction in transfers) raises national saving.
Yet other models, which we shall review in Section 2, suggest that the sign and size of the effect
of fiscal policy on national saving depend on the level and sustainability of government debt, the
size and persistence of the fiscal impulse, and the change in composition of the budget. According
to some of these models an increase in net taxes may even produce a decline in national saving,
by generating a boom in private consumption.

2

An exception is the analysis of the response of private investment to a fiscal impulse provided by
Alesina, Ardagna, Perotti and Schiantarelli (1999).

3

The main results of our empirical analysis are presented in Section 4 for the OECD
countries and in Section 5 for the World Saving Data Base. In our empirical specification the
impact of fiscal policy on national saving can depend on: (i) the sign of the impulse (budget cut or
expansion); (ii) its size and duration; (iii) the previous level or rate of growth of public debt; (iv)
the composition of the impulse (changes in taxes and transfers relative to changes in government
consumption, changes in public investment or in social security entitlements).

Section 6

concludes.

2. Competing Theories
To begin, we outline the main competing hypotheses on the response of national saving to fiscal
impulses. The models generally make predictions about private consumption. We map them into
predictions about the response of national saving, to facilitate the interpretation of the regressions
presented in Section 4, where national saving is the dependent variable. For simplicity, we
consider closed-economy models.
Recall that, by accounting definitions, national saving is the difference between national
income and the sum of private and public consumption:
S = SG + S P = (T − G ) + (Y − T − C ) = Y − (C + G ),

(1)

where S denotes national saving, SG government saving, SP private saving, Y national income, T
taxes net of transfers and interest payments on the public debt (hereafter, net taxes) and G
government purchases of goods and services.
The predictions of the main hypotheses are summarized in Table 1. The predicted
response of national saving to fiscal impulses differs greatly from model to model. The theories
surveyed in this section help directing us to the variables associated with one or another of such
responses. We shall use this information as a guide in our empirical search for the conditions
under which a fiscal impulse can produce non-linear effects on national saving.

[INSERT TABLE 1]

4

2.1. Taxes and Transfers
In the standard IS-LM model, given public spending, an increase in taxes (or a cut in transfers)
raises the government surplus and depresses private consumption and private saving. The increase
in the government surplus may exceed or fall short of the fall in private saving, so that, on
balance, higher net taxes have an ambiguous impact on national saving.3 Wealth effects on
private consumption (as in Blinder and Solow, 1974) reinforce the negative impact of the tax
increase on national saving. If the increase in the surplus reduces the interest rate - either via a
traditional crowding-in mechanism or by reducing the default premium on public debt - the
resulting appreciation of stocks, bonds and real estate can trigger a consumption boom and make
the reduction in national saving more likely.
In full employment models with intertemporally optimizing households, the effect of an
increase in net taxes on national saving depends on the planning horizon, on the distortionary
effect of taxes and on expectations about future fiscal policy. The benchmark case is that of a
lump-sum increase in net taxes where the additional revenue is used to retire public debt and
reduce net taxes on future generations, holding the path of government consumption constant.
If households have a finite planning horizon, as in overlapping generations models with
non-altruistic consumers, net lifetime income for the current generation falls, and households
reduce their consumption and saving accordingly. The reduction in private saving, however, falls
short of the increase in net taxes, as households spread the cut in consumption over their lifetime.
The implied increase in the government surplus thus exceeds the fall in private saving, producing
a positive correlation between net taxes and national saving.
If, instead, households have infinite horizons, one obtains the well-known neutrality result,
often labeled as complete tax discounting or “Ricardian equivalence proposition”. An increase in
net taxes does not affect private consumption, because net lifetime income is unchanged: the
reduction in current disposable income reduces private saving one-for-one. National saving is
unaffected, because the fall in private saving precisely matches the rise in the government surplus.
3

Since in a closed economy national savings equal investment, the ambiguity may be understood by
considering what happens to private investment. Assume that investment depends positively on income
and negatively on the interest rate. A tax increase shifts the IS curve inwards, resulting in a lower interest
rate and income. The net effect on investment is ambiguous.

5

If taxes are distortionary, this neutrality result no longer obtains, even in infinite horizon
models. A net tax increase today, matched by lower taxes tomorrow, changes the deadweight cost
of taxes at different dates and thereby affects the present value of pre-tax lifetime income and
therefore private consumption. If households have infinite horizon, the effect is a decline in
national saving.4
In some models, the presence of distortionary taxes can lead to non-linear effects of fiscal
policy, as is illustrated by Blanchard (1990). He considers a model where households face a
constant probability of death, and assumes that the deadweight cost of taxation is strongly nonlinear: it is zero until the tax rate reaches a critical threshold, positive and high above that. When
the public debt-income ratio is low, an increase in net taxes increases national saving, as in
standard finite horizon models (see above). If instead the debt-income ratio is high, the response
of national saving can be negative. In this case, in fact, an increase in net taxes today diminishes
the chances that the government will have to raise the tax rate above the critical level tomorrow.
As a result, households revise upward their expected net lifetime income, and hence private
consumption. From equation (1), this translates into lower national saving, because Y stays
constant (if the tax rate is below the critical threshold) and G is given.5 The implication is that the
impact of higher net taxes on national saving may switch from positive to negative when the debtincome ratio is high.
There are other cases in which tax policy can have a non-linear effect on national saving.
For instance, assume that the current fiscal policy stance is unsustainable and if not corrected will
4

Suppose that initially the overall tax burden is either efficiently smoothed over time or inefficiently
concentrated in the current period. Then, an increase in current taxes reduces current income and, by a
lesser extent, the lifetime income of households. So consumption falls by less than current income, in step
with the lower lifetime income. Equation (1) then implies a lower national saving (recall that G is
constant). If instead initially the tax burden is inefficiently concentrated in future periods, an increase in
current taxes reduces current income but increases lifetime income and consumption, and therefore
reduces national saving. So in both cases the outcome is a fall in national saving, more pronounced in the
second case.
5
More generally, a tax hike may translate into lower national saving if the deadweight cost of taxes is an
increasing function of the tax rate. This effect occurs when current taxes are inefficiently low relative to
the future taxes required by the existing public debt and the path of public spending. If the government is
raising relatively little tax revenue today, it is implicitly leaving most of the tax burden for the future,
inefficiently imposing a very large deadweight cost on future production. Thus shifting part of this burden
to the present represents efficient “tax smoothing” and can raise consumption.

6

lead to public debt repudiation, disrupting the financial sector and the real economy. Raising net
taxes lowers the probability of default and the associated output costs. The implied increase in
expected net lifetime income raises current private consumption and reduces national saving. In
this example the response of the private sector hinges on people’s confidence on the switch to
“sound finance”. If the credibility of the regime shift is enhanced by the magnitude of the fiscal
turnaround (as suggested by Feldstein, 1982) sufficiently large changes in current net taxes can
switch the sign of the response of national saving. Even if a small increase in net taxes increases
national saving, a large and persistent one can leave it unaffected or even reduce it.
Sutherland (1997) provides another model in which expectations can trigger such nonlinear responses. Suppose that consumers have finite planning horizons, so that increases in net
taxes normally depress consumption and raise national saving. However, let consumers also
expect that when the public debt-income ratio exceeds a given threshold, a major stabilization
will occur. If the debt-income ratio is near the threshold, a tax increase delays reaching the
threshold, and so delays the “day of reckoning”, making the adjustment more likely to fall on the
shoulders of future generations. Paradoxically, the tax increase raises the expected net lifetime
income and the consumption of the current generation. So the positive effect of net taxes on
national saving that occurs under normal circumstances is again attenuated or even reversed when
public debt is high relative to income. 6

2.2. Government Consumption
In the IS-LM model, higher government spending has an ambiguous impact on investment and
national saving, just as a reduction in net taxes. An increase in G raises income and interest rates.
Since these variables affect investment in opposite directions, the impact on national saving is
ambiguous.
In an infinite horizon model with complete tax discounting and no tax distortions,
government consumption “crowds out” private consumption one for one: each dollar of extra
government spending subtracts a dollar from permanent income and hence from consumption

7

(∆C = − ∆G ). For a given path of pre-tax income Y, from equation (1) we see that an increase in G
leaves national saving unchanged. This may not be true in the presence of distortionary taxes.
Consider an increase in G with current taxes staying unchanged. The increase in G leads people to
expect not only higher future taxes, but also a lower net lifetime income due to the future
distortions. So their consumption will decrease by more than the increase in public spending, and
national saving falls. Therefore, in an infinite horizon model, the effect of higher public
consumption on national saving is nil or negative.7
The prediction of finite-horizon models is more clear-cut. Greater public consumption
(whether funded by taxes or debt) reduces private saving. Since the effect on public saving is also
negative, an increase in public consumption reduces national saving.
As shown in section 2.1 for the case of taxes, the effects of expectations can alter these
predictions. Suppose that large increases in public spending are taken as the signal of a transition
to a regime of higher permanent spending and therefore higher permanent taxes, while small
increases are expected to be reversed in the future. A large increase in G thus reduces private
consumption and leaves national saving unchanged (in the benchmark case of complete tax
discounting with no distortions). However, a small increase in G does not affect private
consumption but reduces the public surplus and national saving. This argument, proposed by
Feldstein (1982) and Drazen (1990), suggests a potential source of non-linearity in the effect of
government consumption on national saving.
Non-linearities driven by expectations can even lead to a switch in the sign of the relation
between government consumption and national saving, as shown by Bertola and Drazen (1993).
Suppose a fiscal stabilization is expected with some probability when public spending reaches a
given threshold.8 Below the threshold, an increase in G reduces private consumption less than
one-for-one and therefore leads to a fall in national saving. But if G keeps increasing even after
6

Perotti (1999) also presents a model where tax shocks have a positive correlation with national saving in
normal times and a negative correlation when the debt-income ratio reaches a threshold level, following a
similar logic as in Blanchard (1990) and Sutherland (1997).
7
The discussion in the text assumes that public spending has no effects on labor supply. If an increase in
G stimulates labor supply, as for example in Baxter and King (1993), investment and national saving will
also increase.

8

the threshold is reached, consumers, observing that the expected stabilization failed to
materialize, will revise the estimates of their lifetime income and consumption sharply
downward. This model accordingly predicts that the sign of the correlation between government
consumption and national saving depends on the level of public spending relative to income.
Government consumption shocks have a non-linear effect on private consumption also in
Perotti (1999), for reasons akin to those in Blanchard (1990). In Perotti’s model, an increase in G
increases the consumption of liquidity-constrained households, and lowers that of unconstrained
households, who see their net lifetime income reduced by the increase in future taxes and the
implied distortions. The net effect on aggregate consumption is ambiguous: when the debtincome ratio is low, it is positive; when it is high, so are tax distortions, and aggregate
consumption falls. As a result, the effect of an increase in G on national saving is attenuated when
the debt-income ratio is high.

3. Previous Evidence and Empirical Strategy
So far, empirical studies of unusual fiscal episodes have taken one of two approaches. Some
distinguish the episodes on the basis of ex post criteria (e.g. the success of a fiscal contraction in
reducing the debt-GDP ratio) and describe the characteristics of the fiscal impulse and the
associated behavior of various endogenous variables (income growth, interest rates, or the
exchange rate). These studies directly ask what makes a stabilization “successful”, without
addressing the intermediate question, namely how the private sector responds to a fiscal impulse.
Other studies distinguish fiscal episodes on the basis of an ex ante criterion (e.g. the size or
persistence of the fiscal stimulus) and then assess the effect of the government’s action on
endogenous variables, such as private consumption and investment.
The latter approach was prompted by the analysis of two fiscal policy episodes: the Danish
stabilization of 1983-86, and the Irish stabilization of 1987-89. Giavazzi and Pagano (1990)
conclude that in those episodes the size of the budgetary contraction was so large as to change

8

The difference from the case discussed in Section 2.1 is that here the stabilization only occurs with some
probability when the threshold is reached.

9

expectations about future fiscal policy, and hence people’s estimates of their net lifetime income.
Further evidence in favor of the hypothesis of a non-linear response of private consumption to
fiscal contractions - recessionary for small fiscal contractions, expansionary for large
consolidations - is provided in Giavazzi and Pagano (1996), using a panel of OECD countries.
That paper shows that the non-linearity applies to fiscal expansions as well. Large increases in the
full-employment primary deficit dampen private consumption, while moderate ones produce the
traditional Keynesian outcome.9 All these studies rely on the size and persistence of the change in
the budget balance as the ex ante criterion determining the effects of fiscal policy on private
consumption.10
Alesina and Perotti (1995, 1997), Alesina and Ardagna (1998) and the IMF (1996) take a
different approach, by classifying the episodes according to their ex post performance. Alesina
and Perotti define as “successful” those fiscal contractions which three years out produce a
reduction of the debt-GDP ratio of at least 5 percentage points. According to their evidence, fiscal
consolidations are more likely to stabilize the debt-GDP ratio when the budget improvement is
obtained by cutting public wages and pension benefits. This result is consistent with the view that
the effects of fiscal policy depend on how they affect expectations. Slashing these “untouchable”
budget items, they argue, signals that a regime shift has occurred, thus stimulating output via a
surge of optimism.
The IMF (1996), based on McDermott and Wescott (1996), defines “aggressive fiscal
impulse” a tightening of the budget of at least 1.5 percentage points of GDP for at least 2 years. It
terms “successful” those stabilizations that managed to reduce the debt-GDP ratio by at least 3
points within two years. Out of 63 “aggressive” fiscal contractions between 1970 and 1995, the
14 “successful” ones are associated with higher GDP growth, lower unemployment, lower real

9

For early evidence on the role of the debt-GDP ratio in determining the effect of fiscal policy on
consumption, see Nicoletti (1988).
10
In a similar vein, the OECD (1996) investigates if similar results obtain with reference to output growth
rather than consumption. The study identifies 15 episodes between 1974 and 1995 in which the cyclicallyadjusted surplus improves by at least 3 percentage points of GDP continuously over at least 2 consecutive
years. It finds that fiscal consolidation did not uniformly lead to low growth, but the results are
inconclusive: “overall there appears to be little relationship between either the extent or the pace of
consolidation and growth rates during the process” (p. 39).

10

interest rates and real exchange rate appreciation. This is further evidence that fiscal policy can
have non-linear effects.
More recently, Alesina et al. (1999) have investigated the effects of fiscal impulses on
private sector investment. They find that the composition of a fiscal retrenchment is a critical
variable in determining the response of private investment, but fail to detect significant nonlinearities. Once one controls for the composition of the fiscal impulse, there is no evidence that
private investment reacts differently during large fiscal adjustments than in normal times.
In this paper we analyze the relation between fiscal policy and national saving using ex
ante criteria drawn from the theories surveyed in Section 2. We estimate a national saving
regression interacting fiscal variables with a set of dummies that capture the various
circumstances which, according to the various theories, may give rise to non-linearities: (i) a
large and persistent fiscal impulse; (ii) a high debt-GDP ratio, and (iii) a rapidly growing debtGDP ratio.
For OECD countries, we define a “large and persistent fiscal impulse” as one in which the
full employment surplus (as a percent of potential output) changes by at least 1.5 percentage
points per year over a two-year period. This definition is similar to that used by Giavazzi and
Pagano (1996) and the IMF (1996). We find 38 fiscal expansions and 65 fiscal contractions in the
OECD sample. These are listed in the Appendix.
For the World Saving Data Base we lack estimates of the full-employment surplus, so a
fiscal episode is defined as one in which the current surplus changes by at least 1.5 percent of
current output per year over a two-year period. Based on this definition, we obtain 259 fiscal
expansions and 270 fiscal contractions for developing countries. Since the threshold above which
the change in surplus is defined to be “large and persistent” is somewhat arbitrary, we perform
sensitivity analysis with respect to the definition of fiscal episodes both in the OECD and in the
World Saving Data Base.
While the OECD data cover 18 industrial countries in the period 1970-1996, the World
Saving Data Base contains yearly national income and fiscal variables for a group of 150
industrial and developing countries from 1960 to 1995, adding up to some 5,000 observations.
The data have been subject to extensive consistency checks, and thus represent an important

11

improvement in terms of quality relative to other data sets.11 Due to missing observations on
several variables and years, the sample we use includes only 101 developing countries over the
period 1970-1994, although for several countries the sample size is actually shorter. We do not
include in this sample the industrial countries present in the World Saving Data Base because for
these countries we prefer to rely on the more detailed OECD data.

4. Evidence from OECD Data
Table 2 reports averages of selected macroeconomic variables before, during and after the
episodes of sizable and persistent fiscal impulses that we identified in the OECD sample,
separately for fiscal expansions and contractions. The figures suggest that the effects of fiscal
policy may indeed be asymmetric and non-linear. For instance, real GDP and consumption growth
decline, relative to their previous average, after fiscal expansions and contractions alike, but the
average decline is sharper after the fiscal expansions than it is after the contractions. Real GDP
and consumption growth are also higher during fiscal contractions than expansions. The gross
national saving rate falls considerably following fiscal expansions (from 23.41 percent to 20.17
percent of potential output). Large fiscal contractions, on the contrary, increase gross national
saving, although only slightly (from 21.91 to 22.66 percent). These descriptive statistics thus
suggest the presence of asymmetries in the response of gross national saving to fiscal expansions
and contractions. Finally, the table indicates that major fiscal consolidations have relied on
increases in net taxes (i.e. on increases in taxes or reductions in transfers) rather than on spending
cuts and that, by and large, they have managed to stabilize the debt-GDP ratio.

[INSERT TABLE 2]

To convey a visual impression of the correlations in the data, Figure 1 plots the first
differences of the gross national saving rate and of the full-employment government surplus (both
11

Full details on data sources are available in Loyaza et al. (1998). In the Appendix we report definitions
and sources of the variables used in the estimation.

12

are scaled by full-employment output, and differenced to purge them of country-specific
variation). In the scatter diagram we draw a linear spline with knots set for values of the fullemployment surplus equal to –1.5 and 1.5 percent, the same thresholds used to identify large
fiscal shocks in Table 2. The spline reveals a non-linear relationship between the two variables:
the national saving rate is positively correlated with the full-employment surplus when the latter
is below 1.5 percent of full-employment output, and is slightly negatively correlated with it for
larger fiscal contractions. Interestingly, while the change in slope occurring at the 1.5 percent knot
is large and statistically significant, that occurring at -1.5 percent is minuscule and not statistically
different from zero. This suggests that the response of national saving to fiscal policy may indeed
be non-linear, and that the non-linearity might only be present only for fiscal contractions. We
thus turn to regression analysis to check if this purely descriptive evidence persists when
conditioning for other factors affecting the national saving rate.

[INSERT FIGURE 1]

We estimate the following reduced-form equation which has the national saving rate (as a
fraction of potential output) on the left-hand-side:
T
G
G
St
S t −1
Yt − Yt*
T
= α o + α1 * + α 2
+ α 3 rt + β1 t* + β 2 d t* + γ 1 *t + γ 2 d t *t ,
*
*
Yt
Yt −1
Yt
Yt
Yt
Yt
Yt

(2)

where Y* denotes potential output,12 (Yt − Yt* ) / Yt* the output gap and rt the real interest rate. The
variable dt is a dummy for the circumstances in which fiscal policy can have non-linear effects
according to the theories surveyed in Section 2. A more detailed description of this variable is
provided below.
12

We scale national saving and fiscal variables by potential output to avoid problems of
heteroskedasticity. Dividing by actual rather than potential output would introduce an endogeneity bias
due to the correlation between the error term and the right-hand-side variables. It would also make it hard
to relate the estimated coefficients to the theoretical predictions outlined in section 2, which are all stated
in terms of levels of variables rather than ratios to current output.

13

In equation (2), the lagged value of the national saving rate is expected to capture the
dynamics of the dependent variable, while the output gap should reflect the response of private
saving and of the government surplus to transitory changes in income. The (ex post) real interest
rate is the difference between the short-term domestic rate and inflation, based on the private
consumption deflator. Since the interest rate is potentially endogenous, we use its lagged value as
instrument. Demographic variables (such as the proportion of the population less than 15 years
old or greater than 65) were found to be not statistically significant, and are not included in the
reported results. Even though we deal with a dynamic panel, the least squares within-group
estimator is appropriate in our context.13
Our empirical specification can conveniently nest the various hypotheses laid out in
Section 2. For instance, finite horizon models suggest that an increase in net taxes raises national
saving (β1>0), whereas an increase in government consumption reduces it (γ1<0). In the infinite
horizon model with lump-sum taxes, fiscal policy has no effect on national saving (β1=0 and

γ1=0). As highlighted in Table 1, in some circumstances, however, the private sector response to
fiscal shocks can be dramatically altered by expectational mechanisms. To capture these
circumstances, T/Y* and G/Y* are interacted with appropriately designed dummy variables d.
Several studies have estimated versions of equation (2) using time series data on
individual countries, international cross-sections or panels (Modigliani, 1993; Masson, Bayoumi
and Samiei, 1996). The main problem in estimating equation (2) is the potential endogeneity of
the fiscal variables. Such endogeneity may arise from two different sources. Because of the
automatic stabilizers built in the existing tax code, tax revenues and government transfers from
and to the economy (which enter our definition of T) fluctuate with the business cycle, and are
thus affected by the same shocks which affect national savings.14 We deal with this first source of

13

Alvarez and Arellano (1999) establish the asymptotic properties of the within-group, LIML and GMM
estimators for a first-order autoregressive model with individual effects when both T and N tend to
infinity. They show that all three estimators are consistent when T/N → c, with 0 ≤ c ≤ 2, and that when T
= N the three biases are equal. The intuitive reason is that in samples with relatively large T (as in the case
at hand) the simultaneity bias induced by the presence of the lagged dependent variable tends to zero.
14
Government consumption, on the contrary, is unlikely to fluctuate systematically with the business
cycle: fluctuations in unemployment, for instance, affect government transfers, but are unlikely to be
correlated with government purchases of goods and services.

14

endogeneity by instrumenting net taxes with the full-employment government surplus net of
interest payments, as measured by the OECD.
The second potential source of endogeneity arises from the possibility that the country’s
fiscal rules themselves respond to the business cycle, which in standard models is positively
correlated with national saving.15 For instance, suppose that in response to a negative income
shock the government chooses to cut taxes more than implied by pre-existing tax rules, in order to
stabilize output or smooth the tax burden. This implies that the measured full-employment surplus
is positively correlated with output shocks, and therefore with the error of the saving regression.
The estimated coefficient of net taxes, β̂1 , will then exceed the true coefficient, β1. The opposite
bias would result if the government were to raise more taxes in response to a negative output
shock, for instance because it targets a certain surplus-GDP ratio (say, to meet Maastricht-type
criteria). Handling this potential bias is difficult in the extreme, although recently there have been
attempts at constructing measures of exogenous fiscal policy shocks that are not based on the fullemployment surplus. Blanchard and Perotti (1999) identify tax and spending shocks in U.S.
quarterly data by assuming that implementing fiscal policy changes requires at least one quarter
and by relying on historical information on large discretionary changes in fiscal policy (such as
the tax cut in the second quarter of 1975), in the same vein as Ramey and Shapiro’s (1998) shocks
in military spending. Fatàs and Mihov (1998) use standard VAR restrictions to identify
government spending and revenue shocks in a sample of OECD countries. We shall discuss
below, after presenting our estimates, how they may be affected by this second source of bias.
Column (1) of Table 3 presents the estimates of equation (2). The total number of
observations in our sample (which includes 18 OECD economies over the period 1970 to 1996,
with some unavailable observations) is 417. Initially we do not interact the fiscal variables with
the dummy variables d, so as to have a benchmark specification in which the effects of G and T
are constrained to be linear. The lagged saving rate has a positive and significant coefficient,
whose size (0.554) reveals a large degree of persistence. This implies that the long-run effects of
15

In a Keynesian model, for instance, investment, and therefore national saving, is positively correlated
with the business cycle. Similarly, in standard real business cycle models with optimizing agents, a

15

the other saving determinants are approximately twice as large as the short-run effects reported in
the table. The coefficient of the output gap is consistent with the effect predicted by the theory:
private saving tends to increase and the government deficit tends to decrease in response to
transitory increases in national income.16 The effect of a change in the real interest rate, which in
principle is ambiguous, is not significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level. The
coefficients of T/Y* and G/Y* are respectively positive (0.263) and negative (-0.735), and both are
significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level. These results strongly contradict the
infinite horizon model and are consistent with the predictions of finite horizon models. Given the
continuing debate over the Ricardian equivalence proposition, the positive coefficient of net taxes
is of interest in its own right.17
The other regressions in Table 3 test the hypothesis that the fiscal policy coefficients are
stable. Our approach is to identify possible structural breaks in the relation between fiscal policy
and national saving in the specific circumstances identified by the theories surveyed in Section 2,
namely: (i) a protracted and sizable fiscal impulse, as defined in section 3; (ii) a high ratio of
public debt to potential GDP; (iii) a rapidly growing ratio between gross debt and potential GDP.
In each case we define an appropriate dummy variable.18
The results indicate that the effect of both T/Y* and G/Y* is highly non-linear. During
“normal” times, the effect of net taxes on national saving remains positive (β1 = 0.496), but
positive transitory shock to productivity leads to higher private saving for reasons of intertemporal
smoothing.
16
We also experimented with an alternative specification where a five-year moving average of the growth
rate replaces the output gap among the regressors. This alternative specification is in line with the
theoretical prediction of the life-cycle theory that past growth should have a positive effect on the national
saving rate, as found in previous studies such as Modigliani (1993), Carroll and Weil (1994) and Jappelli
and Pagano (1994). When we use this specification we also find that the coefficient of the lagged growth
rate is positive and significant. All the other coefficients, however, are similar to those reported in Table
3.
17
For instance, Bernheim (1987) concludes that the data do not support Ricardian equivalence, while
Seater (1993) reaches the opposite conclusion.
18
We also experimented with a dummy that is equal to one if the effective exchange rate falls by more
than 10 percent in the year preceding the fiscal impulse. According to the IS-LM model, a devaluation
stimulates aggregate demand. Other things being equal, a devaluation should thus compensate the
recessionary impact arising from a fiscal contraction and could thus modify the effects of fiscal policy
shocks. However, the interaction terms between this dummy and fiscal variables were not significantly
different from zero. For brevity, they are not reported.

16

during sharp fiscal contractions or fiscal expansions, the effect is greatly attenuated
(β1+β2=0.496-0.307=0.189) although it remains statistically significant. In these episodes, the
effect of government spending is also much smaller in absolute value (γ1+γ2= -0.944+0.290 = 0.654) than in normal times (as above, the sum of the two coefficients remains statistically
significant.) Since the results may be sensitive to the values chosen to define a “sizable” change in
the full-employment surplus, we also try raising the threshold from a fiscal correction of at least
1.5 percent over a two-year period to 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, and 5.0 percent respectively. The results
obtained are qualitatively similar, and for brevity they are not reported.
The non-linear response of the national saving rate to net taxes implied by these estimates
may be affected by the second endogeneity bias discussed above. Suppose that the government
reacts to large income shocks (though not to relatively smaller ones) by large discretionary
changes in full-employment net taxes. If these discretionary changes in taxes are positive during
large recessions, then the coefficient β2 on the interacted tax variable will be under-estimated,
while β1 will not (because the government does not respond to small shocks with discretionary
changes in taxes). Correspondingly, our results would indicate a non-linear response ( βˆ 2 < 0 )
while in fact there is none (β2 = 0). On the other hand, if the government were to respond to a
large recession with a large reduction in full-employment taxes, the bias of β̂ 2 would go in the
opposite direction, i.e. the estimated non-linearity in the response of national saving would be
dampened.
In our sample, we find that the correlation between the full-employment surplus and the
output gap is negative and significantly different from zero for small values of the gap (± 2 or 3
percent), and close to zero during strong expansions and deep recessions. This implies that
E ( βˆ1 ) < β 1 , but E ( βˆ 2 ) = β 2 , so that our estimated coefficients are unlikely to overestimate the
non-linear response of national saving to net taxes.
In some of the models discussed in section 2 (for instance in Bertola and Drazen, 1990)
the private sector’s response may differ depending on the sign of the fiscal impulse. To test for
this asymmetric behavior, we interact T/Y* and G/Y* with two separate dummies, one for large
fiscal expansions and one for large fiscal contractions (the threshold is kept at the 1.5 percent

17

level). In the regression reported in column (3) of Table 3 we find that the effect of fiscal policy
differs between fiscal contractions and fiscal expansions. In particular, the effect of net taxes is
positive (0.439) in “normal” times, smaller during large fiscal expansions (0.219 = 0.439-0.220),
and not statistically different from zero during large fiscal contractions (0.034 = 0.439-0.405).
The bottom line is that an increase in net taxes raises national saving, except during a sizable
fiscal contraction, when the increase in private consumption fully offsets the positive effect of
taxes on the government surplus. The pattern for government spending is similar. The coefficient
is always negative, but its absolute value in normal times (-0.898) exceeds its value during sizable
fiscal expansions (-0.711 = -0.898+0.187) and is almost twice as large as during sizable fiscal
contractions (-0.503 = -0.898+0.395).
An intuitive way to understand this result is to plot the estimated impact of the
government surplus on the national saving rate (both as ratios of potential output), for given
government consumption. In normal times, this effect is equal to the product between the surplus
and β̂1 . During sizable fiscal contractions, this effect is supplemented by the interaction of the
deficit with β̂ 2 . To make the graph readable, this interactive effect is plotted only for fiscal
contractions. (A similar decomposition could be performed for fiscal expansions, as well as for
the effect of government consumption, for given deficit.)
In Figure 2 we use the coefficients estimated in column 3 to plot the national saving rate
and the estimated short-run effects of the deficit in countries that have enacted the largest recent
swings in fiscal policy: Sweden, Denmark, Ireland, and Belgium. We standardize the national
saving rate by plotting deviations from the respective country’s mean. Given the size of the
coefficient of lagged saving, long-run effects are about twice as large as the short-run coefficients.
Consider first the effect of the deficit in Sweden, displayed in the upper-left corner of
Figure 2. The line marked with diamonds is the national saving rate. The line marked with circles
shows that in normal times the surplus increases national saving: the two lines move in the same
directions. The line with crosses represents the total effect of the surplus. In normal times this
coincides with the line marked with circles, while during large fiscal contractions it also includes
the interaction term. In our sample period, Sweden had three large fiscal contractions (1983-84;
1986-88 and 1994-96). In each of these episodes the line with crosses virtually coincides with

18

zero, indicating that the surplus has no effect on national saving. Similar considerations apply to
the other three countries. In each of them, in normal times the surplus raises national saving, but
the effect becomes close to zero during large fiscal contractions (in 1983-86 for Denmark; in
1977-78, 1983-85, 1987-89, and 1991-92 in Ireland; in 1974-75, 1981-87 and 1992-94 in
Belgium). The figure clearly conveys the finding that the effect of the surplus on national saving
is markedly non-linear.

[INSERT FIGURE 2]

According to some of the models outlined in section 2, the effect of fiscal policy can
depend on the size of the public debt. In column (4) of Table 3 we interact taxes and spending
with a dummy set equal to 1 if, during the year preceding the fiscal episode, gross public debt
exceeds 70 percent of potential output. The coefficients of the interaction terms are small and not
significantly different from zero, indicating that a high ratio of debt to potential output does not
affect the impact of taxes and spending on national saving. Qualitatively similar results were
obtained for other values of the debt ratio (such as 80 percent or 100 percent).
The sign and size of the response to fiscal impulses may also depend on the perceived
sustainability of the fiscal regime. A regime may be perceived as “unsustainable” not only if the
debt-income ratio is high, but also if it has been rising rapidly in the recent past. To capture such
occurrences, we rely on the dummy for high debt growth computed and reported by Perotti (1999,
Table 1, variable D3). The dummy equals 1 if the growth rate of the ratio of (cyclically adjusted)
gross public debt to trend GDP exceeds 4 percent for two consecutive years, and 0 otherwise. The
results are reported in column (5) of Table 3. The sign of the interaction terms is not consistent
with a smaller fiscal impact on national saving in the wake of rapid debt accumulation.
The specifications in columns (3), (4) and (5) do not allow for possible interactions among
the ex-ante criteria (size and persistence of the fiscal impulse, debt level and debt growth), which
could be complementary sources of the non-linear response of national saving to fiscal policy.
The natural next step, therefore, is to estimate a regression that includes all the interaction terms.
The estimates obtained from this nested specification are displayed in column (6) of Table 3: they

19

confirm that the main source of non-linearity is the size of the fiscal impulse, not the level or
growth of public debt. Furthermore, the size and significance of the interaction terms are again
stronger during contractions than during expansions.
On the whole, the results strongly support models in which increases in net taxes raise
national saving, while increases in government spending reduce it (a non-Ricardian result).
However, the effects of changes in taxes and spending are significantly dampened during large
fiscal contractions. The dampening is particularly pronounced when the fiscal impulse comes on
the side of net taxes. 19 The evidence that these effects are related to a high or fast-growing debtincome ratio is weak at best.
We have also tried to investigate further the non-linear effects of fiscal policy. In
particular, when sizable changes in fiscal policy occur, the non-linear effect of taxes and spending
may depend on whether public debt is high or growing rapidly. Or it may depend on the
composition of the fiscal impulse: the relative importance of tax hikes and cuts in government
consumption, public investment, or pension transfers. We address these issues by interacting the
dummy for “large fiscal contraction” and that for “large fiscal expansions” with dummy variables
capturing episodes in which: (i) the ratio of public debt to potential output exceeds 70 percent, (ii)
the average change in the ratio of debt to potential output exceeds 4 percent in two consecutive
years, (iii) public investment is growing in real terms, (iv) social security benefits are reduced in
real terms, or (v) the consolidation is effected by raising net taxes more than by cutting public
consumption. The results, not reported for brevity, are inconclusive, because none of the
additional interaction dummies is estimated with sufficient precision.

5. Evidence from the World Saving Data Base
In all of the empirical studies quoted above, as well as in this paper so far, the empirical evidence
on possible non-linearities in the effects of fiscal policy has been limited to OECD countries. In
19

These results are broadly consistent with Giavazzi and Pagano (1996), which focuses on private
consumption rather than national saving.

20

this section we use the World Saving Data Base to test if in developing countries as well there is
evidence of non-linearities in the effects of fiscal policy on national saving. As in the previous
section, we look for asymmetries between fiscal expansions and fiscal contractions, and for the
possibility that the level or the growth rate of the public debt affect the way in which national
saving responds to a fiscal impulse. In doing this we keep the 70 percent threshold for the debtincome ratio, and a threshold of 4 percent for the change in the debt-income ratio in two
consecutive years. 20
Even if we try to replicate the regressions presented in Table 3 as closely as possible, there
are differences in specification, definition of variables and estimation method that make the
results not immediately comparable with those obtained for the OECD countries. Regarding
specification, we omit the real interest rate, whose inclusion would require dropping more than
half of the sample, and add as a right-hand-side variable the dependency ratio, defined as the
percent of individuals in the population younger than 15 or older than 65.
The definition of variables also differs from the OECD data set. Potential output, which is
used to scale the variables, is not available in the World Saving Data Base: we constructed an
estimate of this variable running individual country regressions of log output on a quadratic time
trend.21 Furthermore, fiscal variables refer to the central government only, instead of the general
government used for the OECD countries (data for local administrations, government agencies
and public enterprises are only available for a much smaller set of countries).
Finally, concerning estimation, we use an OLS fixed effect estimator rather than
instrumental variables. We could not use the lagged full-employment surplus as instrument, since
20

Lopez, Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (1998) review the mixed evidence on Ricardian equivalence in
developing countries using a subset of the countries included in the World Saving Data Base. They
estimate the impact of permanent and transitory fiscal policy shocks on consumption. Overall, their
results represent strong rejection of Ricardian equivalence, particularly in the sample of developing
countries. Loyaza, Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (1998) and Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (1999) exploit the
full sample to investigate the main factors explaining the international variability in saving rates. They
find that the growth rate of income, the age structure of the population and the government surplus are
among the most important determinants of national saving rates.
21
In several countries output fluctuations in the last three decades are quite large, so that a linear trend is
a very bad approximation of potential output. We experimented using a sub-sample limited to 1980-04
and, on this sub-sample, estimated potential output by individual country regressions of log output on a
linear time trend. The results are qualitatively unaffected.

21

this variable is not available in the data set. Moreover, lagged variables are poor predictors of
current taxes and of the interaction terms in the first-stage regressions.22 The limitations of this
data set thus make the endogeneity problem much more difficult to tackle: in particular, we
cannot claim that both our estimated coefficient of taxes, βˆ1 and βˆ2 , are unbiased.
Attanasio, Picci and Scorcu (1998), using the same data, focus on the correlation between
saving, growth and investment. They find that growth Granger-causes saving, with a positive
sign, and uncover no compelling evidence that saving causes growth, a fact that is consistent with
our saving specification. They also analyze carefully the estimation strategy in panels in which
both the number of countries and the number of time periods are relatively large. In particular,
comparison with a GMM estimator and with an estimator that allows for parameter heterogeneity
and the results of a Monte Carlo experiment reveal that in the dynamic panel we are using the
OLS bias is very small.
Our results are shown in Table 4. In the baseline specification, reported in column 1, the
size of the coefficient of the lagged saving rate and the effect of the growth rate of income are
similar to those obtained in the OECD sample. The negative coefficient of the dependency ratio is
consistent with standard life-cycle models of consumption. The coefficients of net taxes and
government spending reject Ricardian equivalence.
When we allow (column 2) for a different response of national saving to fiscal variables
during episodes of large changes in the budget surplus, we find evidence of a non-linear effect for
both taxes and government spending, as in the OECD sample. In this case, however, the offsetting
effect of the interaction terms is slightly weaker for fiscal contractions than for expansions, as
shown in column 3, where we allow for asymmetries between the two. Here, all the relevant
coefficients are statistically significant at the 1 percent level, and the effect of taxes is positive in
normal times (0.447), smaller during large fiscal contractions (0.279 =0.447-0.168) and even
smaller during large fiscal expansions (0.190 = 0.447-0.257).
The pattern for government spending is also similar to our previous findings, but again,
22

These problems appear to be especially severe in the sub-sample for Latin American countries. When
the observations for these countries are excluded from the sample, lagged taxes have predictive power for

22

compared with the OECD sample, there is greater symmetry between the effects of large fiscal
contractions and expansions. The coefficient of government spending is always negative, and its
absolute value in normal times (-0.691) is larger than during both sizable fiscal contractions (0.459 =-0.691+0.232) and expansions (-0.427 =-0.691+0.264).
Overall these results, obtained from a much larger data set and in spite of the differences
in data definitions, are consistent with our findings from the OECD regressions. The main
difference regards the comparison between episodes of sizable expansions and contractions.
While in Table 3 we found larger effects during fiscal contractions, here the non-linear effects
occurring during large fiscal contractions and expansions are both important and rather
symmetric. Due to data limitations, however, we cannot claim that the estimates for developing
countries are unaffected by endogeneity bias.
In the regressions reported in columns (4) and (5) we introduce the dummies that identify
situations where the fiscal action takes place in an environment of high (column 4) or rapidly
accumulating (column 5) public debt. Recall that in the OECD regressions we found no evidence
of a smaller impact of fiscal policy on national savings when the public debt is high, or growing
rapidly. In the World Saving Data Base, we find instead that during periods of rapidly growing
public debt (recall that we are using a threshold of 4 percent for the change in the debt-income
ratio in two consecutive years preceding the fiscal episode) the impact of taxes and government
spending on national savings is significantly different. In such situations, the effect of an increase
in taxes on national saving is completely offset: the total effect is -0.040 = 0.261-0.301. The
coefficient on government spending remains negative, but is significantly lower than in normal
times (-0.245 = -0.497+0.252).
Finally, in column (6) we interact all the variables that could give rise to non-linearities in
the response of savings to a fiscal impulse. The results confirm that the response of savings to an
increase in taxes is significantly dampened during episodes of large budgetary contractions and
expansions, and in situations when the debt-income ratio is growing fast, regardless of its level.
The same holds, symmetrically, for the response of savings to government spending.

current taxes. The IV estimates that we obtain excluding Latin America are qualitatively similar to those
presented in Table 4, although several coefficients are less precisely estimated.

23

As already mentioned, the World Saving Data Base does not contain information on
cyclically-adjusted fiscal variables. It is therefore possible that some of the episodes we identify
are simply the result of the endogenous response of the budget to the cycle. One way to address
this issue is by raising the threshold used to define a fiscal episode. In Table 5 we report the
results obtained using two different definitions of a “large and persistent fiscal episode”: those in
which the full employment surplus changes by at least 2.5 or 5 percent per year over a two-year
period. (Recall that in Table 4 we had identified fiscal episodes using a threshold of 1.5 percent,
which gave us 259 expansions and 270 contractions.) When the limit is set at 2.5 percent there are
191 fiscal expansions and 222 contractions; these change to 108 and 128, respectively, when the
limit is 5 percent. The general pattern of the results reported in Table 5 does not appear to be
qualitatively affected: the absolute size of the coefficient estimates falls as we raise the threshold,
in particular for net taxes and spending during large fiscal contractions, but the magnitudes of the
standard errors remains virtually unchanged.

6. Conclusions
In this paper we have searched systematically for the circumstances in which national saving
responds non-linearly to fiscal policy impulses. The evidence confirms some previous findings
and complements them with a few new ones.
The data drawn from the OECD countries confirm that a non-linear response by the
private sector is more likely when fiscal impulses are large and persistent. The finding that only
sizable and persistent fiscal impulses trigger non-linear responses can be explained by models of
regime changes: only large and politically costly fiscal actions can signal a regime change, and
thus have a non-linear impact on private sector expectations and behavior. Non-linear effects are
larger and more precisely estimated for changes in net taxes than for changes in public
consumption. Non-linear responses also appear to be asymmetric, stronger and more precisely
estimated for fiscal contractions than for fiscal expansions; in particular, during large fiscal
contractions an increase in net taxes has little or no effect on national saving. In contrast with
many of the relevant theoretical models, as well as with the evidence in Perotti (1999), we find

24

that high or rapidly growing public debt is not per se a good predictor of these non-linear
responses.
In the World Saving Data Base the situations in which the response of national saving is
non-linear appear to be more frequent. In fact, they occur not only in the case of large fiscal
contractions, but also in that of large fiscal expansions, and whenever a country is accumulating
public debt rapidly, regardless of its initial level. These results for developing countries are novel
and interesting, but more work needs to be done to overcome the limitations imposed by the data.

References
Alesina, Alberto and Silvia Ardagna (1998), “Tales of Fiscal Contractions,” Economic Policy 27.
Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1995), “Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in OECD
Countries,” Economic Policy 21, 205-248.
Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1997), “Fiscal Adjustments in OECD Countries:
Composition and Macroeconomic Effects,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 44,
210-48.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Roberto Perotti and Fabio Schiantarelli (1999) “Fiscal Policy,
Profits and Investment,” NBER working paper n.7207.
Alvarez, Javier and Manuel Arellano (1999), “The Time Series and Cross-Section Asymptotics of
Dynamic Panel Data Estimators,” Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Lucio Picci and Antonello Scorcu (1998), “Saving, Growth and Investment:
A Macroeconomic Analysis Using a Panel of Countries,” available at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/savings/policies.htm
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert King (1993), “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American
Economic Review 83(3), 315-334.
Bernheim, Douglas (1987). “Ricardian Equivalence: an Evaluation of Theory and Evidence,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2, 263-304.
Bertola, Giuseppe and Allan Drazen (1993), “Trigger Points and Budget Cuts: Explaining the
Effects of Fiscal Austerity,” American Economic Review 83, 1170-88.

25

Blanchard, Olivier (1990), “Comment,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 5, 111-116.
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti (1999), “An empirical characterization of the dynamic
effects of changes in government spending and taxes on output,” NBER Working Paper n.
7269.
Blinder, Alan S. and Robert M. Solow (1974), “Analytical Foundations of Fiscal Policy,” in The
Economics of Public Finance, Washington, D.C.: The Brooking Institution.
Carroll, Christopher, and David Weil (1995), “Saving and Growth: a Reinterpretation,” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policies 40, 133-193.
Drazen, Allan (1990), “Comment,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 5, 117-122.
Fatàs, Antonio, and Ilian Mihov (1999), “Measuring the effects of fiscal policy,” INSEAD,
mimeo.
Feldstein, Martin (1982), “Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 9, 1-20.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (1990), “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions be
Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
5, 75-111.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (1996), “Non-Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy
Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience,” Swedish Economic Policy
Review, May, 75-111.
IMF (1996), “Fiscal Challenges Facing Industrial Countries,” World Economic Outlook, Chapter
III. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Jappelli, Tullio and Marco Pagano (1994), “Saving, Growth and Liquidity Constraints,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 83-109.
Loyaza, Norman, Humberto J. Lopez, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, and Luis Servén (1998), “The
World Saving Data Base,” available at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/savings/policies.htm
Lopez, Humberto J., Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, and Luis Servén (1998), “How Effective is Fiscal
Policy in Raising National Saving?,” available at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/savings/policies.htm

26

Masson, Paul R. Tamim Bayoumi and Hossein Samiei (1996), “International Evidence on the
Determinants of Saving,” CEPR Discussion Paper n. 1368, March.
McDermott, C. John and Robert F. Wescott (1996), “An Empirical Analysis of Fiscal
Adjustment,” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 43, 725-53.
Modigliani, Franco (1993), “Recent Declines in the Savings Rate: A Life Cycle Perspective,” in
World Saving, Prosperity and Growth, Mario Baldassarri ed. New York: St. Martin Press.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe (1988), “Private Consumption, Inflation and the `Debt Neutrality
Hypothesis’: The Case of Eight OECD Countries,” OECD Working Papers n. 50,
Department of Economics and Statistics, January.
OECD (1996), “The experience with fiscal consolidation with OECD countries,” Economic
Outlook 59, June, 33-41.
Perotti, Roberto (1996), “Fiscal Consolidation in Europe: Composition Matters,” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 86(2), 105-110.
Perotti, Roberto (1999), “Fiscal Policy When Things are Going Badly,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew D. Shapiro (1998), “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
of Government Spending,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48,
145-194.
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus, and Luis Servén (1999), The Economics of Saving and Growth.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Seater, John (1993), “Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal of Economic Literature 31, 142-90.
Sutherland, Alan (1997), “Fiscal Crises and Aggregate Demand: Can High Public Debt Reverse
the Effects of Fiscal Policy?,” Journal of Public Economics 65.

27

Table 1
Predicted Effects of a Fiscal Impulse on National Saving in Various Models

Model

Increase in net taxes
(given government consumption)

Increase in government
consumption
(given net taxes)

IS-LM

uncertain

uncertain

Finite horizon

positive

negative

Infinite horizon and
non-distortionary taxes

no effect

no effect

Infinite horizon and
distortionary taxes
Blanchard (1990)
Sutherland (1995)

negative

negative

Drazen (1990)
Feldstein (1982)

Bertola and Drazen
(1993)

Perotti (1999)

depends on debt-income ratio:
positive if debt is low is small,
negative otherwise
depends on the size of tax increase: depends on the size of the
positive if the tax increase is small, increase in G: negative if the
attenuated or negative otherwise
increase is small, no effect for
large increases
depends on G/Y: negative if the
ratio is small, positive otherwise;
non-linearity applies only to fiscal
expansions
depends on the debt-income ratio:
Depends on the debt-income
positive if the ratio is small,
ratio: negative if the ratio is
attenuated otherwise
small, attenuated otherwise

28

Table 2
Episodes of Large and Persistent Fiscal Expansions and Contractions:
Summary Statistics
(OECD Countries: 1970-96)
A large and persistent fiscal expansion or contraction is defined as an episode in which the ratio of full-employment
surplus to potential output changes by more than 1.5 percent per year over a two-year period. Growth rates before
(after) the episode are average growth rates of the relevant variables in the three years preceding (following) the start
(end) of the episode. The ratio of gross public debt to potential output and the national saving rate before (after) the
episode refer to one year before (after) the start (end). Due to missing values, the number of observations used to
compute the averages in the table is in some case less than 38 for fiscal expansions and 65 for contractions.

Fiscal Expansions

Fiscal Contractions

Growth rate of real GDP
Before
During
After

2.57
1.12
2.00

2.21
2.36
2.13

Growth rate of real private consumption
Before
During
After

2.43
1.91
1.71

2.38
2.22
2.29

Growth rate of real government consumption
Before
During
After

3.64
3.09
1.86

3.48
2.48
2.94

Growth rate of real net taxes
Before
During
After

4.39
0.27
3.40

2.71
4.19
2.25

Debt / potential output
Before
During
After

48.01
48.89
55.66

56.63
57.02
56.29

National saving / potential output
Before
During
After

23.41
21.03
20.17

21.91
22.65
22.66

38

65

Number of episodes

29

Table 3
Effects of Fiscal Policy on National Saving: OECD Data
The dependent variable is the ratio of national saving to potential output. The total number of observations is 417.
Instruments for net taxes and the real interest rate are the full-employment government surplus (scaled by potential
output) and the lagged real interest rate. Countries included in the estimation and sample size are reported in the
Appendix. All regressions are estimated with fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The definition
of the interaction terms is reported in the text.

Lagged national saving rate
Output gap
Real interest rate
Net taxes (T/Y*):

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.554
(0.037)
0.249
(0.037)
0.063
(0.022)
0.263
(0.059)

0.562
(0.038)
0.268
(0.039)
0.059
(0.023)
0.496
(0.108)
-0.307
(0.109)

0.627
(0.042)
0.293
(0.040)
0.044
(0.024)
0.439
(0.110)

0.549
(0.037)
0.246
(0.037)
0.068
(0.026)
0.272
(0.058)

0.554
(0.037)
0.239
(0.038)
0.064
(0.025)
0.278
(0.063)

0.614
(0.046)
0.277
(0.040)
0.056
(0.028)
0.471
(0.119)

0.066
(0.214)
-0.753
(0.070)

-0.397
(0.126)
-0.224
(0.122)
-0.014
(0.203)
-0.026
(0.349)
-0.945
(0.114)

-0.033
(0.175)

0.385
(0.122)
0.189
(0.119)
-0.007
(0.189)
0.036
(0.296)

0.934

0.928

--- and large change in surplus
--- and large increase in surplus

-0.405
(0.118)
-0.220
(0.114)

--- and large decrease in surplus
--- and high debt

-0.015
(0.082)

--- and rapid debt growth
Government consumption (G/Y*):

-0.735
(0.069)

--- and large change in surplus

-0.944
(0.105)
0.290
(0.105)

--- and large increase in surplus

-0.898
(0.107)

-0.752
(0.071)

0.395
(0.115)
0.187
(0.111)

--- and large decrease in surplus
--- and high debt

0.005
(0.072)

--- and rapid debt growth
Adjusted R2

0.934

0.930

30

0.928

0.933

Table 4
Effect of Fiscal Policy on National Saving: World Saving Data Base
The dependent variable is the ratio of gross national saving to gross national disposable income. The number of
developing countries used in the estimation is 101 and the number of observations is 1770. Net taxes and government
consumption refer to the central government only. Estimator: OLS with fixed effects. Standard errors are in
parenthesis. The definition of the interaction terms is reported in the text.

Lagged national saving rate
Output gap
Dependency ratio
Net taxes (T/Y):

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.459
(0.019)
0.300
(0.017)
-0.228
(0.064)
0.257
(0.029)

0.460
(0.019)
0.294
(0.017)
-0.210
(0.064)
0.456
(0.059)
-0.214
(0.056)

0.467
(0.019)
0.294
(0.017)
-0.221
(0.064)
0.447
(0.059)

0.457
(0.019)
0.301
(0.017)
-0.216
(0.065)
0.273
(0.031)

0.459
(0.019)
0.303
(0.017)
-0.212
(0.064)
0.261
(0.029)

0.466
(0.019)
0.297
(0.017)
-0.200
(0.065)
0.464
(0.060)

-0.301
(0.104)
-0.497
(0.039)

-0.175
(0.059)
-0.252
(0.057)
-0.106
(0.081)
-0.260
(0.104)
-0.701
(0.071)

0.252
(0.111)

0.242
(0.071)
0.257
(0.067)
0.133
(0.099)
0.203
(0.112)

0.816

0.819

--- and large change in surplus
--- and large increase in surplus

-0.168
(0.059)
-0.257
(0.057)

--- and large decrease in surplus
--- and high debt

-0.129
(0.081)

--- and rapid debt growth
Government consumption (G/Y):

-0.493
(0.039)

--- and large change in surplus

-0.716
(0.070)
0.248
(0.065)

--- and large increase in surplus

-0.691
(0.070)

-0.502
(0.039)

0.232
(0.070)
0.264
(0.067)

--- and large decrease in surplus
--- and high debt

0.171
(0.098)

--- and rapid debt growth
Adjusted R2

0.815

0.816

31

0.819

0.815

Table 5
Effect of Fiscal Policy on National Saving: World Saving Data Base with Higher Thresholds
for the Identification of Fiscal Episodes
The “limit” refers to the percentage change in the surplus over a two-year period used to define fiscal episodes. The
dependent variable is the ratio of gross national saving to gross national disposable income. The number of
developing countries is 101 and the number of observations is 1770. Net taxes and government consumption refer to
the central government only. See text for the definition of the interaction terms. Estimator: OLS with fixed effects.
Standard errors are in parenthesis. The definition of the interaction terms is reported in the text.

Limit is 2.5 percent
Lagged national saving rate
Output gap
Dependency ratio
Net taxes (T/Y):
--- and large increase in surplus
--- and large decrease in surplus

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.469
(0.019)
0.296
(0.017)
-0.213
(0.064)
0.381
(0.048)
-0.098
(0.049)
-0.213
(0.048)

0.468
(0.019)
0.299
(0.017)
-0.195
(0.065)
0.389
(0.049)
-0.098
(0.050)
-0.202
(0.048)
-0.084
(0.081)
-0.255
(0.105)
-0.636
(0.060)
0.152
(0.062)
0.217
(0.058)
0.100
(0.099)
0.204
(0.112)

0.468
(0.019)
0.293
(0.017)
-0.209
(0.064)
0.324
(0.041)
-0.047
(0.045)
-0.157
(0.043)

0.467
(0.019)
0.297
(0.017)
-0.193
(0.065)
0.330
(0.042)
-0.046
(0.045)
-0.145
(0.043)
-0.074
(0.082)
-0.266
(0.105)
-0.551
(0.051)
0.051
(0.059)
0.129
(0.052)
0.079
(0.100)
0.220
(0.113)

0.818

0.816

--- and high debt
--- and rapid debt growth
Government consumption (G/Y):
--- and large increase in surplus
--- and large decrease in surplus

-0.632
(0.060)
0.148
(0.061)
0.231
(0.058)

--- and high debt
--- and rapid debt growth
Adjusted R2

Limit is 5 percent

0.818

32

-0.548
(0.051)
0.049
(0.059)
0.143
(0.052)

0.817

Figure 1
The Non-Linear Relation between Full Employment Surplus and National Saving
OECD Countries (1970-96)
The figure plots the change in the gross national saving rate and the change in the full-employment government
surplus (both scaled by full-employment output). In the scatter diagram we draw the fitted values of a linear spline
regression of changes in national saving on changes in full employment surplus with knots set for values of the fullemployment surplus equal to –1.5 and 1.5 percent (marked by the two vertical segments).

Change in national saving

5

0

-5
-5

-1.5

0

1.5

Change in full employment surplus

33

5

Figure 2
The Effect of Government Surplus on National Saving in Selected Countries
The figure plots the actual ratio of the national saving rate to potential output and the estimated effect of the ratio of
government surplus to potential output on national saving in Sweden, Denmark, Ireland, and Belgium. For each
country, the national saving rate is plotted in deviations from its mean. To compute the effect of the surplus, we use
the coefficients estimated in column 3 of Table 3. The line marked with diamonds is the national saving rate, the line
marked with circles is the effect of the deficit in normal times, and the line marked with crosses the total effect of the
deficit.

Nat. saving (deviat. from mean)
Eff. of surplus in normal times

Total effect of surplus

Nat. saving (deviat. from mean)
Eff. of surplus in normal times

4

2

2

0

0

Total effect of surplus

-2

-2
-4

-4
-6
1980

1985

1990

1995

1980

1985

Sweden
Nat. saving (deviat. from mean)
Eff. of surplus in normal times

1990

1995

Denmark
Total effect of surplus

Nat. saving (deviat. from mean)
Eff. of surplus in normal times

Total effect of surplus

10
5

5

0

0

-5

-10

-5
1975

1980

1985

1990

1975

1995

Ireland

1980

1985

Belgium

34

1990

1995

Appendix
1. Definition of the Variables: OECD data
All data are drawn from the OECD Economic Outlook database published in June 1997. Public sector data refer to
general government.

Variable

OECD Series

Private consumption
Government consumption
Government savings
Government debt
Gross National/Domestic Product
Deflator for consumer expenditure
Taxes net of transfers
Government investment
Social security contributions
Social security benefits
Full employment government surplus
Potential output

CP
CG
SAVG
GGFL
GDPV
PCP
SAVG+CG
IG
SS
SSPG
NLQGA
GDPVTR

2. Countries and Sample Period Used in the Estimation: OECD data
Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

Sample Period

Fiscal Expansions

1973-96
1974-96
1974-96
1973-96
1981-96
1973-96
1972-96
1970-96
1975-96
1977-96
1972-96
1972-96
1974-96
1970-96
1970-96
1983-96
1970-96
1970-96

83-84; 90-92
93-94
79-80
75-76; 82-85
81-82; 87-90
77-80; 82-83; 86-87; 90-92
77-78; 81-82
74-75; 89-91
80-81; 84-85; 88-89
89-90; 94-95
74-75; 78-79; 84-85
75-79; 92-94
76-80;
72-76; 80-81; 89-90
81-82; 89-90
90-93
72-74; 83-84; 91-93
74-75; 82-83

35

Fiscal Contractions
73-74; 76-77; 80-82; 86-88; 95-96
74-75; 77-78; 80-81; 83-85; 95-96
74-75; 81-87; 92-94
73-74; 80-81; 86-87; 94-96
83-86
73-76; 84-85; 88-89; 93-96
72-73; 79-80; 83-84; 95-96
71-72; 76-77; 81-83; 92-94
75-76; 82-83; 86-87; 90-96
77-78; 82-84; 86-88; 91-92
72-73; 76-77; 82-83; 92-96
72-74; 80-85
74-75; 81-83; 87-88; 90-92
70-71; 82-86; 91-92; 94-95
86-87; 91-93; 95-96
83-84; 86-88; 94-96
70-71; 79-82; 89-90; 94-96
70-71; 76-77; 94-95

3. Definition of the Variables: World Saving Data Base
Data can be downloaded from ftp://monarch/worldbank.org/pub/prddr/outbox. Public sector data refer to central
government. A detailed description of the data set can be found in Loayza et al. (1998). The database includes 150
countries and spans the years 1960 to 1995. However, not all variables are available for every country every year.
Hence the effective time coverage of the data files varies substantially across modules and, within a given module,
across countries and variables. National Saving is defined inclusive of all external transfers. The consumption figures
include any statistical discrepancies present in the GDP expenditure identity. Gross National Disposable Income
(GNDI) is defined as GNP + External transfers; Gross National Saving is defined as GNDI – Total Consumption.
The definition of the public sector is that of consolidated central government, i.e. budgetary central government plus
extra-budgetary central government plus social security agencies. This definition thus excludes local and regional
governments. Each series consists of an Excel 5.0 file; the files we have used are given in the table below.

Variable
Gross National Disposable Income (GNDI)
Private consumption
Government consumption
Gross national saving
Government savings / GNDI
Taxes net of transfers
Government debt / GNDI
GDP at current prices
GDP at 1987 prices
Total population
Population younger than 15
Population older than 65

File
FORMU334.XLS
FORMU21.XLS
FORMU23.XLS
FORMU333.XLS
FORMU342.XLS
Government saving + government consumption
FORMU451.XLS
FORMU16.XLS
FORMU17.XLS
CONST263.XLS
CONST264.XLS
CONST265.XLS

36

