                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ARE AMERICANS MORE ALTRUISTIC THAN THE JAPANESE?
             A U.S.- JAPAN COMPARISON OF SAVING AND BEQUEST MOTIVES


                                               Charles Yuji Horioka
                                                 Hideki Fujisaki
                                                Wako Watanabe
                                                Takatsugu Kouno


                                               Working Paper 7463
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w7463


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         January 2000


The authors are grateful to Robert Barsky, B. Douglas Bernheim, David Campbell, Christopher D. Carroll, Jay Pil Choi,
Thomas Dunn, Mitsuhiro Fukao, Joon-Ho Hahm, Koji Hamada, Shigeyuki Hamori, Fumio Hayashi, Yoshio Higuchi,
Wontack Hong, Ken’ichi Kanie, Miles Kimball, Yukinobu Kitamura, Junko Koie, Per Krusell, Masahiro Kuroda, Robert
Lipsey, Atsushi Maki, Hirohisa Maki, Dick Nanto, Kazuo Ogawa, Fumio Ohtake, Megumi Okui, Daekeun Park, Chang
Yong Rhee, Kazuo Sato, Gary Saxonhouse, Matthew Shapiro, Yukiko Shigeno, E. Young Song, Linda Tesar, David
Weinstein, participants of the National Bureau of Economic Research Japan Project meetings held in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, on April 18-19, 1997, and April 17-18, 1998, the Ninth and Tenth Conferences of the Institute for Posts
and Telecommunications Policy held in Tokyo, Japan, on May 21, 1997, and May 20, 1998, the Conference on Wealth,
Inheritance, and Intergenerational Transfers held at the University of Essex on June 22-23, 1997, the Japan Economic
Seminar held at George Washington University on April 25, 1998, the Aging Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute
held in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on July 27-31, 1998, the Japanese Economic Association meeting held in Tokyo,
Japan, on September 13-14, 1997, the Japan Society of Monetary Economics meeting held in Osaka, Japan, on October
24-25, 1998, and the International Economic Journal Economics Annual held in Seoul, Korea, on October 29, 1999, and
seminar participants at the University of Hawaii, the University of Michigan, Keio University, Osaka Universtity, and
Syracuse University for their helpful comments. In addition, Horioka is grateful to the Ministry of Education, Science,
Sports and Culture of the Government of Japan for a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (project number 09206209).
Forthcoming in International Economic Journal, vol. 14, no. 1 (Spring 2000). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Charles Yuji Horioka, Hideki Fujisaki, Wako Watanabe, and Takatsugu Kouno. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Americans More Altruistic than the Japanese? A U.S.-Japan Comparison of
Saving and Bequest Motives
Charles Yuji Horioka, Hideki Fujisaki, Wako Watanabe, and Takatsugu Kouno
NBER Working Paper No. 7463
January 2000
JEL No. D12, D91, E21

                                                  ABSTRACT


        In this paper, we analyze a variety of data on saving motives, bequest motives, and bequest division
from the “Comparative Survey of Savings in Japan and the United States,” a binational survey conducted
in 1996 by the Institute for Posts and Telecommunications Policy of the Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications of the Government of Japan, in order to shed light on which model of household
behavior applies in the two countries. We find (1) that the selfish life cycle model is the dominant model
of household behavior in both countries but that it is far more applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S., (2)
that the altruism model is far more applicable in the U.S. than it is in Japan but that it is not the dominant
model of household behavior in either country, and (3) that the dynasty model is more applicable in Japan
than it is in the U.S. but that it is of only limited applicability even in Japan.


Charles Yuji Horioka                                 Hideki Fujisaki
Institute of Social and Economic Research            5-7-8-302
Osaka University                                     Seta
6-1, Mihogaoka                                       Setagaya-ku
Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047                              Tokyo 158-0095
JAPAN                                                JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp


Wako Watanabe                                        Takatsugu Kouno
1-1-26-121                                           Institute for Posts and Telecommunications Policy
Naka Meguro                                          Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
Meguro-ku                                            1-6-19, Azabudai
Tokyo 153-0061                                       Minato-ku
JAPAN                                                Tokyo 106-0041
                                                     JAPAN
I. Introduction

         An issue of critical importance for economists and policymakers alike is

which model of household behavior (the life cycle model of Modigliani and

Brumberg (1954), the altruism model of Barro (1974) and Becker (1974, 1981),

the dynasty model of Weil (1989), etc.) is more applicable in the real world,

and data on the saving and bequest motives of households can shed considerable

light on this important issue because the various models have very different

implications for saving and              bequest motives.            In this paper, we analyze a

variety of data on saving and bequest motives in the United States and Japan

from   the   "Comparative        Survey    of   Savings      in   Japan   and       the   United    States

(Chochiku    ni     kansuru     Nichibei    Hikaku       Chousa)"     (hereafter      the   "U.S.-Japan

Survey"), conducted in 1996 by the Institute for Posts and Telecommunications

Policy     (IPTP)    of   the    Ministry       of   Posts      and    Telecommunications          of   the

Government of Japan, in order to shed light on which of the aforementioned

models of household behavior applies in the U.S. and Japan.

         There have been a number of previous studies that test for the validity

of the various models in individual countries (for example, Bernheim, Shleifer,

and Summers (1985), Cox (1987), Hurd (1987), Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff

(1989) for the U.S. and Ohtake (1991), Ohtake and Horioka (1994), and Hayashi

(1995) for Japan--see Horioka (1993) for a survey of the literature on Japan),

but these studies are confined to individual countries and make inferences

based on the actual behavior of individuals or households.                          To the best of our

knowledge,    the    present     study     is   unique     in   at    least   two    respects:     first,

because it compares the extent to which the various models apply in the U.S.

and Japan, and second, because it makes inferences based on direct information

on the attitudes of respondents.

         Conducting a U.S.-Japan comparison is a meaningful exercise for at least




                                                     1
three reasons--first, because it might shed light on why Japan’s saving rate

is so much higher than that of the U.S.; second, because there are important

cultural   differences   between      the    two   countries,    and    to   the   extent    that

cultural   differences   are      important,   we   would     expect    different       models   of

household behavior to apply in the two countries; and third, because the U.S.

and Japan are by far the two largest economies in the world.

      Our paper is organized as follows: we discuss theoretical considerations

in section II, describe the data source in section III, and conduct a U.S.-

Japan comparison of saving motives in section IV and a U.S.-Japan comparison

of bequests, bequest motives, and attitudes toward bequest division in section

V. Section VI is a brief concluding section.

      To preview the main findings of our paper, our U.S.-Japan comparison of

saving and bequest motives suggests (1) that the selfish life cycle model is

the dominant model of household behavior in both the U.S. and Japan but that

it is far more applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S., (2) that the

altruism model is far more applicable in the U.S. than it is in Japan but that

it is not the dominant model of household behavior in either country, and (3)

that the dynasty model is more applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S. but

that it is of only limited applicability even in Japan.



II. Theoretical Considerations

      In   this   section,   we    briefly   describe   the     three   models     of   household

behavior we will be considering and discuss the implications of these three

models for saving motives, bequest motives, and bequest division.



       A. The Life Cycle Model

      The purest form of the life cycle model of                  Modigliani and Brumberg



                                               2
(1954)    assumes      that     individuals       are    selfish      and   do     not    care    about    their

children or about anyone else.                    Thus,      if this model is valid,                  households

should be saving primarily for retirement and other life cycle motives (i.e.,

motives arising from differences in timing between income and expenditure

streams    over      the     course    of     their    own   lifetimes)        and/or    for     precautionary

motives (which are also consistent with the life cycle model), any bequests

they    leave       should    be   unintended         bequests   arising        from     longevity      risk   or

intended bequests motivated by selfish considerations such as a strategic

bequest motive à la Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985) or an implicit

intra-family annuity contract à la Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981), and bequests

should be left only to children who provide something in return such as care

and/or financial assistance during old age.



          B. The Altruism Model

         The    altruism      model     assumes       that    households       harbor     intergenerational

altruism (altruism toward their own children), and thus if this model is valid,

households should be saving not only for life cycle motives but also in order

to leave a bequest, their bequests should be motivated by intergenerational

altruism, and their bequests should be compensatory in the sense that more is

left to children with less earning capacity and/or greater needs.



          C. The Dynasty Model

         The   dynasty       model     assumes    that       households     wish    to    perpetuate       their

family line (dynasty) or family business, and thus                              if this model is valid,

households should be saving not only for life cycle motives but also in order

to     leave    a     bequest,        their     bequests      should      be     motivated       by     dynastic

considerations,         and    their     bequests       should   be    divided      unequally,         with the



                                                         3
entire bequest being left to the first-born child or to the child who carries

on the family line or the family business.1



       Thus,    the    three     models    of    household         behavior    have    very    different

implications concerning saving motives, bequest motives, and bequest division,

and data on saving motives, bequest motives, and bequest division should be

able   to   shed    considerable    light       on   which       model   of   household   behavior     is

applicable in the real world.



III. The Data Source

       In this section, we discuss the “Comparative Survey of Savings in Japan

and the United States,” the data source used for this analysis, in greater

detail.     Thi s   survey was conducted roughly simultaneously in the U.S. and

Japan using identical questionnaires.                    The U.S. survey was conducted during

the February 9-March 6, 1996, period by National Family Opinion, a private

polling organization.          2,200 households were selected from among the 40,000

households already participating in this company's National Household Panel

and asked to participate in this survey.                     Care was taken to ensure that the

resulting sample was representative of the total population.                          These households

were   mailed      questionnaires    and    were         asked    to   mail   them    back;   those   not

returning their questionnaires were sent one reminder.                        This resulted in 1,508

responses, a response rate of 68.5%.                 The Japanese survey was conducted during

the January 31-February 16, 1996, period by Nippon Research Center, a private

polling organization.          1,800 households were selected by a stratified random

sampling    procedure,     and    questionnaires           were    delivered    in    person    to,   and

collected in person from, these households.                      This resulted in 1,243 responses,

a response rate of 69.1%.2



                                                     4
      The target population in both countries was all households (including

single-person       households)      with   a   head    aged       20    or    older.      The    geographic

coverage was as follows: cities in the 48 contiguous states plus the District

of Columbia in the case of the U.S. and three large cities (cities with a

population of 1,000,000 or more), five medium-sized cities (cities with a

population    of    500,000     to   600,000),    and       four    small       cities    (cities    with   a

population of less than 200,000) in the case of Japan.

      The     survey    includes       a    variety     of     questions          not    only     about   the

respondents’ behavior but also about their attitudes toward saving, bequests,

etc., and to the best of our knowledge, it is the first such survey to be

conducted simultaneously in the U.S. and Japan and one of the first such

surveys to be conducted in the U.S.3



IV. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Saving Motives

      In this section, we present data from the U.S.-Japan Survey on saving

motives.     In particular, we estimate the amount of saving for each of thirteen

motives in order to determine how much saving for each motive contributes to

overall household saving in the U.S. and Japan (see Horioka, Yokota, Miyaji,

and Kasuga (1997) and Horioka and Watanabe (1997, 1998) for a similar analysis

using Japanese data only).



      A. Theoretical Considerations

      Before       presenting    our   results,        we   wish        to    discuss    some    theoretical

considerations.        It is important to bear in mind that, at any given point in

time, there are households saving for any given motive as well as households

dissaving for that motive. For example, at any given time, there are young

(pre-retirement) households that are saving for retirement as well as aged



                                                  5
(post-retirement)   households    that   are   dissaving     for   retirement.   What

contributes to overall household saving is the amount by which the saving of

those saving for a given motive (hereafter called "gross saving") exceeds the

dissaving of those dissaving for that motive.      We will hereafter refer to this

difference as "net saving."   The amount of net saving for any given motive can

be either positive, zero, or negative depending on the relative magnitudes of

gross saving and dissaving for that motive, and it will not necessarily be

large or even positive no matter how large gross saving for that motive is.

      Gross saving for a given motive consists of the saving in the form of

the accumulation of financial assets of those planning to realize that motive

in the future and the saving in the form of loan repayments of those realizing

that motive in the past    (the repayment of principal is a form of saving

because it increases the household's net worth).           Similarly, dissaving for a

given motive consists of the dissaving in the form of the decumulation of

financial assets and the dissaving in the form of newly incurred debt of those

realizing that motive during the current period.             In the case of motives

involving investment in depreciable fixed assets such as housing, consumer

durables, and plant and equipment, dissaving in the form of the decumulation

of financial assets and that in the form of newly incurred debt will be

precisely offset by saving in the form of investment in such assets, but

dissaving will still occur in the form of the depreciation on such assets of

those realizing such motives in the past.4



      B. The Calculation Method

      Fortunately, the U.S.-Japan Survey collects the information needed to

calculate the various components of gross saving and dissaving for each of

thirteen motives:   "in order to save up for life after retirement" (hereafter



                                          6
the     "retirement      motive"),       "in       order    to     provide    extra     living    expenses"

(hereafter the "living expenses motive"), "for unexpected expenses required by

illness,       disaster,       etc."    (hereafter          the    "illness        motive"),   "for    one's

children's       education"       (hereafter          the     "education       motive"),       "for    one's

children's marriage" (hereafter the "marriage motive"), "to purchase one's own

home (and land) (including rebuilding and upgrading)" (hereafter the "housing

motive"),      "for     the    purchase       of    durable       goods"     (hereafter     the   "consumer

durables motive"), "for leisure" (hereafter the "leisure motive"), "to pay

taxes"    (hereafter       the    "tax    motive"),          "to    start     up    one's   own   business"

(hereafter the "business motive"), "saving not for any specific purpose but

for the sake of peace of mind" (hereafter the "peace of mind motive"), "to

leave as a bequest" (hereafter the "bequest motive"), and "other."

         Direct information is collected on the accumulation and decumulation of

financial assets and on newly incurred debt and loan repayments for each

motive.     The only exceptions are that information is not collected on loan

repayments and newly incurred debt for the retirement, tax, business, peace of

mind,    and    bequest       motives   in     both   countries       and    that    information      is   not

collected on the          accumulation of financial assets for the living expenses

motive or on the decumulation of financial assets for the retirement and peace

of mind motives in the case of Japan only.                         Dissaving for the living expenses

motive in the form of the decumulation of financial assets is regarded as

being for the peace of mind motive in the case of those aged 59 or younger and

for the retirement motive in the case of those aged 60 or older, while saving

in the form of loan repayments and dissaving in the form of newly incurred

debt for the living expenses motive is regarded as being for the peace of mind

                                                                      5 6
motive, regardless of the age of the respondent.

         Turning   to     dissaving      in    the    form    of    depreciation       on   owner-occupied



                                                       7
housing, direct information is not collected thereon, but it can be calculated

by multiplying the market value of owner-occupied housing (the structure only)

by an appropriate depreciation rate.    The most recent housing censuses in the

U.S. and Japan (the 1993 American Housing Survey in the U.S. and the 1993

Housing Survey in Japan) found that the median age of owner-occupied housing

in the two countries is 27 and 17 years, respectively, and we assumed that the

useful life of owner-occupied housing in the two countries is twice the median

age--54 and 34 years, respectively.          Assuming geometric depreciation, the

rates of depreciation corresponding to these useful lives are 4.1744% and

6.5481%,    respectively.   Unfortunately,    the   data   needed   to   calculate   the

depreciation on consumer durables and on the plant and equipment of family

businesses were not available.    Thus, we had no choice but to ignore the fact

that there is saving in the form of investment in real assets in the case of

the consumer durables and business motives and to assume that dissaving for

these motives takes the form of the decumulation of financial assets and newly

incurred debt.



      C. The Estimation Results

      Our estimates of household saving by motive are shown in Tables 1-6 and

Figure 1.    Table 1 shows data on gross saving in the form of the accumulation

of financial assets by motive, Table 2 data on gross saving in the form of

loan repayments by motive, Table 3 data on dissaving in the form of the

decumulation of financial assets by motive, Table 4 data on dissaving in the

form of newly incurred debt by motive, Table 5 data on dissaving in the form

of depreciation on owner-occupied housing, and Table 6 and Figure 1 data on

the total amount of gross saving, dissaving, and net saving by motive.7

      Let us look first at our estimates of the total amount of gross saving,



                                        8
dissaving, and net saving for each motive (see Table 6 and Figure 1).              As can

be seen from Table 6, the composition of gross saving is remarkably similar in

the two countries: the housing motive ranks first in both countries with a

share of 25.21% in the U.S. and 28.95% in Japan, the retirement motive ranks a

close second in both countries with a share of 21.36% and 26.11%, respectively,

and the peace of mind motive ranks third in both countries with a share of

15.37% and 14.18%, respectively.        Turning to the composition of dissaving, the

housing motive ranks first by far in both countries with a share of 41.14% and

56.58%, respectively, and the consumer durables and education motives in the

U.S. and the peace of mind motive and “other” in Japan are the only other

motives   with   a    share    exceeding   ten    percent.   Turning   finally    to   the

composition of net saving, which is what measures the contribution of saving

for each motive to overall household saving, it is by far the highest in the

case of the retirement motive in both countries, but the share of this motive

is more than twice as high in Japan as it is in the U.S. (62.23% vs. 30.84%).

The peace of mind and housing motives rank second and third in the U.S. with

shares of 20.74% and 14.60%, respectively, while the illness and peace of mind

motives rank second and third in Japan with shares of 22.26% and 18.92%,

respectively.    Note, however, that the illness and peace of mind motives are

both precautionary motives and that if they are combined, their combined share

is 27.93% in the U.S. and 41.18% in Japan.             Thus, the precautionary motive

broadly defined is the second most important motive for saving (after the

retirement motive) in both countries and is far more important in Japan than

it is in the U.S. (see Figure 1).             Note, finally, that net saving for the

housing motive has a negative share in Japan because, even though there is a

substantial amount of gross saving for the housing motive in Japan, it is more

than   offset    by    an     even   larger   amount    of   housing-related     dissaving



                                              9
(depreciation) and that the larger amount of depreciation on housing in Japan

is due, in turn, to the shorter useful life (lower durability) of housing in

Japan.

         Next, we would like to look at data on the importance of the bequest

motive, which is primarily consistent with the altruism and dynasty models.

The bequest motive is of only negligible importance in both countries, with

bequest-related saving amounting to only 3.03% and 0.72% of gross saving and

only    5.04%    and    1.50%   of   net    saving         and    with    only    10.77%    and    3.63%   of

households saving for the bequest motive in the form of the accumulation of

financial assets in the U.S. and Japan, respectively.                                It should be noted,

however, that the bequest motive can be defined more broadly to include the

education and marriage motives (because these motives entail intergenerational

transfers    to    one’s   children)       as   well       as    the    housing   and     business   motives

(because housing and family businesses are often bequeathed to one’s children),

but even if the bequest motive is defined broadly to include these motives,

its share of net saving is only 24.96% in the U.S. and 1.64% in Japan. 8 Thus,

it appears that the bequest motive is stronger in the U.S. than in Japan but

that it is not very strong even in the U.S.

         Looking more briefly at the composition of gross saving and dissaving,

it can be seen from Tables 1 and 2 that gross saving consists primarily of the

accumulation      of    financial    assets      in    the       case    of   most   motives,     with   loan

repayments exceeding the accumulation of financial assets only in the case of

the    housing    and   consumer     durables     motives         and    “other”     in   both    countries.

Similarly, as can be seen from Tables 3 and 4, dissaving consists primarily of

the decumulation of financial assets, with newly incurred debt exceeding the

decumulation of financial assets only in the case of the housing motive and

“other” (in both countries) and the consumer durables and education motives



                                                      10
(in the case of the U.S.).     These findings are not surprising because it is

primarily in the case of housing, consumer durables, and (in the case of the

U.S.) education that credit markets are well-developed.     As noted earlier,

however, in the case of the housing motive, both dissaving in the form of the

decumulation of financial assets and dissaving in the form of newly incurred

debt are fully offset by saving in the form of housing investment, as a result

of which the only form of dissaving is depreciation on owner-occupied housing

(see Table 5).



       D. Summary

      Our results suggest that the life cycle model is much more applicable

than the altruism and dynasty models in both the U.S. and Japan inasmuch as

life cycle motives such as the retirement motive and precautionary motives

such as the illness and peace of mind motives (which are also consistent with

the life cycle model) are of dominant importance and the bequest motive is of

negligible importance in both countries.    Moreover, our results also suggest

that the life cycle model is of much greater applicability in Japan than it is

in the U.S. and that the altruism and dynasty models are much more applicable

in the U.S. than they are in Japan inasmuch as the share of the retirement

motive (the most important life cycle motive) in net saving is twice as large

in Japan as it is in the U.S., the share of the precautionary motive is also

much higher in Japan, and the share of the bequest motive in gross saving and

net saving as well as the proportion of households saving for the bequest

motive in the form of the accumulation of financial assets are much smaller in

Japan than they are in the U.S. (regardless of whether bequests are defined

narrowly or broadly). 9   Note, moreover, that the altruism and dynasty models

might be even less applicable in both countries than suggested by our findings



                                       11
because,    as    noted   earlier,      bequests      could    well    be    motivated      by    selfish

considerations, which are consistent with the life cycle model rather than

with the altruism and dynasty models.                (We present data on bequest motives in

section V.B.)

      Note, however, that U.S.-Japan differences in the relative importance of

the various saving motives may be due not to differences in which model(s) of

household    behavior     apply   in    the    two   countries    but       to   differences      in   the

economic    and    institutional     environments       (the    size    and      source    of    external

shocks, the availability of a social safety net, the position of the economy

in the business cycle, etc.) faced by households in the two countries or to

differences in the age and/or income distribution of the population in the two

countries.       With respect to the former, it could be, for example, that saving

for the retirement motive is far more important in Japan than it is in the U.S.

not because the life cycle model is more applicable in Japan but because

public and private pensions are less available or because there is greater

uncertainty about future benefit levels in Japan.                     With respect to the latter,

saving motives differ greatly by age (see the breakdown by age in Horioka and

Watanabe    (1997,    1998)),     and   thus    U.S.-Japan      differences        in     the    relative

importance of the various saving motives could be due in part to differences

in the age distribution of the population in the two countries.                            For example,

the importance of the retirement motive increases sharply with age in both

countries, and thus the fact that Japan’s population is much older than that

of the U.S. can help explain why the retirement motive was found to be so much

more important in Japan than it is in the U.S. 10                Thus, our conclusions must be

regarded as tentative.11




                                                 12
V. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Bequests, Bequest Motives, and Bequest Division

        In this section, we present data from the U.S.-Japan Survey on bequests,

bequest motives, and bequest division, where bequests are defined throughout

to include inter vivos transfers.



        A. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of the Importance of Bequests

        Table 7 shows data on the prevalence of bequests in the two countries,

and as can be seen from this table, the proportion of respondents who have

received bequests in the past is 28.67% in the U.S. but only 22.35% in Japan,

the proportion of respondents who expect to receive bequests in the future is

28.40% in the U.S. but only 22.10% in Japan, and the proportion of respondents

who have received bequests in the past and/or who expect to receive them in

the future is 48.88% in the U.S. but only 40.18% in Japan.                              Moreover, as can

be seen from Table 8, 45.92% of U.S. respondents want to make efforts to leave

behind a bequest to their children, whereas this proportion is only 25.72% in

Japan (these figures represent the proportion of respondents holding either

view    1   or    view   2).   Finally,     as     we    saw   in    section     IV,     10.77%    of   U.S.

respondents are saving in the form of the accumulation of financial assets in

order to leave a bequest, whereas this proportion is only 3.63% in Japan.                                 It

thus appears that individuals who have received or expect to receive bequests

and    individuals       who   plan   to   leave    bequests        are   in    the    minority    in   both

countries but that bequests are considerably more prevalent in the U.S. than

they    are      in   Japan.     These     results      suggest      that      the    bequest   motive    is

relatively weak in both countries but especially weak in Japan.

        However, Table 7 also shows data on the amount of bequests, and as can

be seen from this table, the average bequest (at current market                                   value) of

respondents who have received bequests in the past is $74,756 (2.131 times



                                                    13
average annual household disposable income) in the U.S. and 54,110,000 yen

(9.630 times average annual household disposable income) in Japan.                        Moreover,

the average bequest of all respondents is $21,431 (0.611 times average annual

household   disposable    income)   in    the    U.S.      and   12,090,000    yen   (2.152    times

average annual household disposable income) in Japan.                         Thus, the average

bequest-income ratio is much higher in Japan than it is                        in the U.S.       The

proportion of respondents who have received bequests in the past is somewhat

higher in the U.S. and thus the U.S.-Japan gap in the bequest-income ratio is

smaller in the case of all respondents than it is in the case of respondents

who have received bequests         in the past, but it is still quite high (the

bequest-income ratio in Japan is 4.520 times higher than the U.S. ratio in the

case of respondents who have received bequests in the past and 3.524 times

higher than the U.S. ratio in the case of all respondents).

       Thus,   whether   bequests   are    more      prevalent     in   the   U.S.   or   in   Japan

depends   on   which   criterion    is   used,       but   all   measures     pertaining    to   the

proportion of households receiving or leaving bequests suggest that bequests

are considerably more prevalent in the U.S.                 It thus appears that a smaller

proportion of households receive or leave bequests in Japan but that those who

do receive or leave bequests receive or leave much larger bequests than in the

U.S.



       B. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Bequest Motives

       Note, however, that whether the life cycle model, the altruism model, or

the dynasty model applies in the real world depends more on the motives for

which people leave bequests than on the prevalence or amount of bequests.

Fortunately, the U.S.-Japan Survey also collects data on the bequest motives

of respondents, and it is to these data that we now turn.



                                                14
         In one question, respondents are asked which of four views they hold

with respect to leaving a bequest to their children.              View 1 ("I want to make

efforts to leave behind a bequest regardless of whether my child or children

look after me after I retire") is an altruistic or dynastic bequest motive,

view 2 ("I want to make efforts to leave behind a bequest as long as my child

or children look after me after I retire") is a selfish bequest motive (either

a strategic bequest motive à la Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985) or an

implicit intra-family annuity contract à la Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981)), view

3 ("I will not make any particular efforts to leave behind a bequest but will

leave    to   my   child   or   children   whatever   assets   happen   to   be   left   over")

indicates that only unintended or accidental bequests will be left, and view 4

("I will not leave any bequest at all to my child or children") indicates the

total absence of a bequest motive.          View 1 is consistent with the altruism and

dynasty models whereas views 2, 3 and 4 are consistent with the life cycle

model, and thus information on the relative prevalence of these views will

shed light on whether the life cycle model, the altruism model, or the dynasty

model is applicable in the real world.

        The results are shown in Table 8, and as this table shows, 42.60% of U.S.

respondents hold view 1, whereas this proportion is only 19.29% in Japan.

Since view 1 is consistent with the altruism and dynasty models, this result

suggests that the proportion of households whose behavior is consistent with

the altruism and dynasty models is more than twice as high in the U.S. as it

is in Japan.       By contrast, the proportion of respondents holding views 2, 3,

and 4 is much lower in the U.S. than in Japan (3.32% vs. 6.43% in the case of

view 2, 51.14% vs. 70.10% in the case of view 3, 2.94% vs. 4.18% in the case

of view 4, and 57.40% vs. 80.71% in the case of these three views combined).

Since views 2, 3, and 4 are all consistent with the life cycle model, the fact



                                               15
that a majority of respondents in both countries adhere to views 2, 3, or 4

suggests that the life cycle model is the dominant model of household behavior

in both countries, and the fact that the proportion of respondents adhering to

views 2, 3, or 4 is much higher in Japan than it is in the U.S. suggests that

the life cycle model is much more applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S.



         C. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Attitudes toward Bequest Division

         The U.S.-Japan Survey also asks about the respondents' attitudes toward

bequest division, with respondents being asked to choose from among six views.

View 1 ("It will be divided equally among my children") is not, in general,

consistent with any theoretical model but is consistent with the altruism

model if parents love their children equally and believe that their children’s

own resources and needs are roughly equal, and view 2 ("Most or all of it will

be willed to the child or children with the least income") is consistent with

the altruism model, whereas view 3 ("Most or all of it will be willed to the

child or children who look after me") is consistent with the life cycle model,

and view 4 ("Most or all of it will be willed to the child or children who

carry on my business") and view 5 ("Most or all of it will be willed to my

oldest     son/daughter     regardless    of    whether   he/she   looks   after   me")   are

consistent with the dynasty model.12 (It is not possible to say a priori with

which    model   view   6   (“other”)    is    consistent.)   Thus,   information    on   the

relative prevalence of these views will shed further light on whether the life

cycle model, the altruism model, or the dynasty model is applicable in the

real world.

         The results are shown in Table 9, and as this table shows, in the U.S.,

the proportion of respondents holding view 1 is 96.28% and the proportion

holding either view 1 or view 2 is 96.83%, whereas these proportions are only



                                                16
48.74% and 51.10%, respectively, in the case of Japan. 13                Since views 1 and 2

are (or may be) consistent with the altruism model, these results suggest that

the proportion of households whose behavior is consistent with the altruism

model is nearly twice as high in the U.S. as it is in Japan.                  By contrast, the

proportion of households holding views 3, 4, and 5 is much higher in Japan

than in the U.S. (32.38% vs. 2.48% in the case of view 3, 6.91% vs. 0.00% in

the case of view 4, and 7.59% vs. 0.41% in the case of view 5).                    Since view 3

is   consistent   with   the   life   cycle    model,    these    results    suggest that the

proportion of households whose behavior is consistent with the life cycle

model is far higher in Japan than it is in the U.S. (32.38% vs. 2.48%), and

since views 4 and 5 are consistent with the dynasty model, these results

suggest that the proportion of households whose behavior is consistent with

the dynasty model is far higher in Japan than it is in the U.S. (14.50% vs.

0.41%).    However,      the   proportion     of    respondents    holding    a   view   that   is

consistent with the dynasty model is only 14.50% even in Japan, suggesting

that the dynasty model is not the dominant model of household behavior in

either country.



       D. Further Evidence on the Applicability of the Dynasty Model

       Additional evidence on the applicability of the dynasty model is given

in Tables 10 and 11.           First, Table 10 shows data on the types of assets

respondents plan to leave as a bequest, and as this table shows, 32.67% of

Americans planning to leave bequests plan to leave assets they inherited and

96.60% plan to leave assets they acquired themselves, whereas in Japan the

corresponding proportions are 39.71% and 83.35%.                 Thus, the tendency to leave

acquired assets is much stronger than the tendency to leave inherited assets

in both countries, and the tendency to leave acquired assets is considerably



                                               17
stronger   in    the   U.S.   than   it   is   in   Japan   whereas   the   tendency   to   leave

inherited assets is considerably stronger in Japan than it is in the U.S.

Individuals regard inherited assets as belonging to their family (dynasty)

rather than to themselves personally, according to the dynasty model, and thus

these findings suggest that the dynasty model is more applicable in Japan than

it is in the U.S. but that it is of only limited applicability even in Japan.

Note that these conclusions are fully consistent with our conclusions based on

data on attitudes toward bequest division.

      Turning to the second type of evidence, Table 11 shows the distribution

of respondents by bequest motive, broken down by whether the respondent has

received bequests in the past and/or expects to receive them in the future.

As this table shows, in both countries, those who have received bequests in

the past and/or who expect to receive bequests in the future are considerably

more likely to have an altruistic or dynastic bequest motive (view 1) or a

selfish bequest motive (view 2) and considerably less likely to plan to leave

only unintended bequests (view 3) or to plan to leave no bequest at all (view

4).   This suggests that both Americans and Japanese are motivated to some

extent by dynastic considerations (i.e., that they tend to feel obligated to

leave a bequest to their children if they themselves received a bequest from

their parents).        However, this tendency is not necessarily any stronger in the

case of Japan, contrary to what the data in Table 10 suggest.



      E. A U.S.-Japan Comparison of the Behavior of Bequest Recipients

      Thus      far,   we   have   focused     almost   exclusively   on    the   attitudes   and

behavior of bequest givers (the parents), but in this section we focus on the

behavior of bequest recipients (the children).               If the children are altruistic,

we would expect them to look after their aged parents whether or not they



                                                 18
expect to receive a bequest from them and whether or not the receipt of a

bequest is conditional on their looking after their parents.                              By contrast, if

the   children      are     selfish,      we   would    expect     them   to    look    after   their   aged

parents only if they expect to receive a bequest from them or, more precisely,

only if the receipt of the bequest is conditional on their looking after their

parents.       Thus, we can shed light on whether the children are altruistic or

selfish      by    seeing    whether      there   is    any   correlation         between   the    parent’s

bequest intentions and the children’s behavior (in particular, whether or not

they look after their aged parents).                     The U.S.-Japan Survey did not collect

direct information on how must care children provide to their aged parents so

we have used coresidence as a proxy therefor.                        Since it is presumably easier

for children to care for their parents and to provide financial and in-kind

assistance to their parents if they live together, we believe that coresidence

is likely to be a good proxy for care provided by children to their aged

parents.

           First, Table 12 shows data on the coresidence rates of respondents aged

49 years and younger and their parents, broken down by whether or not the

respondent expects to receive a bequest from their parents, and as this table

shows, in both countries, respondents who expect to receive a bequest from

their parents are more likely to live with them.                          This suggests that children

are motivated by selfish considerations in both countries.                                  However, the

impact of bequest expectations on coresidence is much greater in Japan than it

is    in    the    U.S.:    the    coresidence         rate   of    those      with    (without)   bequest

expectations is 24.61% (18.79%) in Japan and 7.02 (6.75%) in the U.S.                                   This

suggests that children are much more selfish in Japan than they are in the

U.S.14

           Next,   Table    13    shows    data   on    coresidence       rates    of   aged    respondents



                                                       19
(respondents aged 60 and older) and their children, broken down                                 by bequest

motive, and as this table shows, the coresidence rate varies relatively little

by   bequest    motive       in    the   U.S.   and    is,       in   fact,   lowest    in    the   case    of

respondents with a selfish bequest motive (6.67%) and second lowest in the

case of respondents with an altruistic bequest motive (7.53%) even though we

would expect it to the highest for these respondents if their children are

selfish (the coresidence rate is highest for respondents planning to leave

only unintended bequests (12.02%) and second highest for respondents planning

to leave no bequest at all (7.69%)).                  By contrast, the coresidence rate varies

substantially by bequest motive in Japan and the observed pattern is fully

consistent     with        the    hypothesis    that    children        are   selfish    in    Japan:      the

coresidence rates of respondents with selfish or altruistic bequest motives is

by far the highest (63.89% and 63.46%, respectively) and is about 1.3 times as

high   as   that      of    respondents     planning        to    leave   only    unintended        bequests

(49.45%) and more than two-and-a-half times as high as that of respondents

with no bequest motive (25.00%). These results suggest that American children

are altruistic whereas Japanese children are selfish.15

       We also did a probit analysis of coresidence between aged parents and

their children including as explanatory variables income, the square of income,

the age, marital status, sex, and health of the household head, housing tenure,

city size, bequest motives, and (in the case                          of the U.S.) the race of the

household      head    and       found   that   the        bequest     motive    dummies      are    totally

insignificant in the case of the U.S. but that the dummies for the altruistic

and selfish bequest motives are positive and marginally significant in the

case of Japan.         This demonstrates that the conclusion we drew from Table 13

does not change even when we control for other factors.




                                                      20
        F. Summary

        To    sum    up,          bequests    appear    to   be      motivated   primarily    by    selfish

considerations in both countries, suggesting that the life cycle model is the

dominant model of household behavior in both countries, but they appear to be

motivated to a far greater extent by intergenerational altruism in the U.S.

than   they    are     in     Japan,     suggesting      that     the    altruism   model    is    far    more

applicable in the U.S. than it is in Japan.                           By contrast, bequests appear to

be    motivated      to       a    far   greater   extent       by    selfish    and   dynastic     motives

(especially the former) in Japan than they are in the U.S., suggesting that

the    life   cycle       and       dynasty    models    (especially      the    former)    are    far    more

applicable in Japan than they are in the U.S.



VI. Conclusions

        In this paper, we analyzed a variety of data on saving and bequest

motives in the U.S. and Japan from the “Comparative Survey of Savings in Japan

and    the    U.S.,”      a       binational    household       survey    conducted    in    1996    by    the

Institute for Posts and Telecommunications Policy of the Ministry of Posts and

Telecommunications of the Government of Japan, in order to shed light on which

model of household behavior applies in the two countries.                               The evidence is

remarkably consistent, with the vast majority of it suggesting (1) that the

selfish life cycle model is the dominant model of household behavior in both

countries but that it is far more applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S.,

(2) that the altruism model is far more applicable in the U.S. than it is in

Japan but that it is not the dominant model of household behavior in either

country, and (3) that the dynasty model is more applicable in Japan than it is

in the U.S. but that it is of only limited applicability even in Japan.

        Looking first at the evidence in support of our conclusion that the life



                                                        21
cycle model is the dominant model of household behavior in both countries, we

found    (1)   that       saving    for   life-cycle        motives    (especially        saving   for     the

retirement and precautionary motives) comprises the bulk of household saving

in both countries, (2) that saving for the bequest motive is of negligible

importance in both countries, (3) that individuals who received or expect to

receive bequests, individuals who plan to                      make efforts to            leave behind a

bequest, and individuals who are saving for the purpose of leaving behind a

bequest    are     in     the    minority      in   both    countries,      (4)   that    a    majority    of

individuals in both countries either do not plan to leave a bequest, plan to

leave only unintended or accidental bequests, or plan to leave a bequest only

if their children look after them in their old age, and (5) that, in both

countries, those who expect to receive a bequest are more likely to live with

their parents than those who do not expect to receive a bequest.

         Turning     to    the   evidence      that   the    selfish     life     cycle    model   is    more

applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S., we found (1) that the share of

saving for motives that are consistent with the life cycle model (especially

the retirement and precautionary motives) is much higher in Japan than it is

in the U.S., (2) that the proportion of households saving in order to leave

behind a bequest as well as the share of bequest-related saving are much

higher    in   the      U.S.     than   they    are   in    Japan,    (3)    that   the       proportion    of

households receiving or expecting to receive bequests is somewhat higher in

the U.S. than it is in Japan, (4) that the proportion of households planning

to make efforts to leave behind a bequest is much higher in the U.S. than it

is in Japan,         (5) that bequests are motivated to a far greater extent by

selfish considerations in Japan than they are in the U.S. and that they are

motivated to a far greater extent by intergenerational altruism in the U.S.

than they are in Japan, judging not only from the data on bequest motives but



                                                      22
also from the data on attitudes toward bequest division, and (6)               that the

correlation between whether or not one expects to receive a bequest from one’s

parents and whether or not one lives with one’s parents and that between

whether or not one has a bequest motive and whether or not one lives with

one’s children is much stronger in Japan than it is in the U.S.

      Turning   finally   to   the   evidence   that   the   dynasty   model   is   more

applicable in Japan than it is in the U.S. but that it is of only limited

applicability even in Japan, we found (1) that the proportion of respondents

who plan to leave most or all of their bequest to the child who carries on the

family business or to the eldest child (regardless of whether that child takes

care of them) is much higher in Japan than it is in the U.S. but not very high

even in Japan, (2) that the proportion of respondents who plan to leave behind

assets that they themselves inherited is higher in Japan than it is in the U.S.

but not very high even in Japan, and (3) that the correlation between whether

or not a respondent received or expects to receive a bequest and whether or

not a respondent plans to make efforts to leave behind a bequest is positive

in both countries but not overwhelming.

      Reassuringly, our findings are broadly consistent with those of previous

studies for both countries.     With respect to Japan, our finding that the life

cycle model is the dominant model of household behavior is fully consistent

with the findings of Ohtake (1991), Ohtake and Horioka (1994), Hayashi (1995),

and other previous studies.      With respect to the U.S., our finding that the

life cycle model is the dominant model of household behavior is consistent

with the findings of Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985), Cox (1987), Hurd

(1987), Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1989), and other previous studies,

but our finding that a substantial minority of Americans is altruistic is

somewhat at variance with some previous studies.



                                          23
         Turning next to directions for further research, our finding that the

various models of household behavior coexist in both countries suggests that

theoretical, empirical, and policy-oriented analyses must take account of this

coexistence.      Second, our finding that the altruism and dynasty models are not

the dominant models of household behavior in either country suggests that

further theoretical work using these models is of limited value.                    Third, our

finding    that   precautionary     saving     is   of   significant     importance     in   both

countries suggests that further work in this area holds great promise.                   Fourth,

we found that the proportion of households whose behavior is consistent with

each model varies greatly depending on which criterion is used, and thus it

would be desirable to reconcile the various findings.               Fifth, our finding that

the magnitude of bequests is much larger in Japan than it is in the U.S. is

surprising because income growth has been much more rapid in Japan, meaning

that the gap between the lifetime incomes of younger generations and those of

older generations is much greater in Japan than it is in the U.S., which in

turn   means   that   one   would   expect     Japanese   parents   to    leave   far   smaller

bequests to their children than American parents.              A further investigation of

the reasons for our counterintuitive result is warranted. 16 Sixth, it would be

interesting if similar data could be obtained for other countries as well.17

         Turning finally to policy implications, as discussed by Barro (1974),

Becker (1974, 1981), and Weil (1989), the various models have very different

policy    implications.      For    example,   competitive    equilibria     will     always   be

efficient, the existence of asset bubbles is ruled out, and the Ricardian debt

neutrality proposition holds in the case of the altruism model, while the

opposite holds in the case of the life cycle and dynasty models.                      Thus, our

findings should be of interest not only to economists but also to policymakers.




                                               24
                                  REFERENCES

Altonji, Joseph G.; Hayashi, Fumio; and Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1992), "Is the
Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,"
American Economic Review, vol. 82, no. 5 (December), pp. 1177-1198.

Barro, Robert J. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal          of
Political Economy, vol. 82, no. 6 (November/December), pp. 1095-1117.

Becker, Gary S. (1974), "A Theory of Social Interactions," Journal           of
Political Economy, vol. 82, no. 6 (November/December), pp. 1063-1093.

Becker, Gary S. (1981), A Treatise on the Family (Cambridge, MA, USA: Harvard
University Press).

Bernheim, B. Douglas; Shleifer, Andrei; and Summers, Lawrence H. (1985), "The
Strategic Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93, no. 6
(December), pp. 1045-1076.

Boskin, Michael J., and Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1985), "Public Debt and United
States Saving: A New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 23 (Autumn), pp. 55-86.

Carroll, Christopher D. (2000), “’Risky Habits’ and the Marginal Propensity to
Consume Out of Permanent Income,” International Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Cox, Donald (1987), "Motives for Private Income Transfers,"        Journal   of
Political Economy, vol. 95, no. 3 (June), pp. 508-546.

Dunn, Thomas A., and Phillips, John W. (1997), “The Division of Parental
Resources among Children: Evidence from the AHEAD Survey,” Syracuse University
Center for Policy Research Working Paper No. 5 (February).

Hayashi, Fumio (1995), "Is the Japanese Extended Family Altruistically Linked?
A Test based on Engel Curves," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 103, no. 3
(June), pp. 661-674.

Horioka, Charles Yuji (1993), "Saving in Japan," in Arnold Heertje, ed., World
Savings: An International Survey (Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers), pp.
238-278.

Horioka, Charles Yuji; Fujisaki, Hideki; Watanabe, Wako; and Ishibashi, Shohei
(1998), “Chochiku Doki/Isan Doki no Nichibei Hikaku” (A U.S.-Japan Comparison
of Saving and Bequest Motives), in Charles Yuji Horioka and Koji Hamada, eds.,
Nichibei Kakei no Chochiku Kodo (The Saving Behavior of U.S. and Japanese
Households) (Tokyo: Nihon Hyoronsha), pp. 71-111 (in Japanese).

Horioka, Charles Yuji; Kasuga, Norihiro; Yamazaki, Katsuyo; and Watanabe, Wako
(1996), "Do the Aged Dissave in Japan? Evidence from Micro Data," Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 10, no. 3 (September), pp. 295-
311.

Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Okui, Megumi (1999), “A U.S.-Japan Comparison of



                                      25
the Importance and Determinants of Retirement Saving,” Economics Letters, vol.
65, no. 3 (December), pp. 365-371.

Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Watanabe, Wako (1997), "Why Do People Save? A
Micro-Analysis of Motives for Household Saving in Japan," Economic Journal,
vol. 107, no. 442 (May), pp. 537-552.

Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Watanabe, Wako (1998), “Nihonjin no Mokuteki-betsu
Chochiku-gaku” (The Amount of Saving by Motive of the Japanese), in Charles
Yuji Horioka and Koji Hamada, eds., Nichibei Kakei no Chochiku Kodo (The
Saving Behavior of U.S. and Japanese Households) (Tokyo: Nihon Hyoronsha), pp.
29-69 (in Japanese).

Horioka, Charles Yuji; Yokota, Naoto; Miyaji, Toshiyuki; and Kasuga, Norihiro
(1996), "Nihonjin no Chochiku Mokuteki" (The Saving Motives of the Japanese),
in Noriyuki Takayama, Charles Yuji Horioka, and Kiyoshi Ohta, eds., Koreika
Shakai no Chochiku to Isan/Sozoku (Saving and Bequests in an Aging Society)
(Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Hyoronsha), pp. 9-53 (in Japanese).

Hurd, Michael D. (1987), "Savings of the Elderly and Desired        Bequests,"
American Economic Review, vol. 77, no. 3 (June), pp. 298-312.

Iwamoto, Yasushi (1993), "Does the Dynasty View Help to Explain Japan's High
Saving Rate?" mimeo., Kyoto Institute of Economic Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Kessler, Denis, and Masson, Andre (1989), "Bequest and Wealth Accumulation:
Are Some Pieces of the Puzzle Missing?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
3, no. 3 (Summer), pp. 141-152.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1988), "Intergenerational Transfers and Savings,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 41-58.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Spivak, Avia (1981), "The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 2 (April), pp.
372-391.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Summers, Lawrence H. (1981), "The Role of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 4 (August), pp. 706-732.

Modigliani, Franco (1988), "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life
Cycle Saving in the Accumulation of Wealth," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 15-40.

Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, Richard (1954), "Utility Analysis and the
Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in Kenneth K.
Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian Economics (New Brunswick, N.J., USA: Rutgers
University Press), pp. 388-436.

Ohtake, Fumio (1991), "Bequest Motives of Aged Households in Japan," Ricerche
Economiche, vol. 45, no. 2-3 (April-September), pp. 283-306.

Ohtake, Fumio, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (forthcoming), "Saving Motives in



                                      26
Japan," in Tsuneo Ishikawa, ed., The Distribution of Income and Wealth in
Japan (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press).

Weil, Philippe (1989), "Overlapping Families of Infinitely-Lived           Agents,"
Journal of Public Economies, vol. 38, no. 2 (March), pp. 183-198.



                                  Footnotes
1
 Note that the dynasty model is a special case of Weil's (1989) model, which
assumes that new and infinitely linked dynasties, which are not linked to pre-
existing families through operative intergenerational transfers, continuously
enter the economy over time, because children who are not first-born or who do
not carry on the family line or the family business represent the new
dynasties that Weil's model requires.

2
 A comparison of the samples for each country with those of similar household
surveys in the same country showed that the samples are more or less
representative.
3
  A copy of the full    questionnaire    is   available   upon   request   from   the
corresponding author.
4
 It could be argued that capital gains and losses on fixed assets such as land,
housing, etc., should be included in the saving for the purchase of such
assets, but I have chosen not to do so because I was interested in knowing how
much saving for each motive contributes to the national income accounts
concept of saving, which does not include capital gains or losses.
5
 Unfortunately, it is not possible to calculate the proportion of respondents
saving for each motive in the form of the accumulation of financial assets,
the proportion of respondents saving for each motive in the form of loan
repayments, the proportion of respondents dissaving for each motive in the
form of the decumulation of financial assets, or the proportion of respondents
dissaving for each motive in the form of newly incurred debt from the data in
the U.S.-Japan Survey because it is not possible to differentiate between
those who are not saving or dissaving for a given motive and those who did not
respond to the question.    Thus, we estimated the proportion of respondents
saving for each motive in the form of the accumulation of financial assets on
the assumption that all respondents who hold financial assets for the motive
in question but did not indicate whether or not they accumulated further
financial assets for that motive during the past year did, in fact, do so.
Similarly, we estimated the proportion of respondents saving for each motive
in the form of loan repayments on the assumption that all respondents who have
outstanding loans for the motive in question but did not indicate whether or
not they made any payments on such loans during the past year did, in fact, do
so.    We made the aforementioned assumptions because households holding
financial assets for a given motive are likely to be accumulating financial
assets for that motive on a regular basis, even if they did not indicate
whether or not they are doing so, and similarly, households with outstanding
loans for a given motive are likely to be repaying those loans on a regular
basis, even if they did not indicate whether or not they are doing so.      By
contrast, we estimated the proportion of respondents dissaving for each motive
in the form of the decumulation of financial assets on the assumption that all
respondents who hold financial assets for a given motive but did not indicate
whether or not they decumulated any of these assets during the past year did



                                        27
not, in fact, do so. Similarly, we estimated the proportion of respondents
dissaving for each motive in the form of newly incurred debt on the assumption
that all respondents who have outstanding loans for a given motive but did not
indicate whether or not they incurred any new debts for the motive in question
during the past year did not, in fact, do so.   It appeared reasonable to make
these assumptions because decumulating financial assets and/or incurring new
debt in order to realize a given motive are likely to be one-time events
involving large sums of money, and thus we would expect non-response to be
less of a problem than in the case of saving in the form of the accumulation
of financial assets or in the form of loan repayments.
6
 With respect to the treatment of outliers, it is customary to decumulate a
considerable amount of financial assets or to incur a considerable amount of
new debt when realizing certain motives such as the housing motive; hence, a
large amount of dissaving in the form of the decumulation of financial assets
or in the form of newly incurred debt is not necessarily suspect. By contrast,
saving in the form of the accumulation of financial assets or in the form of
loan repayments is typically done gradually over a number of years out of
current income.   Thus, we excluded what appeared to be outliers only in the
case of saving in the form of the accumulation of financial assets or in the
form of loan repayments.
7
 As the results show, the net saving rate implied by our results is broadly
consistent with the National Accounts figure in the case of Japan but is much
higher than the National Accounts figure in the case of the United States.
The reason for this is not clear and warrants further investigation, but in
this paper, we are interested in the composition of saving by motive rather
than in the level thereof. We are indebted to B. Douglas Bernheim and Daekeun
Park for this point.
8
 Note, however, that the share of the bequest motive broadly defined in gross
saving is 35.59% in the U.S. and 39.69% in Japan, meaning that it is
substantial in both countries and slightly higher in Japan than it is in the
U.S. We are indebted to Joon-Ho Hahm for this point.
9
 Refer to Horioka and Okui (1999) for an analysis of the importance and
determinants of retirement saving in the U.S. and Japan using the same data
source. They find that, in both countries, retirement saving is influenced by
some (though not all) of the factors identified by the extended life cycle
model, especially expected living expenses during retirement.
10
    We are indebted to Joon-Ho Hahm and Daekeun Park for these points.
11
  The shares of the population aged 0-19, 20-39, 40-59, and 60 and over were
32.0% (22.4%), 31.9% (27.8%), 20.3% (28.9%), and 15.7% (21.0%), respectively,
in the United States (Japan) as of July 1, 1996.
12
 In Japan, it has traditionally been the eldest son who carries on the family
line or the family business, and in prewar Japan, the law stipulated that the
entire bequest goes to the eldest son.
13
  The U.S. results are broadly consistent with the findings of Dunn and
Phillips (1997), who find that 90% of Americans bequeath at least some assets
to all of their children.

14
     Note, however, that the altruism model requires only that the parents be



                                        28
altruistic. Thus, the fact that the children are selfish does not necessarily
contradict the altruism model.
15
  Horioka et al. (1996) also find that, in Japan, aged respondents with an
altruistic or selfish bequest motive are roughly twice as likely to receive
financial assistance from their children as those with no bequest motive,
which again suggests that children are selfish in Japan.

16
  We are indebted to Christopher D. Carroll and Daekeun Park for this point.
One possible explanation of our result is habit formation (see, for example,
Carroll (2000)).
17
 The Urban Households Saving Market Study, conducted by the Bank of Korea in
1995, asked Korean households about their bequest motives and found that the
proportion of respondents with an altruistic bequest motive is somewhat higher
in Korea than it is in Japan but not nearly as high as it is in the U.S.
(25.7% in Korea vs. 42.6% in the U.S. and 19.3% in Japan), that the proportion
of respondents with a selfish bequest motive is far, far higher in Korea than
it is in either the U.S. or Japan (22.8% in Korea vs. 3.3% in the U.S. and
6.4% in Japan), and that the proportion of respondents with no bequest motive
(or planning to leave only unintended bequests) is lower in Korea than it is
in either the U.S. or Japan (51.5% in Korea vs. 54.1% in the U.S. and 74.3% in
Japan).   Since the second and third responses are consistent with the life
cycle model, these findings imply that the proportion of respondents adhering
to the life cycle model in Korea is much higher than it is in the U.S. but
somewhat lower than it is in Japan (74.3% in Korea vs. 57.4% in the U.S. and
80.6% in Japan). Thus, it appears that Korea is between the U.S. and Japan
but closer to Japan with respect to the degree of applicability of the
altruism and life cycle models. We are indebted to Joon-Ho Hahm for providing
us with the Korean data.




                                     29
                                                                                       Figure 1: A U.S.-Japan Comparison of the Composition of Net Saving


                                                   70


                                                   60


                                                   50
   The share of net saving for each motive (%)




                                                   40


                                                   30


                                                   20


                                                   10


                                                    0


                                                  -10


                                                  -20
                                                                      Precautionar                                    Consumer
                                                         Retirement                  Education   Marriage   Housing               Leisure   Tax     Business   Bequest   Other
                                                                           y                                           durables
                                                 U.S.      30.84         27.93         -0.14       2.87      14.6        4.2       6.35     6.4       2.59      5.04     -0.66
                                                 Japan     62.23         41.18         8.77        7.31     -15.57      1.54       2.44     0.25     -0.37       1.5     -9.29
                                                                                                                       Motive

Note: The precautionary motive represents the sum of the illness and peace of mind motives.

Data source: Table 6.
