NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN JOB STABILITY AND JOB SECURITY:
A COLLECTIVE EFFORT TO UNTANGLE, RECONCILE,
AND INTERPRET THE EVIDENCE

David Neumark

Working Paper 7472
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7472

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2000

This is the introductory chapter to an edited volume tentatively titled On the Job: Is Long-Term Employment
a Thing of the Past?, to be published by the Russell Sage Foundation, based on a conference held in February,
1998. Annette Bernhardt, Peter Cappelli, Peter Gottschalk, Susan Houseman, David Jaeger, Alec Levenson,
Martina Morris, Anne Polivka, Daniel Polsky, and David Wetzell provided valuable comments. Support for
this project from the Russell Sage Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in Job Stability and Job Security: A Collective Effort to
Untangle, Reconcile, and Interpret the Evidence
David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 7472
January 2000
JEL No. J63, J64
ABSTRACT
I synthesize and summarize a set of recent papers on changes in the employment relationship. The
authors of these papers present the most up-to-date and accurate assessment of their evidence on changes
in job stability and job security, and attempt to reconcile their evidence with the findings of other research,
including the other papers discussed herein. Some of papers also begin to explore explanations of changes
in the employment relationship.
The evidence suggests that the 1990's witnessed some changes in the employment relationship
consistent with weakened bonds between workers and firms. But the magnitudes of these changes indicate
that while these bonds may have weakened, they have not been broken. Furthermore, the changes that
occurred in the 1990's have not persisted very long. It is therefore premature to infer long-term trends
towards declines in long-term employment relationships, and even more so to infer anything like the
disappearance of long-term, secure jobs.
The papers examining sources of changes in job stability and job security in the 1990's point to
some potential explanations, including relative wage movements, growth in alternative employment
relationships, and downsizing. However, with the possible exception of the first of these, this list does not
encompass “fundamental” or exogenous changes impacting the employment relationship, but rather to some
extent suggests how various changes in the employment relationship may reinforce each other.
Understanding the structural changes underlying empirical observations on changes in job stability and job
security is likely to be a fruitful frontier for future research on the employment relationship.
David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER

I. Introduction
At a symposium at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the fall of 1996, various
researchers presented their findings on changes in long-term employment relationships in U.S.
labor markets. The researchers focused on two dimensions of these relationships: “job stability,”
meaning the duration of jobs or the probability of retaining or leaving a job; and “job security,”
referring to the likelihood of experiencing involuntary job loss. The disparity of the conclusions
was striking. Some, including me, reported “nothing new under the sun.” Despite intense media
attention, culminating in the 1996 New York Times series “The Downsizing of America,” overall
changes in the stability of jobs over the 1970's and 1980's were trivial or non-existent. Others, in
contrast, reported substantial declines in job stability. Similar, if slightly less sharp
disagreements emerged over job security, with some research indicating sharp declines, and
others reporting only modest declines, or speculating that the increased job loss reflected changes
in survey methods rather than real changes in the economy.
Towards the end of the day, Eric Wanner, President of the Russell Sage Foundation,
which helped fund the symposium, wondered what research foundations could do to help resolve
these contradictions and provide a clear picture of labor market developments in the United
States. Somewhat facetiously, I suggested that the Foundation ought to lock the various
researchers in a room and not let us out until we figured out exactly what the data really said
about these issues.
Some time later, substituting comfortable surroundings, nice meals, and nominal financial
inducements for a lock on the door, many of the researchers active in this debate convened and
embarked on just this task. The process began with a conference at which researchers presented
papers that pursued two goals: first, to present the most up-to-date and accurate assessment of

1

their evidence on changes in job stability and job security; and second, to attempt to reconcile
their evidence with the findings of other research, including both earlier papers and those
presented at the conference. In addition, papers were invited that began to explore possible
explanations of any changes in the employment relationship that emerged from the ongoing
research, adding a vital component to what had to that point been largely a debate about
empirical facts–a necessary first step, but an incomplete research agenda. Following the
conference, in addition to the usual process of review and revision of the papers, a deliberate
effort was made to push the contributors in the direction of reconciling, whenever possible,
contradictory findings among the papers, or with respect to other research on job stability and job
security. The final product of this process is represented in this volume.
As the title of this chapter suggests, this process was unique in its collective effort to
establish a consensus on the empirical evidence across numerous papers using a variety of data
sets. Besides assembling a set of new papers that would generally advance our knowledge about
changes in job stability and job security, we also set out to push a research “model” that focuses a
number of papers simultaneously on the same topic, with a strong emphasis on delineating points
of reconciliation, points of continued disagreement, and wherever possible the reasons for each.
This emphasis gives this conference volume a unique flavor. It is hard to read this book and not
come away believing that the set of papers as a whole–but in some sense only as a
whole–substantially pushes forward our knowledge regarding changes in the employment
relationship.
In this introductory chapter I briefly summarize the original findings presented in each
paper, and then move on to what each paper has to say about findings in the previous literature
and in the other conference papers. This provides a synthesis that is somewhat difficult to obtain

2

from reading the individual papers, unless the reader were to engage in his or her own detailed
process of comparing and contrasting these papers, which are filled with a rather bewildering
array of discussions about data issues, measurement problems, alternative estimates, and
references to other research findings. I therefore hope that this synthesis helps the reader absorb
the contributions of this research more easily.1
In addition to their contribution to the debate over the changing employment relationship,
I believe readers will also find in these papers a wealth of useful suggestions and insights
regarding the measurement of worker-employer attachments (tenure, job separations, job loss,
etc.) in many of the main data sets that labor economists use in a variety of applications. This
results from what is probably the most serious attention such issues have received. My guess is
that this product of the research contained in this volume will prove indispensable not only in
future research on changes in the employment relationship, but also in a much wider body of
research on job mobility, job attachment, and job loss.
II. Job Stability
Untangling the Evidence
The first five papers in the volume address the issue that has figured most prominently
thus far in the ongoing research and debate over changes in the employment relationship–whether
the distribution of the duration of jobs has changed appreciably in the U.S. economy in recent
years, and in particular whether jobs have become less stable. Four of these five papers (by
Jaeger and Stevens, Neumark, et al., Bernhardt, et al., and Gottschalk and Moffitt) use the main
secondary data sources available to labor economists to study this question, and are distinguished
from previous research by two main features: updating evidence through the mid- to late-1990's;
and serious attempts at verifying and more importantly reconciling the evidence from earlier

3

studies and alternative data sources. The fifth (by Allen, et al.) casts another look at this question
using a proprietary data set on a small sample of large employers, providing a narrower look at
the question, but one that addresses the important issue of changes in the employment
relationship at the largest corporations. Table 1 summarizes the findings of these papers in a
form that enables easy comparison of data sets, samples, sample periods, the “definition” of
stability, and results. Because this table is provided, my summary of each paper is brief, and
restricted to findings on job stability.
The paper by Jaeger and Stevens studies the evolution of job stability over the 1970's,
1980's, and 1990's using the two primary data sources exploited in the earlier research: the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID); and the various tenure supplements of the Current Population
Survey (CPS). Whereas past research has used primarily one data set or the other, this is the first
research to attempt to use these two sources of data while doing everything possible to ensure
that at the end of the day we are looking at comparable measures from the two sources. Jaeger
and Stevens look at job duration at both the “short” and “long” end of the distribution, by
measuring changes over time in the shares of workers with less than 18 months of tenure, and
with less than 10 years of tenure. The former measure is closely related to turnover, since an
increase in the fraction of workers with low tenure would occur if workers were leaving or losing
their jobs (and becoming reemployed) at higher rates. The 10-year measure captures the extent to
which workers are accumulating high amounts of tenure on the job. It is not as closely related to
turnover per se, as average tenure could be rising while the proportion with 10 or more years of
tenure is shrinking.2 Jaeger and Steven find consistent results in the PSID and in the CPS tenure
supplements, indicating that the share of workers with less than 18 months of tenure rose over
the early part of the sample period, but not since about 1983. In contrast, for men the share with

4

less than 10 years of tenure began to increase in the late 1980's.
Neumark, et al., update the evidence on job stability based on CPS tenure supplements by
extending into the 1990's the type of estimates presented in their earlier work. Rather than
looking at point-in-time distributions of tenure or some transformation thereof (like the share
with tenure below some cutoff), they string together tenure supplements to estimate retention
rates, which are free of the influence of factors such as changes in participation.3 Overall,
though, the findings are quite consistent with those of Jaeger and Stevens. Shorter-term (fouryear) retention rates were largely unchanged for the sample as a whole over the sample period
(1983-1995). In contrast, longer-term (eight-year) retention rates fell in the early 1990's, and
both rates fell for higher-tenure and older workers, and more so for higher-tenure managerial and
professional workers. These results point to a weakened tendency, in the short-run at least, for
managerial and professional workers to remain in long-term jobs.
Bernhardt, et al., look at job stability by comparing two-year job separation rates across
cohorts of young white men in the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS). This is an alternative
data source to the PSID or CPS that offers some advantages the authors describe (most
importantly, a unique employer code), but also presents potential problems of changes over time
stemming from differences in survey methods used for the two NLS cohorts. The authors are
careful to consider fully issues that arise because of differences between the surveys, and they
present a relatively compelling case that their findings of substantially higher separation rates in
the later NLS cohort reflect a real behavioral change. Their results compare one cohort followed
over the period 1966-1981 with another cohort followed over the period 1979-1994. Thus, their
findings of higher separation rates in the more recent cohort to a large extent compare the 1970's
with the 1980's, and hence are not inconsistent with evidence reported in other papers in this

5

volume finding some declines in job stability over the 1970's and early 1980's (e.g., Jaeger and
Stevens), but not during the 1980's. In addition, their data are restricted to relatively young men,
in contrast to most of the other analyses discussed in this chapter.
Bernhardt, et al., also broach the interesting question of whether the consequences of job
changing have shifted over time, reporting that the wage returns to job changing have declined
and become more unequal. While there is not enough material in the papers in this volume to
reach definitive conclusions regarding this issue, I would argue that research along these lines has
a valuable role to play. Much of the recent debate has been about empirical measurement of
changes in the employment relationship. But little if any research has asked “So what?” To
know what to make of the evidence on changes in the employment relationship, we need a better
idea of what the consequences of such changes are.
The study by Gottschalk and Moffitt is the first to look at job stability using data from the
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP data offer two advantages. First,
monthly data allow the study of short-term dynamics, thus adding a dimension to the study of job
stability that is quite important, given that a high fraction of workers (about 20 percent) are in
jobs with less than one year of tenure. Second, the SIPP includes 32 months of job history data
with unique identifiers throughout each panel. Looking first at one-year separation rates, the
authors reach conclusions similar to those of Jaeger and Stevens–namely, that one-year
separation rates did not increase over the 1983-1995 period. Looking at monthly separation
rates, Gottschalk and Moffitt find no trend increase, and if anything a decline from the mid1980's through the early 1990's.4 Like Bernhardt, et al., these authors also devote some attention
to the consequences of job changes, finding, in contrast to that paper, no downward drift in wage
gains associated with job changes.

6

Finally, Allen, et al., study a data base of consulting clients of Watson Wyatt Worldwide.
These data cover the 1990's only, and principally permit comparisons of tenure distributions over
this period. The firms in these data display a fairly high degree of downsizing, which may of
course be related to their selection into a sample of consulting clients. The key finding that Allen
emphasizes is that–putting aside the impact on “downsized” workers–the average tenure of the
workforces in this sample of firms rose over the 1990's, as did the percentages of workers with
10+ or 20+ years of tenure. Moreover, while retention rates were naturally lower in downsizing
firms (with downsizing defined simply as reducing employment), the differential appears for
lower-tenure, rather than higher-tenure workers. In other words, whether or not firms are
downsizing, in these data we do not observe declining representation of high-tenure workers.
However, because these data are not representative and cover a relatively short period, it is not
clear that we want to characterize this evidence as undermining the conclusion from
representative samples that it was high-tenure, not low-tenure, workers who experienced the
decline in stability in the 1990's. One possible reconciliation is that the types of very large
corporations represented in these data may have experienced different patterns of job separations.
Reconciling the Conflicting Findings
Having described the basic findings in each paper, I next summarize the evidence that
explicitly attempts to reconcile or in some cases verify the findings in these papers and other
research regarding changes in job stability. This evidence is presented in a condensed form in
Table 2, permitting a brief summary here.
Jaeger and Stevens address the vexing issue of why past research based on the PSID
(Marcotte, 1996; Rose, 1995) reported declines in job stability over the 1980's, while evidence
based on CPS tenure supplements indicated little decrease in job stability from the 1970's to the

7

1980's or in the 1980's. As already noted, Jaeger and Stevens conclude, based on their analysis of
PSID and CPS data, that there was no increase in the share of workers with low tenure over the
1980's or through the mid-1990's, but that stability fell from the 1970's to the 1980's. They
attribute the contrast to earlier PSID studies to changes in questions in the 1980's that inflated
measures of turnover in that period, and to sensitivity to the sample period, with studies ending in
the late 1980's coincidentally using as their end date the peak in the share of workers with low
tenure (less than 18 months). On the other hand, they argue that in contrast to CPS studies of the
1970's versus the 1980's, there appear to have been some relatively small but real decreases in job
stability over this period, which are masked by changes in the CPS tenure question in 1983. An
important conclusion from this paper is that, in contrast to the impression one might have gotten
from the contradictory findings in the earlier research, the PSID and CPS yield similar findings
when used in a comparable manner. Aside from helping to settle issues regarding trends in job
stability, this ought to reassure researchers requiring information on turnover, who might
sometimes find the CPS and other times the PSID better suited to answering particular questions.
Jaeger and Stevens also present some evidence suggesting that the findings of Bernhardt, et al.
and the earlier findings of Monks and Pizer (1998) of an increased separation rate from roughly
the 1970's to the 1980's, based on the NLS surveys, are reflected in the PSID data, which indicate
what they characterize as a “strong” increase in the fraction of young men with low tenure (in
their data, from 1976 through 1988).
Neumark, et al., do not focus quite as much on the reconciliation of conflicting evidence
from different data sources. However, the extension of their earlier research through the mid1990's provides a significant “check” on the consistency between anecdotal and media reports of
declines in long-term jobs and evidence from representative samples. As suggested in Neumark

8

and Polsky (1998), part of the earlier disagreement between “evidence” from these two types of
sources may have been that the latter, research-based evidence lagged the media and anecdotal
reporting, and may therefore have failed to pick up the changes that were occurring most
recently. They conclude that their evidence of declines in job stability for more-tenured workers
overall in the 1990's, especially for managerial and professional workers, is in part consistent
with anecdotal evidence reported in the media, though they caution against drawing conclusions
regarding long-term trends, since these changes show up mainly in the first part of the 1990's.
The part of the Bernhardt, et al., paper analyzing changes in separation rates largely
revisits an earlier paper using the NLS cohorts, by Monks and Pizer (1998), which reported
rather sharp declines in two-year retention rates between the NLS cohorts. After considering the
potential role of measurement issues, differences in attrition (which is plausibly associated with
measured job retention), and some other empirical issues, they largely confirm the Monks and
Pizer results, finding if anything a larger decline in job stability.
Finally, the Gottschalk and Moffitt paper is not devoted to reconciling conflicting
evidence, but rather to presentation of evidence on short-term dynamics from the SIPP.
However, to ensure that any differences they find are not due simply to differences between data
sets, they first endeavor to verify that the SIPP and the PSID, when used longitudinally and in a
comparable fashion to study yearly turnover, yield similar results. In addition, because past
research with the PSID did not really treat it as a longitudinal data set, but instead as a series of
cross-sections, an important by-product of their “benchmarking” of the data is showing that when
the PSID data are used longitudinally, they give very similar results to those obtained when using
the PSID as a series of cross-sections; although estimated separation rates shift, the time-series
pattern of no upward trend remains the same. Again, this is of interest to researchers who may be

9

measuring job stability or turnover with other questions in mind that require longitudinal data.
III. Job Security
While the research on job stability focuses on the duration of jobs, another critical
dimension is what has come to be labeled job security. The distinction between job stability and
job security was introduced as a means of sharpening the interpretation of different types of
changes in the employment relationship.5 A decline in job durations might be construed as
positive or negative, depending on whether workers’ jobs were ending involuntarily, or instead
because workers were quitting more frequently to take better jobs (such as occurs to some extent
in an economic expansion). A decline in job security, in contrast, refers specifically to a decline
in job durations attributable to increased involuntary job loss, an unambiguous “bad” from the
perspective of workers. Tracking changes in both job stability and job security is important for
understanding how the employment relationship is changing. As in the previous section, Table 3
presents the evidence on changes in job security in a condensed form, while Table 4 summarizes
the attempts at reconciling the conflicting evidence.
Untangling the Evidence
The paper by Valletta reports evidence on changes in the probability of dismissal over the
1976-1992 period using the PSID. Valletta estimates how this probability has changed
differentially for high- and low-tenure workers, how this probability varies (overall, and with
tenure) in declining versus expanding sectors, and how the latter relationships have changed over
time. These particular empirical analyses are motivated by what is one of the first attempts in
this growing literature to offer a theoretical framework for interpreting the empirical analysis. In
particular, Valletta attempts to estimate parameters that might reflect behavior in the context of
implicit employment contracts that are designed to overcome incentive problems and imperfect

10

monitoring, and changes in the terms of such contracts, although he acknowledges that the
theoretical framework does not impose enough structure on the empirical analysis to test sharp
hypotheses. Nonetheless, there is evidence consistent with the general implicit contracts
approach, in particular the diminution of the effect of tenure in reducing dismissal probabilities
in declining sectors, which Valletta interprets as employer default on delayed payment contracts
in the face of adverse shocks. In light of this framework, the upward trend in dismissals for hightenure workers, and a similar upward trend in quits, suggest some change in the incentives or
behavior underlying long-term implicit contracts. Valletta’s paper clearly establishes a case for
trying to incorporate more theoretical analysis into what has until now been a purely empirical
research agenda.
Stewart’s contribution to the job security literature is to develop a time-series on job loss
that can be used as an alternative to those based on the PSID and Displaced Worker Surveys
(DWS), which have been used to date. As Stewart points out, neither of these latter two data
sources provides consistent measures of job loss over time. The changes in questions over time
in the PSID were already discussed and have received careful attention in previous research (e.g.,
Polsky, 1999). The changes in the DWS are more recent, but their impact on estimates of
changes in job loss in the 1990's is potentially serious. (See Polivka and Miller, 1998; Farber,
1998b; Polivka, 1998). Stewart, instead, looks at the rate of employment-to-unemployment
transitions in the CPS over a thirty-year period. While such transitions are not synonymous with
job loss–since some job losers go directly to other jobs–they offer an alternative perspective.
Stewart then reports findings that draw some potentially interesting contrasts with the existing
literature. He finds that the rate of transition to unemployment increased in the 1980's relative to
the 1970's, but did not increase in the 1990's. For example, for most groups this rate was lower

11

during the 1990 recession than during the more severe 1982 recession. However, this was
reversed for some groups that typically are quite insulated from recession-induced spells of
unemployment, including more-educated workers, more-experienced workers, and white-collar
workers. This may provide some support for the greater media attention and–in my
view–hyperbole regarding decreased job stability and job security in the 1990's. In particular,
media attention may have increased in part because the peers of those in the media were
experiencing far greater dislocation than they had at other times.6
Schmidt presents a different kind of evidence altogether, namely estimates of how
workers’ perceptions regarding job security have changed over time. Using the General Social
Survey (GSS) from 1977-1996, Schmidt studies changes over time in the perceived likelihood of
job loss or layoff (in the next 12 months) and the perceived likelihood of job loss coupled with
the perceived difficulty of finding a job with similar income and benefits; she refers to the latter
combination as “costly job loss.” Since these are unconventional data to bring to bear on the
question of changes in job security, it is useful to consider what they can tell us. There are at
least three ways to interpret the GSS data, all of them potentially informative. One is as a
“check” on the objective findings from other data sources. If workers’ perceptions parallel
evidence on job loss from the PSID, DWS, and CPS, then the strength of that evidence would be
bolstered. On the other hand, if we found undue pessimism in workers’ subjective assessments,
we might attribute this to exaggerated claims in the media and elsewhere regarding the decline of
long-term employment relationships. Second, these data may be informative about changes in
the distribution of the probabilities of job loss, as they measure ex ante probabilities that workers
may face job loss, rather than ex post measures of actual job loss. For example, an employer
could lay off a higher-than-normal fraction of its workforce, but commit to lifetime job security

12

for the remaining workers, in which case we might observe more job loss, but increases in
perceived job security for many workers. Third, “security” is, in essence, a subjective
characteristic, and a change in workers’ subjective assessment of their job security–whether or
not validated in observed behavior for the same period–may still have implications for labor
market behavior. For example, as Schmidt suggests, drawing on testimony by Federal Reserve
Board Chairman Alan Greenspan, a greater perceived threat of job loss could moderate wage
inflation demands; yet if these demands do indeed moderate wage demands, the threat may never
be realized.7
Schmidt’s evidence suggests that, in terms of workers’ perceptions of job security, the
1990's were different from the earlier decade-and-a-half. While perceived risk of job loss
generally and of costly job loss in particular both rise during a recession, workers were more
pessimistic in the period following the 1990-1991 recession than in earlier comparable periods,
although the perceived risks of both types of job loss declined following the recession. In
common with the other work on both job stability and job security, these findings do not
establish any long term trends, while pointing to some unique developments in the early- to mid1990's. More importantly, perhaps, Schmidt’s research suggests the value of more careful
analysis of how data on workers’ perceptions of job security can further our understanding of
labor market developments–not limited to changes in job stability and job security.8
Reconciling the Conflicting Findings
There is not as much conflicting evidence in the prior literature on job security as there is
on job stability. Across most of the existing papers, including those in this volume, there is some
evidence of declining job security. The disagreements focus more on the timing of the changes,
in particular whether job security declined in the 1990's. This is, of course, an important issue, as

13

tests of potential explanations of changes in job security will to some extent hinge on the
coincidence of timing of changes in job security and the causal factors under consideration.
Although not central to their analysis, Gottschalk and Moffitt replicate some PSID results
on changes in involuntary terminations based on careful consideration of how best to use the
PSID in a consistent manner over time. Based on these replications, they conclude that the
findings from the PSID reported in Boisjoly, et al. (1998)–that involuntary terminations rose over
the 1970's and 1980's–were driven by increases from the 1970's to the 1980's, but not increases
over the 1980's. Note that this squares with Stewart’s conclusions noted above, and also in Table
4, which points out that in his data there was little change in job security from the mid-1970's
through the mid-to-late 1990's.
Aside from addressing the evidence in Boisjoly, et al., Stewart also carefully explores two
other sets of findings on changes in job security from the previous literature. He devotes most of
his attention to Farber’s (1997b) conclusion based on the DWS that the rate of job loss increased
over the 1990's (from 1991-1993 to 1993-1995), a finding not replicated in Stewart’s data.
Stewart is cognizant of the fact that his employment-to-unemployment transitions do not
necessarily measure the same thing as job loss in the DWS. But following careful consideration
of discrepancies between the two measures, and the effects of changes in the DWS questionnaire,
he concludes that changes in the questions in the 1996 DWS (covering the 1993-1995 period)
resulted in more job leavers being classified as job losers than in previous surveys, and that the
job loss rate actually did decline in this period.
Finally, Stewart also revisits the evidence in Monks and Pizer (1998) reporting an
increase in the rate of job loss across the NLS cohorts. Stewart finds consistent evidence in the
CPS data for some education groups (those with only a high school education), but no rise for

14

other groups (college graduates or those with some college). Whereas other authors have
speculated that the NLS findings (including possibly those by Bernhardt, et al., on job stability)
may be driven by differences between the survey methods used for the different NLS cohorts,
Stewart suggests that this is unlikely to be the case, as this explanation would tend to apply
across all schooling groups, not just isolated ones.
IV. Interpreting and Understanding Sources of Change in the Employment Relationship:
A Beginning
The papers discussed to this point parallel the existing research on job stability and job
security in that they focus primarily on measurement of changes in these characteristics of the
employment relationship. While an accurate description of changes in job stability and job
security is of course critical, especially in light of the disagreements in past research, it is equally
imperative to begin to develop an understanding of why any changes may have occurred. Job
stability and job security are, after all, only symptoms of underlying behavioral changes. Among
the previous papers, only Valletta’s emphasizes this point explicitly, but his focus is theoretical.
The final four papers in the book, in contrast, seek to understand which changes in the behavior
or decisions of employers and in the choices of workers underlie changes in job stability and job
security. Because this inquiry is new, and not as focused on a previous literature, these papers
are a bit more eclectic than the other ones in the book in terms of types of behaviors, decisions,
or outcomes studied.
Levenson focuses on changes in part-time and temporary work (i.e., employment in the
temporary staffing industry). He considers both voluntary and involuntary part-time work,
because the latter, in particular, is thought to correspond more to the “menu” of jobs that firms
offer workers in the labor market, although this presumption is questioned in his paper. Overall,

15

the rate of involuntary part-time employment has grown since the 1970's, although this growth
occurred principally between the 1970's and 1980's (see Levenson, 1996, for a thorough analysis
of overall trends in part-time employment). The rate of temporary employment increased sharply
after the 1970's, though it grew from a very small base and therefore remains low. Levenson first
documents that involuntary part-time work has grown faster for low-skill men and women than
for high-skill men and women, and that voluntary part-time work and temporary employment
increased faster for low-skill men. These findings provide the jumping-off point for his inquiry.
The growth in involuntary part-time and temporary work appears to be part and parcel of the shift
toward increasingly “bad” jobs offered to low-skill workers. Although not documented in this
paper (see, however, the Farber paper discussed below), these jobs are likely less stable and
secure, thus suggesting a link between the types of jobs some firms are offering and changes in
job stability and job security.
However, Levenson considers an important alternative hypothesis. We know that wages
of low-skill workers fell over the past couple of decades, both absolutely (in real terms) and
relative to high-wage workers, and that this is in part responsible for relative declines in labor
force participation among low-skill individuals (e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1991; Juhn, 1991).
Levenson builds on this research by asking whether the relative rise in involuntary part-time and
temporary work among low-skill workers in fact reflects a voluntary labor supply response to
lower wages. With respect to part-time work this would imply, of course, that the “involuntary”
distinction used in the CPS may not be meaningful, reflecting an inability to find full-time work
at the wage at which one would choose to work full-time, rather than an inability to find such
work per se. Levenson finds that for men, but not for women, the relative increase in involuntary
part-time work among the less-skilled can be partly understood as a labor supply response, while

16

only a small amount of the relative increase in temporary employment among low-skill men can
be explained as a labor supply response. This injects an important perspective into the debate
about changes in the employment relationship broadly defined, namely whether some of the
changes reflect market responses to relative wages or perhaps changes in workers’ preferences or
constraints, rather than changes in the nature of the employment relationship per se driven by
corporate restructuring, management strategies, etc.
Farber looks at a different source of the flow of workers into temporary and involuntary
part-time employment. He defines temporary employment more broadly to include on-call and
contract work. Matching data from the DWS to the 1995 and 1997 Contingent and Alternative
Employment Arrangements Supplements to the CPS, his key finding is that workers who lose
jobs are more likely to be in temporary or involuntary part-time jobs than workers who have not
lost their jobs. Farber goes on to characterize these jobs and the workers who fill them more
fully. In particular, he finds that the relationships between job loss and temporary or involuntary
part-time employment weaken with time, suggesting that these jobs are to some extent used as
workers make transitions back to full-time, regular employment following a job loss. Indeed, his
evidence suggests that those in temporary jobs, specifically, are of two types: job losers using
them as transitions back to full-time, regular employment; and voluntary part-time workers, for
whom these jobs may be preferred over other alternatives.
Although the nature of the evidence is different, the perspective it yields is in some ways
similar to Levenson’s. In particular, we should not necessarily view employment relationships
such as involuntary part-time or temporary employment as “bad” jobs foisted on workers who
would otherwise have full-time, regular jobs. Job loss is a persistent phenomenon, and the
availability of transitional jobs may serve a useful function. Moreover, and more closely related

17

to Levenson’s work, some types of flexible or non-permanent employment relationships may be
preferred by workers. While the evidence Farber presents is cross-sectional, coupled with some
other evidence suggesting that the rate of job loss has increased, it also potentially explains part
of the growth in involuntary part-time employment and temporary employment. If the
relationship between job loss and employment in these types of jobs has been stable over time,
then higher rates of job loss would lead to higher incidence of these types of employment.
However, this cannot be established with the data Farber has available; data on most forms of
temporary employment, in particular, are available beginning only with the CPS contingent work
supplements in 1995.
Houseman and Polivka study flexible employment arrangements broadly defined. They
begin by presenting evidence from an Upjohn Institute employer survey regarding why employers
report using flexible staffing arrangements. The authors focus on those reasons likely to have
implications for job stability, in particular whether employers use these arrangements to screen
workers for more permanent positions, and whether they actually move employees in flexible
arrangements into regular positions. Houseman and Polivka conclude that employers sometimes
use flexible arrangements for screening, most notably agency temporaries, but that other factors
are generally more important in determining employers’ reliance on these employment
arrangements.9
The main part of their analysis exploits the CPS contingent work supplement, matching
the 1995 supplement to other CPS files to obtain evidence on job turnover among workers in
flexible and regular employment relationships. Their principal finding is that workers in these
flexible employment relationships are less likely to remain in their jobs for an additional year (or
an additional month) than workers in full-time employment. Among workers in such flexible

18

arrangements, this is especially true for agency temps, on-call workers, direct-hire temps, and
contract workers. Houseman and Polivka are naturally concerned with the possibility that
workers in these latter types of jobs are simply higher turnover workers, suggesting that it is not
the nature of these jobs, per se, that reduces job stability. Although more complete panel or work
history data might better resolve this issue, they argue–based on controls they can include
(measures of very recent job loss, turnover, unemployment, and non-employment), as well as
other evidence from longitudinal data for temporary services workers (Segal and Sullivan,
1997)–that there is a causal effect of employment in these types of arrangements on job stability.
On the assumption that their evidence points to such a causal effect, Houseman and
Polivka also attempt to answer the question of whether growth of flexible staffing arrangements
can explain part of the modest decline in job stability in the 1990's. Because of data limitations
and the lack of evidence on the relationship between flexible employment arrangements and job
stability in earlier years, this exercise must be viewed cautiously. But based on their estimates,
the authors’ calculations suggest that the growth in flexible employment arrangements from 1986
to 1996 may explain nearly a third of the modest decline in job stability over this period.
Finally, the paper by Cappelli seeks to shed light on the corporate downsizing
phenomenon, which has been fingered by the media as a prime cause of the decline in job
stability and job security in the 1990's, although its contribution to the overall trends is difficult
to gauge. Cappelli seeks to accomplish two goals with his analysis of establishment-level data
from the 1994 and 1997 National Employer Surveys. First, he is interested in understanding
some of the characteristics of establishments and their workforces that are related to the
incidence and magnitude of downsizings. Second, he examines the consequences of downsizing
for productivity and labor costs per employee. To operationalize the concept of “downsizing,”

19

Cappelli defines such an event as an employment reduction that is not associated with excess
capacity. Such employment reductions, it seems, are more likely to coincide with corporate
reorganizations, management restructurings, etc., that correspond to the popular conception of a
downsizing, as opposed to employment reductions associated with slack demand.10 To the best
of my knowledge this paper is the first establishment-level empirical analysis, based on
representative data, of the determinants and consequences of downsizing in terms of workforce
and establishment characteristics or outcomes. It is easy to criticize the data for a failure to
capture unambiguous downsizings or specific events or factors that might have spurred them.
Nonetheless, it presents some new evidence that helps inform our understanding of downsizing.
The paper reports that downsizings are associated with not only reductions in labor costs
per worker, but also with declines in sales per worker (productivity). This suggests that overall
performance is unlikely to be enhanced by downsizing.11 The failure to find beneficial
consequences of downsizing is consistent with existing research cited in the paper indicating that
financial performance on average declines following a downsizing, although this research also
indicates that downsizings accompanied by specific features–such as restructuring plans–may
have more beneficial financial effects.12 The apparent absence of beneficial performance effects
implies that the motivations for the downsizings, which are believed to have generated at least
some of the increased job loss in the 1990's, remain somewhat of a mystery. Of course a strong
possibility is that the existing studies, including Cappelli’s, fail to completely capture the right
counterfactual via regression controls. That is, what may have happened to establishments or
firms had they not downsized could have been far worse than what happened to other
establishments or firms that are similar in terms of control variables available to researchers. In
this case downsizings are driven by idiosyncratic factors that are unobserved by the researcher,

20

and regressions such as those reported by Cappelli and elsewhere in the literature could be biased
against finding positive effects of downsizing. While Cappelli’s use of the National Employer
Surveys to study employment reductions in the absence of excess capacity ought to reduce any
such bias, this is a difficult issue to resolve fully. More importantly, though, this paper ought to
spur other researchers to attempt to better understand the decision to downsize and its
consequences, and to figure out how to gauge the aggregate role of downsizing in generating
changes in job stability and job security.
V. Conclusions
This introduction is intended to provide a road map to the individual papers included in
this volume. Although readers may draw somewhat different conclusions from the papers, I
believe that they point to a relatively broad and in many cases consistent set of facts regarding
changes in the employment relationship. Overall, my reading of the evidence is that the 1990's
have witnessed some changes in the employment relationship consistent with weakened bonds
between workers and firms. But the magnitudes of these changes–while sometimes suggesting
sharp breaks with the recent past–nonetheless indicate that while these bonds may have
weakened, they have not been broken. Furthermore, the changes that occurred in the 1990's have
not persisted long enough even to earn the label “trends.” This makes it at least as plausible,
based on what we know at this point, to conclude that these changes are the unique product of
changes in the corporate world in the 1990's, rather than longer-term developments that will
necessarily persist or accelerate in the near future. It is therefore premature to infer long-term
trends towards declines in long-term employment relationships, and even more so to infer
anything like the disappearance of long-term, secure jobs.
One shortfall in our knowledge, to which this volume has tried to make some initial

21

contributions, is the sources of changes in job stability and job security in the 1990's. The papers
addressing this question point to some potential explanations, including relative wage
movements, growth in alternative employment relationships, and downsizing. However, with the
possible exception of the first of these, this list does not encompass “fundamental” or exogenous
changes impacting the employment relationship, but rather to some extent suggests how various
changes in the employment relationship may reinforce each other. To the extent that we could
understand the structural changes underlying empirical observations on changes in job stability
and job security, we would be in a better position to make inferences or predictions regarding
future developments. In my view, this is one of the most fruitful frontiers for research on
changes in the employment relationship.
While this chapter provides a road map to the contributions made in the papers in this
volume, reading a map is not the same as taking the trip. It can convey the contours and present
a few key facts, but only the voyage can convey the full richness of the landscape. In addition to
gaining an appreciation of the rich and detailed analyses that each paper presents, I fully
anticipate that researchers interested in exploring the employment relationship will find in the
papers many interesting detours, side trips, and perhaps even a few unmarked highways that
invite further exploration and ultimately a better understanding of this complex topic.

22

References
Aaronson, Daniel, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1998. “The Decline of Job Security in the 1990s:
Displacement, Anxiety, and Their Effect on Wage Growth.” Economic Perspectives, 22(1): 1743.
Bansak, Cynthia, and Steven Raphael. 1998. “Have Employment Relationships in the United
States Become Less Stable?” University of California, San Diego, Department of Economics
Discussion Paper 98-15.
Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J. Duncan, and Timothy Smeeding. 1998. “The Shifting Incidence of
Involuntary Job Losses from 1968 to 1992.” Industrial Relations, 37(2), April: 207-31.
Cappelli, Peter. 1999. The New Deal at Work. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Cappelli, Peter, Laurie Bassi, Harry Katz, David Knoke, Paul Osterman, and Michael Useem.
1997. Change at Work. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark. 1999. “Do “High-Performance” Work Practices Improve
Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Michigan State University. Unpublished paper.
Cohany, Sharon R. 1998. “Workers in Alternative Employment Arrangements: A Second Look.”
Monthly Labor Review, November: 3-21.
Committee on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance. 1999. The Changing
Nature of Work: Implications for Occupational Analysis. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Diebold, Francis X., David Neumark, and Daniel Polsky. 1997. “Job Stability in the United
States.” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(2), April: 206-33.
Farber, Henry S. 1997a. “Trends in Long Term Employment in the United States, 1979-1996.”
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper, Princeton University.
________. 1997b. “The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States: 1981-1995.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1: 73-119.
________. 1998a. “Are Lifetime Jobs Disappearing? Job Duration in the United States: 19731993.” In John Haltiwanger, Marilyn Manser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor Statistics
Measurement Issues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
________. 1998b. “Has the Rate of Job Loss Increased in the Nineties?” IRRA Series,
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting, Volume 1: 88-98.
Farber, Henry S., and Kevin F. Hallock. 1999. “Have Employment Reductions Become Good
News for Shareholders? The Effect of Job Loss Announcements on Stock Prices, 1970-97.”
Princeton University. Unpublished paper.

Fitzgerald, John. 1999. “Job Instability and Earnings and Income Consequences: Evidence from
SIPP 1983-1995.” Bowdoin College. Unpublished paper.
Hipple, Steven. 1998. “Contingent Work: Results from the Second Survey.” Monthly Labor
Review, November: 22-35.
Juhn, Chinhui. 1992. “Decline of Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining
Market Opportunities.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 79-122.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35-78.
Kletzer, Lori G. 1994. “White Collar Job Displacement, 1983-1991.” University of California,
Santa Cruz. Unpublished paper.
Levenson, Alec R. 1996. “Recent Trends in Part-Time Employment.” Contemporary Economic
Policy, 14(1): 78-89.
Manski, Charles F., and John D. Straub. 1999. “Worker Perceptions of Job Insecurity in the Mid1990s: Evidence from the Survey of Economic Expectations.” NBER Working Paper No. 6908.
Marcotte, Dave E. 1995. “Declining Job Stability: What We Know and What It Means.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 14(4): 590-8.
________. 1996. “Has Job Stability Declined? Evidence from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics.” Center for Governmental Studies, Northern Illinois University. Unpublished paper.
Monks, James, and Steven Pizer. 1998. “Trends in Voluntary and Involuntary Turnover.”
Industrial Relations, 37(4), October: 440-59.
Neumark, David, and Daniel Polsky. 1998. “Changes in Job Stability and Job Security.” IRRA
Series, Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting, Volume 1: 78-87.
Polivka, Anne E. 1998. “Discussion.” IRRA Series, Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting,
Volume 1: 107-9.
Polivka, Anne E., and Steven Miller. 1998. “The CPS After the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens.” In John Haltiwanger, Marilyn Manser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor Statistics
Measurement Issues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Polsky, Daniel. 1999. “Changing Consequences of Job Separations in the United States.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(4): 565-80.
Rose, Stephen. 1995. “Declining Job Security and the Professionalization of Opportunity.”
Research Report 95-4, National Commission for Employment Policy.
Schmidt, Stefanie R., and Shirley V. Svorny. 1998. “Recent Trends in Job Security and
Stability.” Journal of Labor Research, 19(4): 647-68.

Segal, Lewis M., and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1997. “The Nature of Temporary Services
Employment: Evidence from State UI Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Unpublished
paper.
Valletta, Robert G. 1996. “Has Job Security in the U.S. Declined?” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Weekly Letter, 96(7), February 16.
________. 1999. “Recent Research on Job Stability and Security.” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Weekly Letter, 99(22), July 23.

Table 1: Summary of Findings, Studies Focusing Primarily on Job Stability
Author(s)

Main data set(s)

Sample period

Coverage

Outcomes

Findings

Jaeger and
Stevens

PSID

1976-1996

CPS Tenure and
Employee
Benefits
Supplements

1973-1996

Heads of
households, and
spouses, ages 2059, employed (not
self-employed)

Share of workers with
tenure < 18 months, share
with tenure < 10 years

Increased share with < 18 months of tenure, but only over early years,
not 1983-1996. Increased share with < 10 years of tenure beginning in
late 1980's. Patterns consistent across most education and age groups,
and races. No trend in share with < 10 years of tenure for women.
PSID and CPS used on consistent basis yield similar answers. Other
studies used PSID through 1988, in which share with low tenure
peaked.

Neumark,
Polsky,
and
Hansen

CPS Tenure and
Contingent Work
Supplements

1983, 1987,
1991, 1995,
and 1996

Employed
workers (nonagricultural, not
self-employed)

Four-year and eight-year
job retention rates

Four-year retention rates unchanged in early 1990's, eight-year
retention rates fell. Both rates declined among higher-tenure and older
workers, but these declines emerged only in 1990's. In 1990's,
declines among higher-tenure workers occurred for white men and for
blacks. Blacks also experienced decline in aggregate stability.
Decline in job stability in 1990's sharp for more-tenured
managerial/professional workers. Results robust to numerous
adjustments to CPS.

Bernhardt,
Morris,
Handcock,
and Scott

NLSYM

1966-1981

Two-year job separation
rates, wage changes

NLSY

1979-1994

Ages 14-38 (1422 in first waves,
30-38 in last
waves), nonHispanic whites,
employed (not
self-employed)

Substantially higher separation rate among NLSY cohort than earlier
NLSYM cohort. Finding arises across age, education, and tenure
groups. Wage returns to job changing have declined and become more
unequal for recent cohort.

Gottschalk
and Moffitt

SIPP

1983-1995

PSID

1981-1992

Male (married)
heads of
households in
PSID, all males
and females in
SIPP, ages 20-62,
employed

One-year and one-month
job separation rates,
involuntary job separations
and other classifications of
reason for separation,
characteristics of
separations, wage changes
upon job changes

One-year separation rates did not increase in SIPP or in PSID with
given sample restrictions, variable definitions, and sample period.
Involuntary separations in PSID increased, but only from the 1970's to
the 1980's; no increase post-1980. No trend increase in monthly
separation rates in SIPP; secular decline from mid-1980's to early
1990's. Little evidence that job endings were more likely to be
accompanied by spell of non-employment, but duration of nonemployment increased for less-educated. No downward drift in wage
gains associated with job changes.

Database of
consulting clients
(firms) of Watson
Wyatt Worldwide

1990-1997

Allen,
Clark, and
Schieber

All workers

Change in average tenure,
Average tenure rose over the 1990's, although not uniformly across
changes in percentages
firms. Percentages of workers with 10+ or 20+ years of tenure rose
with 10+ or 20+ years of
over the 1990's. Most of the lower retention rates associated with
tenure, five-year retention
downsizing firms relative to growing firms borne by junior workers.
rate
The table uses the following abbreviations: Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID); Current Population Survey (CPS); National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men (NLSYM);
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY); and Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).

Table 3: Summary of Findings, Studies Focusing Primarily on Job Security
Author(s)

Main data set(s)

Sample period

Coverage

Outcomes

Findings

Valletta

PSID

1976-1992

Workers (not
self-employed),
ages 21-64

Dismissals (permanent
layoffs and firings), quits,
and general turnover

For men, although tenure is negatively associated with dismissal,
significant upward time trend in probability of dismissal, stemming
from upward trend for high-tenure workers. Negative effect of tenure
on dismissals reduced in declining sectors (but no consistent trend
towards greater probability of dismissal of high-tenure workers in
declining sectors). Downward trend in probability of quit for lowtenure workers and upward trend for high-tenure workers. Similar
results for skilled white-collar women.

Stewart

CPS (March)

1967-1997

Men and women
ages 19+, 1-40
years of potential
experience,
worked (not selfemployed) at least
one week in
previous year

Employment-tounemployment transitions
(worked in previous year
and unemployed in
March), as proxy for job
loss

Rate of job loss was higher in the 1980's than in the 1970's, but did not
increase in the 1990's. Also holds for men in all education groups, for
less-educated women, and for all experience groups. For most groups,
job loss during the 1990 recession was lower than during the more
severe 1982 recession. But for some groups–usually more insulated
from recessions–1990 recession was as severe, including collegeeducated men, men with 21 or more years of experience, and whitecollar workers.

Schmidt

GSS

1977-1996

Men and women
ages 18+,
employed fulltime or part-time
in survey week

Perceived likelihood of job Workers in 1990's were more pessimistic about involuntary job loss
loss or layoff in next 12
and costly job loss than in earlier periods. This is apparent in
months (fear of job loss),
comparison of economic recovery years 1993-1996 to late 1980's, with
and interaction of this with similarly low unemployment, and in comparison of recession years
perceived difficulty of
1990-1991 to 1982-1983. These perceptions are broadly consistent
finding job with about the
with patterns of actual job loss in DWS, overall and for many
same income and fringe
demographic subgroups.
benefits (fear of costly job
loss)
The table uses the following abbreviations not already defined in the notes to Table 1: General Social Survey (GSS); and Displaced Workers Survey (DWS).

Table 5: Summary of Findings, Studies of Sources of Changes or Variation in the Employment Relationship
Author(s)

Main data set(s)

Sample period

Coverage

Question studied

Findings

Levenson

CPS (March)

1964-1996
(changes
studied from
1971-73 to
1988-90)

Prime-age
men and
women, ages
25-59

Do increased rates of
voluntary and
involuntary part-time
employment and
temporary employment
partly reflect labor
supply responses to
changes in wages?

Involuntary part-time employment has grown faster for low-skill men
and women than for high-skill men and women, as have voluntary
part-time employment and temporary employment among men.
Relative increase in involuntary part-time employment for low-skill
workers is partly a voluntary labor supply response to lower wages
for men, but not women. A labor supply response can only explain a
small amount of the increase in temporary employment among lowskill men and women. Thus, not all growth in these alternative
employment arrangements should be interpreted as “forced” on
workers who would otherwise (at the same wage) prefer full-time,
permanent jobs.

Farber

Matched DWS and CPS
Contingent Work
Supplements

1994-1997

Individuals
ages 20-64 in
DWS files,
employed at
time of
survey

Are job losers more
likely to become
employed under flexible
staffing arrangements?
Are these flexible
arrangements
“permanent,” or used as
bridge jobs?

Job losers are more likely to be in temporary jobs and in involuntary
part-time jobs than otherwise similar workers who have not lost their
jobs. But these relationships weaken with time since job loss,
suggesting that these alternative work arrangements are part of a
transition to regular, full-time employment. Workers in temporary
jobs appear to be of two types: job losers in transition to full-time
jobs; and non-job-losers working voluntarily part-time, for whom
temporary jobs may represent a desired arrangement.

Houseman
and
Polivka

CPS Contingent Work
Supplements

1995, 1997

All workers

Match between CPS
Contingent Work
Supplement and monthly
CPS files

1995-1996

Do workers in flexible
staffing arrangements
(temporary, on-call,
contract, and part-time
work) have less stable
jobs? Can growth in
flexible staffing
arrangements account
for changes in job
stability?

Workers in most flexible staffing arrangements (especially agency
temps, on-call workers, direct-hire temps, and contract workers) are
less likely to remain in their jobs for one year than workers in fulltime arrangements. Simulations based on applying these crosssection results to the growth in temporary help agency employment
from 1986 to 1996 suggest that growth in flexible staffing
arrangements could explain a substantial share (30 percent or more)
of the modest increase in employer switching in this decade.

EQW National
Employers Survey

1994, 1997

Sample of
private
establishments with
more than 20
employees

What establishmentspecific factors are
associated with
downsizing, and what
are the consequences of
downsizing?

Downsizing defined as cuts in employment by firms operating at or
above capacity. Downsizing is related to both management practices
and variables reflecting factor prices (such as unionization), but not
always in the expected direction. Factors explaining downsizing are
not much different from those explaining overall job losses, and
overall job reductions are not driven mainly by demand shortfalls.
Downsizing is associated with cuts in both sales per employee and
labor costs per employee, possibly mitigating overall performance
effects.

Cappelli

The table uses the following abbreviations not already defined in the notes to Tables 1-3: National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce (EQW).

Table 2: Attempts at Reconciling Evidence and Establishing Consistent Results on Job Stability
Author(s)

Studies addressed

Findings

Jaeger and
Stevens

PSID studies (Marcotte, 1996; Rose, 1995; Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1994)
reporting reductions in one-year retention rates from the 1970's to the 1980's, and
in the 1980's.

Some of the increase is in the 1980's is due to changes in survey questions
regarding job and position changing, and failure to account for heaping.
Some is due to sample periods ending in late 1980's, when probability of
having tenure of one year or less peaked. Some is also due to restriction to
younger workers.

Polsky (1999) PSID study reporting no increase in turnover through 1991.

Consistent evidence.

CPS studies (Diebold, Neumark, and Polsky, 1997; Farber, 1998a) finding little
decrease in job stability from 1970's to 1980's.

Upward trends in instability for some groups may be masked in the CPS
because of question changes prior to 1983.

Neumark, Polsky, and Hansen (this volume) finding decreased job retention rates
in 1990's using CPS data.

Consistent evidence.

Monks and Pizer (1998) and Bernhardt, et al. (this volume) finding increased job
separation rate from 1966-1981 to 1979-1994 using NLSYM and NLSY cohorts.

PSID data also show increase in fraction of young men with low tenure
from 1976 through 1988.

Neumark,
Polsky,
and
Hansen

Cappelli, et al. (1997) reporting largely anecdotal evidence that 1990's witnessed
organizational restructuring, including streamlined managerial structures.

Consistent evidence from representative samples of declines in job stability
for more-tenured managerial/professional workers in 1990's.

Farber (1997a) using CPS tenure supplements reporting declining proportions of
male workers with 10 or more or 20 or more years of tenure, especially after 1993;
Jaeger and Stevens (this volume) finding increase in fraction of male workers aged
30 or older with fewer than 10 years of tenure in the 1990's.

Consistent evidence.

Bernhardt,
Morris,
Handcock,
and Scott

Monks and Pizer (1998) reporting declines in two-year retention rates between the
NLSYM and NLSY cohorts.

Confirmed, with if anything a larger rise in instability.

Gottschalk Jaeger and Stevens (this volume) findings on separation rates using CPS and PSID
and Moffitt as cross-sectional data sets.
For definitions of abbreviations, see notes to other tables.

Confirmed using PSID as longitudinal data set. Separation rates shift, but
time-series pattern (no upward trend) persists.

Table 4: Attempts at Reconciling Evidence and Establishing Consistent Results on Job Security
Author(s)

Studies addressed

Findings

Gottschalk
and Moffitt

Boisjoly, et al. (1998) PSID results showing that involuntary terminations rose
over the 1970's and 1980's.

Results driven by increases from 1970's to 1980's, but not increases in the
1980's.

Stewart

Farber (1997b) DWS study concluding that rate of job loss increased from 19911993 to 1993-1995 period.

Omitting the potentially troublesome category of job loss in the DWS for
“other” reasons, job loss rate in March CPS data (employment-tounemployment rate) falls from 1991-1993 to 1993-1995, while job loss
rate in DWS data remains constant (despite economic recovery).
Concludes that the job loss rate actually did decline, but that changes in
questions in 1996 DWS (covering 1993-1995) resulted in more job leavers
being classified as job losers than in earlier years.

Boisjoly, et al. (1998) PSID results showing that involuntary terminations rose
over the 1970's and 1980's.

Job security declined over the early 1970's, but from mid-1970's through
the mid-to-late 1990's, there has been little change.

Monks and Pizer (1998) reporting increase in rate of job loss between the NLSYM
and NLSY cohorts.

CPS data show increased job loss rates for those with at most a high school
education, but (in contrast to Monks and Pizer) not for those with some
college or college graduates. Suggests that contrast between the two data
sets unlikely to be due to differences in survey between NLSYM and
NLSY, since this would generate contrasting results across all schooling
groups.

For definitions of abbreviations, see notes to other tables.

Notes
1. I do not review the previous literature except in cases where its
findings are directly addressed in the present papers. For reviews
of that literature see Schmidt and Svorny (1998), Marcotte (1995),
and Diebold, et al. (1997). For broader reviews of workplace
changes extending well beyond job stability and job security, see
Cappelli, et al. (1997), Cappelli (1999), and Committee on
Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Resources (1999). For
a brief overview of a subset of the papers included in this volume,
see Valletta (1999).
2. This emphasizes a more general issue in this research, namely that we do not have sufficient
data to observe changes over time in full distributions of completed tenure spells for jobs
beginning at different points of time. Rather, we have to choose particular metrics that
potentially obscure some of the details regarding changes in these distributions.
3. Jaeger and Stevens present results that address the issue of changing participation in another
way, by comparing employment-based and population-based measures.
4. In research released after the earlier versions of this paper, but apparently done concurrently,
Bansak and Raphael (1998) and Fitzgerald (1999) reach the similar conclusion that the SIPP data
do not provide evidence of a decline in job stability.
5. To the best of my knowledge, this distinction was introduced into the recent debate by Valletta
(1996).
6. This hypothesis was suggested in Neumark and Polsky (1998). See Kletzer (1994) for a
review of evidence on the changing incidence of displacement for white-collar workers in the
early 1990's.
7. Greenspan stated in testimony before the U.S. House Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs, on February 26, 1997 that “atypical restraint on compensation increases has been
evident for a few years now and appears to be mainly the consequence of greater worker
insecurity.” See also Aaronson and Sullivan (1998).
8. For another recent attempt to study workers perceptions of job security and likely outcomes in
the event of job loss (using the Survey of Economic Expectations, or SEE), see Manski and
Straub (1999). This paper takes some steps in the direction of deriving theoretical predictions for
patterns of these perceptions/expectations in the data.
9. They also report some suggestive evidence, based on CPS data discussed below, that workers
are sometimes moved from “regular permanent positions” into flexible arrangements.
10. This definition contrasts with much existing work equating downsizing with employment
reductions, including Allen, et al. (this volume), Farber and Hallock (1999), and the annual
survey of the American Management Association’s “AMA Survey on Downsizing, Job
Elimination and Job Creation.”

11. This parallels findings in Cappelli and Neumark (1999) that introduction of innovative work
practices appears to move labor costs per worker and productivity in the same direction– positive
in this case.
12. In a recent study of this issue, Farber and Hallock (1999) report that the magnitude of
negative effects of reductions in force on stock prices has declined over time, suggesting that
more recent reductions in force have focused on improvements in efficiency (downsizing?) rather
than reductions in product demand.

