             TAX AVOIDANCE, EVASION, AND ADMINISTRATION




                                  Joel Slemrod
                            The University of Michigan



                                Shlomo Yitzhaki
                        The Hebrew University of Jerusalem




                                 November 5, 1999




Forthcoming in the Handbook of Public Economics, edited by Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein. We are grateful to Wojciech Kopczuk for valuable research assistance.
Helpful comments on an earlier draft were received from Jim Alm, Alan Auerbach, Len
Burman, Brian Erard, Firouz Gahvari, Roger Gordon, Jim Hines, Jonathan Kesselman,
Louis Kaplow, Agnar Sandmo, Dan Shaviro, Eric Toder, Gideon Yaniv and the
participants at the NYU Law School Colloquium on Tax Policy and Public Finance.
                           Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration

                                  Joel Slemrod and Shlomo Yitzhaki



1.       INTRODUCTION

1.a.     Why Avoidance, Evasion and Administration are Central, Not
         Peripheral, Concepts in Public Finance

         Most economic analysis of taxation presumes that tax liability can be ascertained

and collected costlessly. As a description of reality, this is patently untrue. For example,

in the U.S. the Internal Revenue Service (henceforth IRS) estimates that about 17% of

income tax liability is not paid;1 the figure for most other countries is probably higher.

Furthermore, the resource cost of collecting what is paid can be large, in the U.S.

probably about 10% of tax collections.2 The tax structures themselves are undoubtedly

skewed by the realities of tax evasion, avoidance, and administrative costs.

         The standard models of taxation and their conclusions, need to be modified in the

light of these realities. Many practitioners of tax advice believe that this change in

emphasis is essential; for example, Casanegra de Jantscher (1990, p. 179) goes so far as

to say that, in developing countries, "tax administration is tax policy."3 Bird (1983),

Mansfield (1988), and Tanzi and Pellechio (1996) are useful summaries of the practical

problems of the interaction of tax policy and tax administration.




1
  Internal Revenue Service (1996).
2
  Slemrod (1996a).
3
  Others disagree. Groves (1974, p. 25) offers that
          "Vetoing tax measures because of the difficulty of administering them is in most cases
          less compelling than doing so on the ground of their failure to conform to acceptable
          principles. Administration is usually amenable to improvement where violation of first
          principles is not. And administration of a given tax may often be improved most
          effectively in the process of attempting to administer it. The point is sometimes crucial in
          recommending taxes for so-called underdeveloped economies in our own time."
1.b.     The Evolution of Tax Structures

         Scholars of the historical evolution of tax structure, notably Hinrichs (1966) and

Musgrave (1969), have also stressed the importance of tax administration issues. They

note that modern tax structure development has generally been characterized by a shift

from excise, customs, and property taxes to corporate income and progressive individual

income taxes.4 This shift has been made possible by the expansion of the market sector

and relative decline of the rural sector, the concentration of employment in larger

establishments, and the growing literacy of the population. Further changes in the

technology of tax administration, including globalization and financial innovation, may

now be pushing us away from progressive income taxes toward tax systems that rely

more on broad-based consumption taxes such as the value-added tax (VAT), flatter rate

structures for income taxation, or the "dual income tax" system recently adopted by

certain Scandinavian countries, and described in Sorensen (1994).

         Alt’s (1983) treatment of the evolution of tax structure stresses the role of

administrative and compliance costs. He argues that it has become increasingly easy to

collect taxes from organized business rather than from households, and that one

explanation for the widespread adoption of the VAT is that it imposes compliance costs

without raising administrative costs, through incentives for self-policing. Kau and Rubin

(1981) focus on changes in the cost of collecting taxes, and successfully relate growth of

the U.S. federal government to reasonable correlates of collection cost, such as the

literacy rate, the extent of female labor force participation, and the extent of the




4
  Although Hinrichs (1966) points out that tax structure development began with direct taxes rather than
indirect taxes.

                                                     2
agricultural sector. Balke and Gardner (1991) contend that declining marginal collection

costs can explain the stepwise growth in the size of government and the changes of

taxation observed in the U.S. and U.K. They argue that major wars coincide with

permanent improvements in tax instruments and tax collection technology, which

facilitated permanent expansions in government size thereafter.

        Putting aside the role of administrative issues in explaining the evolution of tax

levels and tax structures, it is indisputable that these considerations are critical

determinants of tax policy at a point in time. For example, an important set of generic

aspects of income tax structure, such as the absence of taxation of imputed rents from

consumer durables, taxation of capital gains (if at all) on a realization basis, and pre-set

depreciation schedules, are undoubtedly largely driven by practical concerns of

administerability. For these reasons, we believe that consideration of evasion, avoidance,

and administration is essential to the positive and normative analysis of taxation. Our

view corresponds closely to that of Blough (1952, p. 146):

             It is tax policy in action, not simply the wording of the statute, that
             determines how much the taxpayer must pay, and the effects of the
             payment. Knowledge of the statute is only a start in knowing a tax
             system. The interpretations placed on language by administrators
             and courts, the simplicity and understandability of tax forms, the
             competence and completeness of audit, the vigor and impartiality
             of enforcement, and the promptness and finality of action all
             influence the amount of revenue collected, the distribution of the
             tax load, and the economic effects of the tax.


    In this chapter we organize, explicate, and evaluate the modern literature that

incorporates these considerations into the economics of taxation.5 We do not claim to


5
  Other surveys of these issues include Cowell (1990b), Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998), Roth,
Scholz, and Witte (1989), and Alm (1999). Because of space constraints we have omitted any discussion of
the role of tax practitioners, corruption in tax administration, tax amnesties, or business tax evasion.

                                                   3
have put together a comprehensive survey of this literature, which is huge and multi-

faceted, rather a guide to what we feel are the most important issues and contributions in

this area.


1.c.      Evasion, Avoidance, and Real Substitution Response

          We begin with some definitions. The classic distinction between avoidance and

evasion is due to Oliver Wendell Holmes, who wrote

             "When the law draws a line, a case is on one side of it or the other,
             and if on the safe side is none the worse legally that a party has
             availed himself to the full of what the law permits. When an act is
             condemned as evasion, what is meant is that it is on the wrong side
             of the line..." (Bullen v. Wisconsin (1916), 240. U.S. 625 at p.
             630).

          Thus, the distinguishing characteristic of evasion is illegality.6 In practice, of

course, there are many gray areas where the dividing line is not clear, and sometimes the

tax authorities may inappropriately characterize particular cases.

          One can draw a further distinction within the class of legal responses to taxation.

At times we will refer to real substitution responses, or real responses for short, as those

responses which come about because the tax law changes the relative price of different

activities, and that induce taxpayers to respond by choosing a different consumption

basket.

          Conceptually distinct from real substitution responses are efforts to reduce one’s

tax liability without altering one’s consumption basket, which we will refer to as

avoidance. These are actions taken in response to the tax system that do not involve shifts


6
  Kay (1980, p. 136) offers a different pair of definitions for evasion and avoidance: "Evasion is concerned
with concealing or misrepresenting the nature of a transaction; when avoidance takes place the facts of the
transaction are admitted but they have been arranged in such a way that the resulting tax treatment differs
from that intended by the relevant legislation."

                                                     4
along a given budget set. This definition covers a broad range of behaviors. One

example is to pay a tax professional to alert one to the tax deductibility of activities

already undertaken. Another example is to change the legal form of a given behavior,

such as reorganizing a business from a C corporation to an S corporation,7

recharacterizing ordinary income as capital gain, or renaming a consumer loan as a home

equity loan. A third example is tax arbitrage, when economically equivalent, but

differentially-taxed, positions are held simultaneously long and short, producing tax

savings. Finally, retiming a transaction to alter the tax year it falls under is an example of

avoidance.

         Fine distinction among the types of behavioral response to taxation is not possible

and is for many issues not crucial. In general, changes in the tax structure will induce all

the different kinds of response. Indeed, one of the goals of this chapter is to emphasize

the common analytical aspects of issues that have traditionally been kept distinct.


1.d.     General Framework

         Although there may be reasons, discussed later, for distinguishing among these

categories of response to taxation, there is a common framework for analyzing these

issues. Given the structure of the tax system and enforcement process, taxpayers are

faced with opportunities to reduce their tax payments, or expected tax payments. There is

a private cost to taking advantage of these opportunities, which may take the form of an

altered consumption basket, an increasing probability of detection of, and penalty for,

evasion, and/or a real resource cost of effecting avoidance or concealing evasion. This


7
 Under U. S. tax law an S Corporation retains the legal characteristics of a corporation, but is taxed as a
pass-through entity such as a partnership. There are restrictions to becoming an S corporation, most notably
on the maximum number of shareholders.

                                                     5
private cost depends on policies of the government that include, but are not limited to, the

setting of tax rates and bases. The parameters of the tax administration and enforcement

policies also matter, but these policies themselves are usually costly.

         The tax system establishes the relative prices among this broad set of taxpayer

activities. In the standard model, it establishes the relative price of leisure and other

goods, as well as the relative price among the set of goods. In a more general framework

it also sets the price of "honesty," meaning the incentives to evade, and establishes the

cost and reward to legally reducing taxes via avoidance activities. The dimensions of

taxpayer response interact. For example, real behavior may alter the cost of avoidance or

evasion, thus changing the effective prices of real activities.

         Although these are common themes, the literature to date has tended to isolate

pieces of the overall problem. We follow that practice here, by beginning in Section 2

with a discussion of the now standard economic model of tax evasion.8 Then in Section 3

we introduce models that apply more generally to both evasion and avoidance. We then

look at the empirical evidence, first in Section 4 about evasion, and then in Section 5 on

avoidance. The remainder of the chapter addresses the implication for tax analysis of

introducing these issues. Section 6 examines the fundamental issues of positive tax

analysis, while Section 7 addresses normative issues. Section 8 concludes.




8
  There is a vast literature which investigates non-economic perspectives on tax evasion. We do not have
the space to discuss or evaluate this literature, and refer the interested reader to Roth, Scholz, and Witte
(1989).

                                                      6
2.      THEORETICAL MODELS OF EVASION

2.a.    The Allingham-Sandmo-Yitzhaki Model

        Suppose that the true tax base is known to the taxpayer, but is not costlessly

observable by the tax collection agency. Then, under certain circumstances, the taxpayer

may be tempted to report a taxable income below the true value. In the seminal

formulation of Allingham and Sandmo (henceforth A-S) (1972),9 what might deter an

individual from income tax evasion is a fixed probability (p) that any taxable income

understatement will be detected and subjected to a proportional penalty (θ) over and

above payment of the true tax liability itself. Later we introduce and discuss at length a

"technology of evasion," in which evasion involves costs to the evader that might depend

on the income and the amount of tax evaded.

        In the A-S model, all real decisions, and therefore taxable income (y), are held

fixed; only the taxpayer’s report is chosen. The risk-averse taxpayer chooses a report (x),

and thus an amount of unreported income y-x, in order to maximize expected utility:


(1)     EU = (1 - p)U(ν + t(y - x)) + pU(ν - θ(y - x)),


where ν is true after-tax income, y(1 - t), t being the rate of (proportional) income tax.

The von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function U(⋅) represents the individual’s

preferences toward risk. In this model the choice of whether and how much to evade is

akin to a choice of whether and how much to gamble. Each dollar of taxable income

understatement offers a payoff of t with probability (1-p), along with a penalty of θ with


9
 The Allingham-Sandmo paper applies to tax evasion the approach of the classic paper on the economics of
crime by Becker (1968).

                                                   7
probability p. If and only if the expected payoff to this gamble, (1 - p)t-pθ, is positive,

every risk-averse taxpayer will chance some evasion, with the amount depending on the

expected payoff and the taxpayer’s risk preferences.

         A critical issue, pointed out by Yitzhaki (1974), is whether the penalty for

discovered evasion depends on the income understatement, as A-S assume, or on the tax

understatement, as more accurately reflects practice in many countries. In the latter case,

the maximand becomes (1 - p)U(ν + t(y - x)) + pU(ν - θt(y - x)), and the expected payoff

per dollar of evaded income becomes (1 - p)t - pθt. This is an important change, because

it means that the tax rate has no effect on the terms of the tax evasion gamble; as t rises,

the reward from a successful understatement of a dollar rises, but the cost of a detected

understatement rises proportionately. The first-order condition for optimal evasion

becomes

        U' ( y A )       (1 − p)
(2)                  =           ,
        U' (y U )          pθ

where yA and y U refer to net income in the audited and unaudited states of the world,

respectively. Note that t does not appear in equation (2), other than via an income effect

in the definition of yA and y U . Compare this to the original A-S formulation, where t

would be a multiplicative factor in the denominator of the right-hand side, implying that

increases in t would proportionally increase the reward to getting away with understating

income, but not proportionally increase the penalty, making evasion more attractive.

      Regardless of whether the penalty depends on the tax understatement or income

understatement, more risk-averse individuals will, ceteris paribus, evade less.

Individuals with higher income will evade more as long as absolute risk aversion is


                                              8
decreasing; whether higher-income individuals will evade more, as a fraction of income,

depends on relative risk aversion. Evasion relative to income will decrease, increase or

stay unchanged as a fraction of income depending on whether relative risk aversion is an

increasing, decreasing, or constant function of income. Increases in either p or θ will

decrease evasion.

         Increasing t has both an income effect and, possibly, a substitution effect. If the

taxpayer has decreasing absolute risk aversion, the income decline makes a less risky

position optimal. An increase in t has a substitution effect, increasing the relative price of

consumption in the audited state of the world, and thereby encouraging evasion, if the

penalty is related to income, rather than tax avoided. In the latter case, if the penalty is

related to the tax evaded, a tax increase has no substitution effect, so that an increase in t

reduces evasion as long as there is decreasing relative risk aversion.10

         This simple version of the A-S model has been criticized on the grounds that it

fails a simple reality check. If p is the fraction of returns audited in the U.S., about 0.015,

and θ is the statutory penalty for non-criminal evasion, about 0.2, then based on the

degree of risk aversion exhibited in other situations people should be evading a lot more

than they apparently do. The intriguing question becomes why people pay taxes rather

than why people evade. Much subsequent research, some of it surveyed below, has been

addressed to reconciling the facts with the theory.


10
   Note the similarity to the standard model of the effect of taxation on the optimal portfolio, in which a tax
increase can increase the demand for the risky asset (Domar and Musgrave, 1944 ). One difference is that,
in a portfolio model, it is arguably inappropriate to ignore the effect of the tax scheme on the variability of
government revenues (Gordon and Wilson, 1989). This issue can be sidestepped in the context of a tax
evasion model, because the "risks" are independent and therefore there is no social risk involved.
It is important to distinguish the effect of a change in the environment on evaded income (y - x) versus the
impact on evaded tax liability, t(y - x). With respect to changes in p and θ, there will be no interesting
distinction. However, when t increases it is certainly possible that (y - x) may decline at the same time t(y -
x) increases.

                                                       9
        In the A-S model what limits the amount of evasion attempted is the taxpayer’s

risk aversion. At some point further evasion becomes just too big a gamble, so that at the

chosen amount of evasion the marginal gain in expected tax savings is exactly offset by

the marginal disutility of the extra risk taken on.11 The model also predicts that a risk-

neutral individual would either remit no tax at all, or do no evasion, depending on

whether evasion has a positive expected payoff. This "either-or" prediction is eliminated

if the probability of detection is an increasing function of the amount of evasion, which is

likely to characterize most tax systems. The implications of introducing an endogenous p

depend on the precise relationship between p and evasion. For example, consider the

case (discussed in Yitzhaki (1987)) where p is an increasing function of evaded income

(y - x). The risk-neutral taxpayer chooses x to maximize expected income,


(3)     EY = ((1-p[y - x])(ν + s) + p[y - x](ν - θs)),


where s ≡ t(y - x) is understated tax. If p' ≡ ∂p / ∂( y − x ) is positive, the first-order

condition becomes


(4)     1 − p − pθ = p' (θ + 1)(s / t ) .

In this case, evasion will be constrained by the fact that p increases to offset what would

otherwise be an increase in expected income.

        The either-or prediction in the case of a risk-neutral taxpayer is also eliminated if

there are distinct sources of income, each of which is subject to its own p. For example,




11
  In the language of Kolm (1973), the evasion is accomplished by "the mere stroke of a pen." We consider
below where the evasion is facilitated by supplying labor to an "underground" sector which offers better
concealment possibilities.

                                                  10
employee labor income has a high p (due to information reporting by employers and

computer matching), while "moonlighting" income has a much lower p. Faced with this

situation, a risk-neutral individual reports all or none of each of the several sources of

income, but may certainly report a fraction of total income.12

            The endogenous probability of detection can of course be applied to the case of a

risk-averse taxpayer. In this case, at the margin the gain in expected value is offset by a

combination of increased risk-bearing and an increased probability of detection. Cremer

and Gahvari (1994) generalize this notion by introducing what they call a "concealment

technology," which in our notation takes the form p(y - x,                  ((y − x )/ y ), m ) where m
represents taxpayer expenditure on concealment. The notion that the probability of

detection can be increased by the taxpayer's expenditure is also present in Usher (1986),

Kaplow (1990), Cowell (1990), and Mayshar (1991).


2.b.        Jointness With Labor Supply

            Of particular interest is the relationship between the tax report decision and other

consumer decisions. Most attention has been paid to labor supply, where the individual

chooses how much labor to supply and how much labor income to report. The decision

about how much income to report is made simultaneously with the decision of how much

to work, so that it is impossible to adjust labor supply based on whether one is caught

evading. This problem may be posed as how much of a homogeneous labor income to

report, which is equivalent to simultaneously choosing one's consumption basket and




12
     As discussed in the next section, differential detection rates could also affect the sectoral supply of labor.

                                                         11
exposure to risk.13 Models that belong to this group are based on extensions of the A-S

model. Alternatively, the problem may be posed in the context of a model of the

underground economy, in which there are two sectors with possibly different equilibrium

wage rates and other different circumstances. The latter class of models allows for wage

adjustment in response to policy changes, and thus are general equilibrium in nature.

         In the extensions of the A-S model, the first-order condition for labor supply

differs from that in a model without tax evasion only in that it contains mean marginal,

instead of marginal, utilities. Whether mean marginal utility is bigger or smaller than the

marginal utility depends on the sign of the second derivative of marginal utility, which is

the sign of the third derivative of the utility function. On top of that, if utility is non-

separable, the marginal utility functions depend on the sign of cross-derivatives, which

further complicates the problem.14 Baldry (1979) and Pencavel (1979) stress the

difficulty of reaching any clear-cut comparative statics conclusions from such a model;

the response of reported income to changes in tax rates, penalties, and fines becomes

ambiguous. Thus, most models are based on particular restrictive assumptions about the

utility function. For example, if the utility function is separable in consumption and

leisure, then the marginal utility of leisure is independent of consumption. If, in addition,

the marginal utility of consumption is linear (as in the function

U(C, L ) = α + βC + γC 2 + δL ), the first-order condition for optimal labor supply is


(5)      (1 − t ) wU 1 [ wL + (1 − pθ)s] = U 2 [L],


13
   Models of this type resemble models of choice among risky occupations (e.g., Kanbur, 1979), except that
in the latter the occupational choice is usually discrete, so that a "diversified" occupational portfolio is not
allowed.
14
   Moreover, the conditions that the equilibrium investigated is on the increasing portion of the Laffer curve
also depend on the curvature of the third derivative of the utility function, further complicating the issue.

                                                      12
where s is the tax evaded and (1-pθ)s is the expected gain from evasion. Because evasion

increases expected consumption for any given amount of leisure without changing the

real wage, leisure would increase, and labor supply would decline. The real wage does

not decline because the evasion opportunities are independent of the amount of work

done. The critical importance of the relationship between the real consumption choices

and the evasion or avoidance opportunities comes up again in the more general models

discussed in Section 3. There we discuss cases where the avoidance opportunities do

affect the real wage. In situations where labor income in the formal sector is reported by

the employer to the tax enforcement agency as a matter of course, the only way to evade

tax may be by "moonlighting"-- working extra hours at a different job -- or by switching

completely to the informal sector or "underground economy."


2.c.    Other Uncertainty

        The basic model can also be extended to deal with other sources of uncertainty.

Andreoni (1992) introduces a temporal nature to the tax evasion decision, recognizing the

fact that the penalty for tax evasion, if detected, is assessed later than the tax saving.

Andreoni deviates from the majority of the literature which assumes efficient market

environments, and instead assumes that the taxpayer is constrained by credit rationing.

Due to uncertainty, the income of the taxpayer fluctuates, as does the shadow price of

income. Provided that non-monetary punishments are high enough to deter one from

non-repayment of penalties and tax evaded, evasion may be viewed as a way of

"borrowing" from the IRS. A constrained taxpayer may find it optimal to borrow when

the shadow price of money is high enough during evasion and relatively low during



                                              13
repayment.15 Andreoni models a situation where, in bad times, individuals evade as a

way to smooth income streams; thus the IRS is a "loan shark." The conditional

repayment of the loan occurs in a better state of the world.

         Another aspect of uncertainty concerns the unpredictability of the tax liability

itself, which arises when the "correct" tax liability is not clearly defined.16 Uncertainty

of true tax liability can be modeled by extending the Allingham and Sandmo framework.

Scotchmer and Slemrod (1989) construct a model where, upon audit, the assessed tax

liability is symmetrically centered around a known value with an equal probability of one-

half. In this case the very concept of income understatement becomes problematic

because the taxpayer is uncertain whether any given income declaration is correct or not.

         There are now three possible outcomes that the taxpayer must consider. If the

return is not audited (with probability 1 - p), true taxable income is irrelevant--the

taxpayer merely pays the tax due on his declared taxable income. If the return is audited,

there are two possible outcomes, depending on what the assessed tax liability turns out to

be. Scotchmer and Slemrod (1989) show that increasing the dispersion of possible

assessed taxable incomes induces increased compliance, given weak conditions about the

taxpayer’s attitudes toward risk. The intuition is that, for a given reported income, more

dispersion lowers income in the least desirable state of the world, when the taxpayer is

audited and his taxable income is determined to be the highest possible value. This

increases the marginal utility of income in that state of the world, which is accomplished


15
   In this case the government may find it optimal to encourage tax evasion. The optimality of such a policy
depends crucially on the non-existence of alternative methods of borrowing, including negotiated payment
terms with the IRS, which can in some situations be arranged in the U.S.
16
   Long (1981) argues that the IRS exploits the unpredictability of tax liability to enhance its powers by
using it as a license to decide cases in whatever way serves the government’s interest at the time. She also
notes that unpredictability makes the IRS’s burden in providing criminal intent (rather than inadvertent
errors) more difficult.

                                                    14
by increasing reported income and thus subjecting oneself to a lower penalty in the event

this state of the world occurs. As long as the taxpayer exhibits declining absolute risk

aversion, increasing the report is the optimal response.

       Beck and Jung (1987a) show that this conclusion may not hold when there is a

continuous range of possible taxable income assessments. In this case one marginal

benefit of increasing the income report is that it reduces the probability that a fine will be

assessed. For a taxpayer reporting income below the mean of possible assessment, an

increased dispersion of possible assessed incomes decreases the likelihood that the

income report will be declared insufficient and a fine assessed, so that this component of

marginal benefit is reduced. Thus, it is theoretically possible that increased dispersion

will cause a lower report.

       Note that uncertainty does not reduce tax evasion by as much as it reduces

aggregate noncompliance in the sense of true aggregate tax liability minus tax paid. This

is because one effect of uncertainty is to induce some taxpayers to pay more tax than they

are legally obligated to pay, which reduces aggregate noncompliance but not the amount

of individual tax evasion.

       Scotchmer (1989) allows for the possibility that, by expending resources, the

taxpayer can reduce the uncertainty of tax liability. The resources can be in the form of

research by the taxpayer himself, or in the form of professional assistance hired. In this

case the cost of unpredictability includes not only the disutility caused by uncertain tax

liability but also the resources expended to reduce the uncertainty.




                                              15
2.d.   General Equilibrium Considerations


       The A-S model and its direct descendants address only the demand for tax evasion

by (potential) taxpayers. One might also consider the "supply" of evasion, and ponder the

general equilibrium considerations of demand having to equal supply.

   One context for this extension is the underground economy. Kesselman (1989)

develops a set of models in which there are two sectors -- above-ground and

underground--which produce two distinct goods. Workers are homogeneous in their

gross productivity in each sector of the economy (and in their consumption preferences),

but must work only in one sector or the other. The workers, though, have differential

distaste and risk aversion for tax evasion, and differential efficiency in concealment and

other skills needed to operate successfully in the underground economy.

       Although the precise results are model-dependent, three general conclusions

obtain: (i) much of the gain from evasion may be shifted from the evaders to the

consumers of output through lower prices, and the "marginal" evader gains nothing; (ii)

relative price effects tend to dampen the impact of tax rate changes on the extent of

evasion, and (iii) the effects of evasion on the marginal revenue response to tax rate

changes will depend on consumers’ elasticity of substitution between the sectoral outputs.

       A key aspect of the foregoing model is that the act of tax evasion is tightly tied to

the production of a distinct good. This need not be true, as is indicated by the

simultaneous presence of above-ground and underground housepainters, repair people,

and so on. Still, there is certainly evidence that evasion is concentrated in particular

sectors, such as those that supply services directly to homeowners, because of the small


                                             16
scale of production that can aid concealment and the lesser need for receipts compared to

services provided to businesses.


3.          GENERAL MODELS OF AVOIDANCE AND EVASION

            Because Allingham and Sandmo addressed tax evasion as a gamble, much of the

subsequent literature focused on models in which taxpayers' risk aversion, and therefore

higher-order characteristics of utility functions, played an important role. This focus has

to some extent obscured other important aspects of the issue, such as the tax concealment

technology, and also obscured the common aspects of evasion and what we have called

avoidance. To highlight these issues we turn now to more general models of behavioral

response to taxation.

            Mayshar (1991) poses the taxpayer’s problem as:


(6)         Max U(Y,L)
            X,S,L,Y


      subject to X=w[L-S-m(E)]

      and             Y=X-T(X,S,E),


where X is output, S is sheltering effort, L is total labor effort, and Y is consumption.

Mayshar labels T(⋅) the "tax technology;" it specifies the maximal taxes, T, collectible

from a base X, when the tax authority selects a vector E of policy instruments, while the

taxpayer devotes S in labor units to sheltering activity. It is reasonable to assume that

TX>0 and TS<0 and, by construction TE>0. The function m(E) represents unavoidable

compliance costs associated with taxpaying, measured in labor units.

            Although evasion as a gamble is not explicitly treated in this model, Mayshar

argues that it can be presented in this framework; to do so S is defined as that certain

                                                17
payment which causes the same expected utility loss as the extra risk an evader takes on,

for given expected tax payments. This forms the link between the A-S models of tax

evasion and the models discussed in this section.17 From the perspective of an A-S

evasion model, TS<0 means that more evasion can lower expected tax payments, at a cost

of more uncertainty.

        Consider the first-order conditions with respect to L and S, respectively, where

asterisks indicate an optimal value:


(7)     -UL(Y*,L*)/UY(Y*,L*) = w[(1-TX(X*,S*,E)]


(8)     w[(1-TX(X*,S*,E)] ≥ -TS(X*,S*,E),


where (8) holds as an equality if S* > 0.

        Expression (7) looks familiar: the marginal rate of substitution between

consumption and leisure equals the net wage. But note that the effective marginal tax

rate, TX(X*,S*,E), permits more complex marginal tax rates than the standard linear tax

model, where T(X*, S*, E) would equal tX*, and so TX would equal t. In expression (7),

the effective marginal tax rate may depend on the sheltering activity of the taxpayer

and/or the policy instruments of the government, interpreted more broadly than simply

announcing a tax schedule. Expression (8) states that, because sheltering is accomplished

by using labor, at an interior optimum its opportunity cost w(1-TX(⋅)) will be equal to its

marginal private gain, which is the marginal tax saving, -TS.

        Slemrod (forthcoming) investigates a related model in which the private cost of



17
  Note that interpreting S, or C in the model of Slemrod (forthcoming) discussed below, as the risk bearing
cost of evasion, will impose restrictions on the T(⋅) or C(⋅) functions.

                                                    18
achieving reductions in taxable income (denoted A, for income avoidance) is C(wL, A),

where wL is true labor income; he argues that, in general, C1<0 and C2>0.18 If we imbed

this avoidance technology into the taxpayer choice under a linear income tax, the

maximization problem becomes


(9)      Max         U(Y,L),
               L,A



         subject to Y=w(1 - L) - t(w (1 - L) - A) - C(wL,A).


         Before pondering the general implications of this formulation, first consider the

special case where C(wL,A)=C(A). In this case the first-order condition for labor supply

is identical to the standard model without avoidance. The first-order condition for A is
                                    ’
simple and straightforward, C = t, implying that avoidance ought to be pursued until its

marginal cost equals its marginal saving in tax liability, equal to t. In this situation a tax

rate hike unambiguously increases A. Furthermore, its effect on L is no different than in

the standard model, except to the extent that the income effect is altered by the possibility

of avoidance.

         The story is enriched when the avoidance, or tax, technology becomes C(wL,A).

The effective marginal return to working becomes w(1 - t - C1), where -wC1 is a subsidy

to working that Slemrod (1994) dubs the "avoidance-facilitating" effect; for example, a

given level of allegedly work-related deductions looks more plausible if it is taken against




18
  Slemrod (forthcoming) is less general than Mayshar in that it presumes a flat-rate statutory tax system; it
does not presume that tax sheltering or avoidance must be "produced" with the taxpayer’s own time. One
superficial difference is the adoption by Slemrod of a cost function approach to avoidance, compared to
Mayshar’s production function for tax receipts.

                                                     19
a larger gross income. The term (t-C1) is analogous to TX in Mayshar’s model, and makes

explicit how the avoidance technology influences the incentive to supply labor.

         Several insights emerge from this modeling of the tax environment. First of all,

the substitution effect of labor supply does not respond identically to the two components

of the statutory after-tax wage rate, w and (1-t). Changes in (1-t) trigger avoidance

responses which are not triggered by changes in w. While both labor supply and

avoidance respond to both w and (1-t), they do not do so symmetrically. This implies that

econometric studies of labor supply (and avoidance) ought to differentiate responses to w

and (1-t). Furthermore, one should not conclude, as does Rosen (1976), that a differential

response to w and (1-t) necessarily represents "taxpayer illusion;"19 instead it could be

reflecting the avoidance technology.

         Mayshar and Slemrod addressed the possibility that changes in the tax system will

induce from taxpayers all three types of behavioral response. For example, an increase in

the rate of a proportional income tax will provide an incentive to substitute leisure for

goods, to (depending on the penalty structure) increase evasion, and increase avoidance.

Other interactions among the three types of behavioral response have been investigated,

as well. Cowell (1990a) develops a model in which the taxpayer can evade, but can also

legally shelter income for a fixed cost Γ and a constant marginal cost γ, where γ < t.

These cost assumptions generate the result that if an honest (or highly risk-averse) person

shelters any of his income (Y), then he will automatically shelter all of it, and will do the

latter if Γ + γY < tY. Cowell then investigates whether sheltering will co-exist with

evasion, and asserts that the optimum is not characterized by an equality between the


19
  Although, note that in his empirical analysis Rosen (1976) does not detect a significant differential
response.

                                                     20
marginal cost of avoidance and evasion. This is because sheltering reveals to the tax

authority that the taxpayer’s true income must be at least Γ /(t - γ). He argues that there

may be a class of shelterers who would also have been evaders, had it not been for the

attention drawn by sheltering, and that in some cases there may be a complete

polarization between evaders and avoiders.

         In Cross and Shaw (1982), taxpayers must make expenditures to learn about and

(in the case of avoidance) document both avoidance and evasion activities.20 Two

avenues of interaction arise. First, in a progressive tax system, expenditure on avoidance

or evasion reduces the marginal tax rate, thus reducing the return to engaging in the

other.21 Second, investment in avoidance may reduce the marginal cost of evasion, or

vice versa. For example, while investigating an illegal but undetectable "tax shelter," a

(barely) legal tax shelter arrangement may be uncovered without much additional

investment of time.


4.       DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF EVASION AND
         ENFORCEMENT

4.a.     The Extent of Tax Evasion

4.a.1. Data problems

         Ascertaining the extent and characteristics of evasion immediately runs into two

problems -- one conceptual and one empirical. The conceptual problem is that, although




20
   In some situations, more evasion may be associated with less cost. For example, not bothering to trace a
miscellaneous source of income is less costly than tracking down whatever receipt or Form 1099 would
document the income. Not filing a return at all happens to minimize compliance cost.
21
   Alm (1988) also examines the simultaneous choices of evasion, avoidance and reported income, and
investigates the effects of other fiscal variables on these choices.

                                                    21
one can assert that legality is the dividing line between evasion and avoidance, in practice

the line is often blurry. Sometimes the law itself is unclear, sometimes it is clear but not

known to the taxpayer, sometimes the law is clear but the administration effectively

ignores a particular transaction or activity. The importance of these factors certainly

differs across situations.

        The other difficulty is that, by its nature, tax evasion is not easy to measure --

merely asking just won’t do. Several different approaches have been attempted. One

approach relies on inferring the level or trends in noncompliance from data on measurable

quantities, such as currency demand or national income and product accounts. The

monetary indirect estimates are based on the presumption that most unreported economic

activity takes place in cash, and that some time in the past the underground economy was

small. In Gutmann (1977), increases in the ratio of currency to demand deposits since

1937-41 measure the underground economy; in Feige (1979), changes since 1939 in the

ratio of total dollar transactions to official GNP since 1939 measure it. Tanzi (1980)

estimates regressions explaining the ratio of currency to money defined as M2, and

interprets the portion explained by changes in the tax level as an indication of changes in

the size of the underground economy. None of these approaches is likely to be reliable,

however, as their accuracy depends either on unverifiable assumptions or on how well the

demand for currency is estimated. The indirect noncompliance estimates based on

discrepancies between national accounts measures of income and income reported to the

tax authority are also problematic. For one thing, national income estimates of several

key forms of income are based on tax return data. Second, there are many inconsistencies

between how income is defined for tax purposes and for national accounts. However,



                                              22
Engel and Hines (1999), in a study of tax evasion dynamics which focuses on the

possibility of retrospective examination of previous-years' returns, study this measure of

evasion in the U.S. for the years 1947 to 1993 and find that it responds as their model

predicts. For example, annual fines and penalties imposed by the IRS subsequent to

audits are correlated with contemporaneous and several lags of tax evasion as calculated

from national income statistics.

       The most reliable source of information about tax compliance concerns the U.S.

federal income tax, and exists because of the IRS’s Taxpayer Compliance Measurement

Program, or TCMP. Under this program, approximately every three years from 1965

until 1988 the IRS conducted a program of intensive audits on a large stratified random

sample of tax returns, using the results to develop a formula used to inform the selection

of returns for regular audits. The TCMP data consist of line-by-line information about

what the taxpayer reported, and what the examiner concluded was correct. This data

formed the basis for the IRS estimates of the aggregate "tax gap," and provides much

useful information about the patterns of noncompliance with respect to such variables as

income, occupation, line item, region of the country, age, and marital status. While

informative, it is widely recognized that even the intensive TCMP audits imperfectly

reveal particular kinds of noncompliance, such as income from the underground

economy.

4.a.2 Patterns of noncompliance

       We cannot adequately review here what is known about the extent and nature of

tax evasion for all taxes in all countries at all times. Rather, in what follows we offer a




                                             23
few salient facts about the recent U.S. income tax, mostly gleaned from the TCMP data

just discussed.

     1. With audit coverage hovering around 1% and an extensive information reporting

and matching program, evasion is estimated to be 17% of true tax liability.22

     2. The extent of evasion varies widely across types of gross income and deductions;

for example, the 1988 TCMP reports that the voluntary reporting percentage was 99.5%

for wages and salaries, but only 41.4% for self-employment income (Schedule C). These

percentages clearly correlate positively with the likelihood of income understatement

being detected.

     3. Evasion (as measured by underreported income, not tax liability), rises with

income but at a less than proportionate rate. Christian (1994) reports that in 1988,

taxpayers with (auditor-adjusted) incomes over $100,000 on average reported 96.6

percent of their true incomes to the IRS, compared to just 85.9 percent for those with

incomes under $25,000.23

     4. Within any group defined by income, age, or other demographic category, there

are some who evade, some who do not, and even some who overstate tax liability.24 For

example, of middle-income (auditor-adjusted income between $50,000 and $100,000)

taxpayers in 1988, 60% understated tax, 26% reported correctly, and 14% overstated tax.

(Christian, 1994, p. 39).



22
   It is probably higher in most other countries. For example, Alm, Bahl, and Murray (1991) put the figure
(for avoidance and evasion) at 46% for the Jamaican income tax of 1983. Richupan (1984) cites studies of
tax evasion in developing countries indicating that it is not uncommon for half or more of potential income
tax to be uncollected.
23
   One explanation for this pattern is almost certainly that tax returns of high-income households are more
likely to attract IRS attention. Another potentially important factor is that the TCMP results do not account
for the noncompliance of business entities, which are more germane for higher-income individuals.
24
   Note that Erard (1997) concludes that a large fraction of noncompliant reports may be unintentional.

                                                     24
4.b.     Determinants of Evasion

         Empirical attempts to more systematically establish how compliance responds to

aspects of the tax environment have met with limited success, primarily due to the data

problems discussed in Section 4.a.1.25 Three approaches dominate the literature.26


4.b.1. Cross-sectional analysis

         Clotfelter (1983) was the first attempt to make use of the TCMP data to

investigate how noncompliance responded to changes in the environment. He estimated a

tobit model, explaining, for each of ten audit classes, noncompliance as a function of the

combined federal and state marginal tax rate, after-tax auditor-adjusted income, and a set

of demographic variables available on tax returns. The most striking conclusion is that

noncompliance is strongly positively related to the marginal tax rate, with the elasticity

ranging from 0.5 to over 3.0. This finding is apparently consistent with the basic A-S

model, but not with the extension proposed by Yitzhaki.

         Beron, Tauchen and Witte (1992) investigate TCMP data aggregated by the IRS to

the three-digit zip code level. They find that increasing the odds of an audit significantly

increases reported AGI and tax liability for some, but not all, of the groups. In an attempt




25
   A former colleague, Harvey Galper, once put the problem this way: "Regression analysis of tax evasion
is straightforward, except for two problems: you can’t measure the left-hand side variable, and you can’t
measure the right-hand side variables!"
26
   In addition to the econometric methodologies discussed below, laboratory experiments typically
involving students engaged in a multi-period reporting game, have been employed. (See, for example,
Baldry (1987) and Alm, Jackson, and McKee (1992)). These results are subject to the canonical criticisms
of laboratory studies: that the setting is artificial, and the participants are not demographically similar to
those making the actual decisions, and therefore do not come to the decision problems with the same array
of experiences and expectations about the environment. These criticisms may be especially salient in this
context, because the experiments differ from general problems in choice under uncertainty only by the
labeling of the choice as having to do with taxes, and as compliant or not rather than gambling or not.

                                                      25
to deal with the potential endogeneity of the intensity of enforcement, they model the

simultaneous determination of tax reporting and the log odds of an audit for each of the

several audit classes in each zip code area. Their instrument for this is the level of IRS

resources relative to the number of returns27. Although Beron, Tauchen, and Witte argue

that it is a valid instrument because the IRS has not been able to distribute its resources

among districts so as to achieve its goals, this is not convincing: it is reasonable that the

IRS attempts to target its resources toward areas believed to be particularly noncompliant,

thus invalidating use of IRS resources as an instrument.

         Subsequent studies have produced mixed results. Of particular interest is work by

Feinstein (1991), who performed a pooled cross-section analysis of 1982 and 1985 TCMP

data, thus mitigating the problem that in a single cross-section (other than for cross-state

differences) the marginal tax rate is a (complicated, non-linear) function of income,

making it difficult to separately identify the tax and income effect. Feinstein’s analysis

suggests a negative impact of the marginal tax rate on evasion, which contradicts

Clotfelter’s results but is consistent with the A-S model as adjusted by Yitzhaki.

         Klepper and Nagin (1989) investigate the characteristics of evasion across line

items, and find that noncompliance rates are related to proxies for the traceability,

deniability, and ambiguity of the items, which are in turn related to the probability that

evasion will be detected and punished. They also find evidence of a "substitution effect"

across line items, such that greater noncompliance on one item lowers the attractiveness




27
  Dubin and Wilde (1998) perform a similar analysis on the zip-code aggregated data, and use the same
instrument. They defend this choice by claiming that, in an analysis of the time path of state-level IRS
budgets, they were found to be independent of compliance levels, and predominantly determined by the
share of total returns filed.

                                                    26
of noncompliance on others, because the latter jeopardizes the expected return to the

former by increasing the probability of detection.


4.b.2. Time-series analysis

           Dubin, Graetz and Wilde (1990) make use of state-level time series cross-section

data from 1977 through 1986 to investigate the impact of audit rates and tax rates on tax

compliance. They do not, though, have a direct measure of noncompliance, but instead

use tax collections per return filed and returns filed per capita as (inverse) measures of

noncompliance. They conclude that the continual decline in the audit rate over this

period caused a significant decline in IRS collections -- amounting to $41 billion by 1985.


4.b.3. Controlled experiments

           As discussed above, analysis of both cross-section and time-series historical data

is subject to severe difficulties of measuring the parameters of the environment and in

knowing the source of any variation in these parameters. Controlled experiments can

avoid all of these problems, but, for cost and other implementation reasons, are rare.

           One recent exception is reported by Slemrod, Blumenthal, and Christian

(forthcoming), in which the State of Minnesota Department of Revenue conducted a

randomized controlled experiment with respect to four aspects of the tax compliance

environment: the threat of an audit, the provision of special return preparation

information services, moral appeals, and a redesigned tax form. With regard to the first,

they find that, for low- and middle-income taxpayers, a threat of certain audit28 produced

a small, but statistically significant, increase in reported income, which was larger for



28
     The audit threat was delivered by letter in January following the tax year.

                                                        27
those with greater opportunities to evade.29 However, for high-income taxpayers the

audit threat was associated with on average a lower income report. The authors speculate

that sophisticated, high-income, taxpayers view an audit as a negotiation, and view

reported taxable income as the opening (low) bid in a negotiation which does not

necessarily resulted in the determination and penalization of all noncompliance. Based

on the same experiment, Blumenthal, Christian and Slemrod (1999) find no evidence that

either of two written appeals to taxpayers' consciences had a significant effect on

aggregate compliance.


5.       DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF AVOIDANCE

5.a.     Dimensions of Avoidance

         Stiglitz (1985) distinguishes three basic principles of tax avoidance within an

income tax: postponement of taxes, tax arbitrage across individuals facing different tax

brackets (or the same individuals facing different marginal tax rates at different times),

and tax arbitrage across income streams facing different tax treatment. Many tax

avoidance devices involve a combination of these three principles. In an example used by

Stiglitz, the basic feature of an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) is the postponement

of tax liability until retirement; if the individual faces a lower tax rate at retirement than at

the time the income is earned, then the IRA also features tax arbitrage between different

rates. Finally, if the individual can borrow to deposit funds in an IRA and the interest

incurred to finance the deposit is tax deductible, then the IRA is a tax arbitrage between




29
  The approach is a "difference-in-difference" analysis; that is, the increase in reported income over the
previous year of the treatment group is compared to the increase in reported income of the control group.

                                                     28
two forms of capital, one of which is taxed, and the other of which is not taxed.30 Stiglitz

argues that, with perfect capital markets, these three principles can be exploited to

eliminate all taxes while leaving the individual’s consumption and bequests unchanged

relative to the zero tax case, and facing no more risk than in the original situation. But

capital markets are not perfect, and therefore all tax liability is not eliminated by tax

avoidance,31 and to reduce tax liabilities distorting actions (such as investment in sectors

where it is easier to convert ordinary income into capital gains) are utilized. There is

considerable empirical evidence testifying to the extent and tax sensitivity of these kinds

of avoidance behavior.


5.b.1. Retiming

         There is abundant support for the notion that the timing of certain transactions can

be extraordinarily responsive to changes in tax rates. Perhaps the most striking example

was the response of capital gains realizations to the tax rate increase scheduled to occur

on January 1, 1987, but fully anticipated by the fall of 1986. Aggregate realizations in

1986 were twice what they were in any previous year or for several years thereafter. As

Burman, Clausing, and O’Hare (1994) document, capital gain realizations on corporate

stock in December of 1986 were seven times higher than in the previous December.

Another striking example of timing response is provided by Goolsbee (forthcoming), who

documents that, in advance of the expected 1993 increase in the U. S. top individual tax




30
   The IRA example makes clear that in certain cases (some of) the avoidance behavior is the result of a
conscious tax policy choice, in this case with the intent of increasing saving. Another excellent example is
capital gains, where taxation upon realization rather than accrual allows for deferral of tax liability, often
into periods of lower taxation, and where gains are completely excused from taxation at death due to the
step-up of tax basis.
31
   There are also policy responses to avoidance, such as limits on loss offsets and interest deductions.

                                                      29
rate, corporate executives realized a huge amount of income in 1992, primarily through

exercising non-qualified32 stock options.

         Sophisticated econometric techniques using panel data have been developed for

separately identifying the timing responses to tax rate changes over time from the

permanent behavioral response to a changed tax rate. These new techniques have been

applied to both capital gains realizations (Burman and Randolph, 1994) and charitable

contributions (Randolph, 1995). In both cases the results suggest that the retiming effect

dominates the permanent effect.


5.b.2. Tax arbitrage

     Tax arbitrage activity takes advantage of inconsistencies in the tax law, featuring

economically offsetting positions which have asymmetric tax treatments. Examples

range from sophisticated derivative financial instruments to the more mundane cases of

doing tax-deductible borrowing to finance tax-deferred IRA contributions or tax-exempt

bond purchases.


5.b.3. The classification of income

         The classic example of income reclassification, also termed income shifting, is

turning ordinary capital or labor income into preferentially-taxed capital gains. In another

example, Maki (1996) and Scholz (1994) have documented that, following the Tax

Reform Act of 1986, there was a large shift from no-longer-deductible consumer interest

into still-deductible mortgage or home equity loans. There is anecdotal evidence that,



32
  For non-qualified stock options, the difference between the exercise price and the issue price is taxable at
ordinary income tax rates at the time of exercise, and is deductible from the employer's taxable income at
the same time.

                                                     30
following the introduction of the R&D credit in the United States, much business activity

was "discovered" to have a significant research component. Gordon and MacKie-Mason

(1991, 1997) have investigated how, when the Tax Reform Act of 1986 lowered the top

individual rate below that of the corporate rate, there was a large shift from C

corporations into S corporations, which are taxed like partnerships and therefore are not

subject to the corporation income tax. Gordon and Slemrod (forthcoming) discuss the

shifting of income between the corporate and individual tax base via the method of

compensation, and document evidence of such shifting in the United States.


5.c.    The Extent of Avoidance

        No one has attempted to calculate for avoidance a counterpart to the aggregate

evasion "tax gap." There is, though, some indirect evidence that the avoidance tax gap is

large. Gordon and Slemrod (1988) calculated that the U.S. tax system of 1983 raised

approximately zero revenue from taxing capital income, due to the combination of

legislated deviations from a pure income tax and tax arbitrage.33 As to the incidence of

the avoidance opportunities, Agell and Persson (1988) and Gordon and Slemrod (1988)

argue that the availability of tax arbitrage opportunities will generally benefit those at the

bottom and top of the tax rate distribution, to the disadvantage of those in the middle.

This generally corresponds to low- and high-income individuals, respectively, but there

are exceptions to that rule; high-income individuals benefit through their ownership of

tax-preferred pension assets.




33
 It is likely that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 mitigated the avoidance tax gap by reducing the dispersion of
marginal tax rates and tightening up the rules about tax arbitrage behavior.

                                                    31
6.       FUNDAMENTALS OF TAX ANALYSIS

     Having completed a review of the positive, or descriptive, analysis of tax evasion and

avoidance, we turn now to the normative analysis of taxation. However, before we

proceed to that task, we must first reconsider the fundamental building blocks of tax

analysis -- the evaluative criteria of equity and efficiency -- to check whether these

concepts need to be revised.


6.a.     Equity

6.a.1. Vertical equity

         Analyses of the distributional impact of taxation, especially those based on tax

return data, ought to account for the presence of evasion. The evidence cited in Section

4.a.--that noncompliance as a fraction of true income declines with true income--suggests

that standard analyses of incidence based on the statutory rates and base may understate

the progressivity of the tax burden;34 Bishop, Chow, Formby, and Ho (1994) find this for

the United States using the 1985 TCMP data, although Alm, Bahl, and Murray (1991)

reach the opposite conclusion about Jamaica.35


6.a.2. Horizontal equity

         Horizontal equity -- the idea that equals should be treated equally by the tax

system, or that tax liability should not depend on any of a set of irrelevant characteristics -

- is central to an assessment of the impact of tax avoidance and evasion. To see this,


34
   This evidence also suggests that tax return data may overstate the inequality in the distribution of
incomes. Because the data on tax evasion are flawed, one should keep in mind that the theoretical
arguments discussed in Section 5.c. imply that data on reported incomes will understate the true dispersion
of income.
35
   A complete incidence analysis would account for the costs borne by evaders in the form of exposure to
risk and concealment expenses, neither of which is accounted for in the studies mentioned.

                                                    32
compare two tax situations, one in which there is a linear income tax rate of 20% and

everyone reports their true income, and another in which the tax rate is 40% and everyone

(costlessly) reports exactly half their income. In this case the two systems are identical

with respect to both horizontal and vertical equity. Now imagine that, in the second

system, on average everyone reports half their income, but that the fraction differs

systematically by income. In that case replicating the progressivity of the first tax system

will require a more complicated, non-linear, system of rates. If, however, evasion varies

within income classes, no revision of the tax rate schedule can compensate, and there will

be horizontal inequity.

       In the context of the A-S model of tax evasion, the horizontally inequitable tax

burden will depend on the taxpayer’s degree of risk aversion. Less risk-averse

households will gain more from the availability of a gamble with given positive expected

value. In contrast, common parlance would ascribe any horizontal inequity to variations

in honesty, with the honest, or dutiful, citizens left holding the bag by the dishonest. In

the typical economic model, though, there are no honest or dishonest individuals, only

utility-maximizers; thus, this distinction can be introduced only artificially by simply

positing that some individuals do not pursue tax evasion. The same kind of artificial

differentiation across people can be made with regard to tax avoidance by positing that

some people have an aversion to such behavior; as Steuerle (1985, p. 78) says: "Some

taxpayers simply do not enjoy playing games no matter what the certainty of the return;

the U.S. tax system is designed to insure that such individuals pay a greater share of the

tax burden than those who are not so hesitant." Steuerle (p. 19) concludes that "taxpayers




                                             33
pay unnecessary taxes because of the simplicity of their filing response or their lack of

knowledge of the tax laws."


6.a.3. Incidence

         The theory of tax incidence -- who bears the burden of a given tax structure --

begins with three basic principles: (i) the burden of all taxes must be traced back to

individuals; (ii) individuals with relatively elastic demand (or supply) of a taxed good

tend to escape the burden of tax imposed on that good; and (iii) in the long run the

incidence of a tax levy does not depend on which side of the market bears the legal

responsibility for remitting the tax to the government. Introducing avoidance and evasion

preserves the methodological importance of the first two principles,36 but calls the third

into question. A complete analysis of the incidence of a particular tax requires specifying

the remittance process and positing an avoidance technology for both the suppliers and

demanders of the taxed good.

         Avoidance opportunities alter the analysis of incidence for two separate reasons.

First, their presence affects the behavioral response to a change in the tax system, and this

alters what otherwise would be the change in equilibrium prices. Second, the presence of

avoidance alters the link between tax-inclusive prices and welfare. This suggests that the

incidence (not to mention the efficiency) of a tax may depend on which side of the market

the responsibility for remittance falls. That is in stark contrast to the standard model,

under which that is irrelevant to the long-run incidence.37


36
  Section 2.d discusses some models of tracing the incidence of tax evasion.
37
  There are exceptions. Consider, for example, the debate between Tanzi (1992) and Dixit (1991) over the
implications of tax collection lags for the optimal amount of inflationary finance. Tanzi (1992) argues that,
when consumption taxes are collected by firms in advance and held by them for the duration of the
collection lag, inflationary finance implies a real redistribution of income from consumers to sellers.

                                                     34
6.a.4. Are changes in the social welfare function necessary?

       In models with heterogeneous citizens, the standard objective function is a social

welfare function which has as arguments the utility level of each citizen -- accepting the

individuals’ own relative valuations of goods and services -- where the shape of the social

welfare function implicitly determines the social value placed on the distribution of

utilities as opposed to the sum of utilities. In the presence of uncertainty, the expected

utilities of individuals are the relevant arguments -- accepting the risk preferences of

consumers. Cowell (1990b) questions the appropriateness of according the same social

weight to investigated and guilty taxpayers as is applied to the innocent or uninvestigated,

and argues that there may be a case for putting a specific discount on the utility of those

"who are known to be antisocial" (p. 136). Cowell investigates a few alternative social

objective functions, including one in which any private benefit derived from the proceeds

of evasion is assigned a social weight of zero, but in our opinion no convincing

alternative that provides reasonable policy prescriptions has yet been presented.


6.b.   A Taxonomy of Efficiency Costs

       In the standard model the efficiency cost of taxation is entirely due to the fact that,

because of the change in relative prices, individuals are induced to select socially

suboptimal consumption baskets -- to substitute away from relatively highly-taxed goods

to relatively lightly-taxed goods, such as leisure. A standard exercise in optimal taxation

theory is to describe the tax system that minimizes these costs, or to describe the tradeoff

between these costs and the distribution of welfare in the society.

       In the presence of avoidance and evasion, a broader concept of efficiency cost is

needed. In what follows, we describe and comment on three additional components of


                                             35
the social cost of taxation and discuss the problems that arise in introducing these costs

into formal models of optimal taxation.


6.b.1. Administrative costs

       Tax administrations deal, among other things, with information gathering. But

this is a difficult element to model because information varies in quality. There is a

qualitative difference between an auditor "knowing" that a given taxpayer is evading and

having sufficient evidence to sustain a court finding to that extent. Also, the cost of

gathering information depends on how accessible the information is, and whether it can

be easily hidden. There are several advantages to taxing a market transaction relative to

taxing an activity of the individual such as self-consumption. First, in any market

transaction there are two parties with conflicting interests. Hence, any transaction has the

potential of being reported to the authorities by one unsatisfied party. A second property

is that the more documented the transaction, the lower is the cost of gathering information

on it. For this reason it is easier to tax a transaction that involves a large company, which

needs the documentation for its own purposes, than to tax a small business, which may

not require the same level of documentation. Finally, market transactions establish arms-

length prices, which greatly facilitate valuing the transaction. Administrative cost may

also be a function of the physical size and the mobility of the tax base (it is harder to tax

diamonds than windows), whether there is a registration of the tax base (e.g., owners of

cars, holders of drivers’ licenses), the number of taxpayer units, and information sharing




                                              36
with other agencies.38 It is also an increasing function of the complexity and lack of

clarity of the tax law.

        Administrative costs possess two additional properties that complicate the

modeling of tax administration issues: they tend to be discontinuous and to have

decreasing average costs with respect to the tax rate. To see the first property, consider

two commodity tax rates, denoted by t1 and t2. If t1 = t2, then only the total sales of the

two commodities need be reported and monitored. If, however, the two rates differ even

slightly, then the sales of the two commodities must be reported separately, doubling the

required flow of information. There are decreasing average costs because the cost of

inspecting a tax base does not depend on the tax rate (except to the extent that people are

more inclined to cheat with a higher tax rate). Hence, a higher tax rate reduces the

administrative cost per dollar of revenue collected (Sandford, 1973). Administrative cost

may also be a function of the combination of the taxes employed and their rates, because

the collection of information concerning one tax may facilitate the collection of another

tax (e.g., inspection of VAT receipts may aid the collection of income tax).


6.b.2. Compliance costs

        Slemrod (1996a) estimates that, for the U.S. income tax, the private compliance

cost is about 10 cents per dollar collected. Sandford (1995) presents estimates for a

variety of taxes in several countries. Some of that cost is an unavoidable cost of

complying with the law, and some of it is voluntarily undertaken in an effort to reduce

one’s tax bill, but in either case it approximately represents resource costs to society. In



38
 A good description of the properties of administrative cost can be found in Shoup, Blough, and
Newcomer (1937), pp. 337-51.

                                                   37
almost all cases the private compliance costs dwarf the public administrative costs of

collecting taxes, which the IRS estimates at 0.6 cents per dollar collected for all the taxes

it administers.

        Integrating compliance costs into formal models in a meaningful way is tricky.

As an example of the modeling difficulties this topic poses, consider the following

problem: when is it optimal to delegate to employers the authority to collect taxes and

convey information about employees, thus requiring the administration to audit both the

taxpayer agent and the taxpayer himself, and when is it optimal to deal only with the

employee? Clearly, given that the employer already has the necessary information, it

would save administrative costs to require him to pass it along to the tax administrator.

This might also reduce total social costs if the cost of gathering information by the

administration is higher than the increase in cost caused by imposing a two-stage

gathering system.39

        However, the potential efficiency of involving taxpayers in the administrative

process must be tempered with a practical consideration. Administrative costs must pass

through a budgeting process, while compliance costs are hidden. Hence, there may be a

tendency to view a policy which reduces administrative cost at the expense of an equal

(or greater) increase in compliance costs as a decrease in social cost, because it results in

a decrease in government expenditures. We will discuss this issue further in Section 7.




39
  Note that a withholding system requires two information gathering systems and might generate incentives
for the withholding agent to evade the taxes it collects, or to collaborate with withholdees in withholding
less than required (Yaniv, 1988 and 1992). In a period of rapid inflation, the gain to the agent from
withholding may exceed the cost.

                                                    38
6.b.3. The risk-bearing costs of tax evasion

       In the Allingham-Sandmo model, tax evasion occurs only if the taxpayer expects

to increase his expected income by evading taxes, including the expected fines that he

would have to pay if he were caught; it continues until, at the margin, the increased

expected income is offset by the increased risk-bearing. Hence, a taxpayer who evades

taxes increases both his exposure to risk and his expected income. This additional

exposure to risk is a deadweight loss to society. In principle, the taxpayer could be better

off under an agreement whereby the taxpayer pays at least as much as the government

currently collects, while the government ceases to audit. Assuming a risk-neutral

government, the risk-bearing cost of tax evasion is equal to the risk premium that the

taxpayer would be ready to pay in order to eliminate the exposure to risk (Yitzhaki

(1987)). Depending on the other assumptions about the probability of detection, the

penalty structure, and risk aversion, the risk-bearing costs of evasion may be a continuous

function that increases with the tax rates. These costs are in addition to the compliance

costs voluntarily incurred by an individual attempting to minimize the expected cost by

camouflaging the evasion or shifting to an otherwise less remunerative occupation.


7.     NORMATIVE ANALYSIS

7.a.   Optimal Tax Administration and Enforcement

       Avoidance and evasion pose two challenges for the normative analysis of

taxation. First, they introduce a new set of policy instruments whose optimal setting is at

issue. These include the extent of audit coverage, the penalty imposed on detected

evasion, and the structural integrity of the tax code itself, which determines the extent and



                                             39
nature of avoidance opportunities. Second, they invite a rethinking of standard taxation

problems, including the optimal setting of commodity tax rates and optimal progressivity.


7.a.1. Optimal Penalties

         Consider the A-S model of a representative consumer whose true income is

exogenous and whose only choice concerns how much of that income to report. This

choice depends on two policy instruments set by the government, p, which has a resource

cost due to the need for auditors and the related infrastructure, and θ, which is a fine for

detected evasion, which is a transfer with no resource cost.

         It has been well known since Becker (1968) that in this setting a government

concerned with maximizing the ex ante utility of its representative citizen will want to set

θ as high as possible, allowing p to be as low as possible. This policy of "hanging

violators with a probability of zero" deters evasion while minimizing the resource cost of

the deterrent -- p represents a real resource cost but θ is simply a transfer. But this kind

of model ignores, inter alia, the possibility of a corrupt tax administrator who abuses the

system or, alternatively, harshly punishes someone who commits an honest mistake.40

The harsher the penalty, the more damage that can be inflicted by a corrupt administrator

or, in the case of an honest mistake, the more capricious the system is. Hence, the harsher

the penalty, the more detailed and cautious the prosecution process should be, although

this may increase its administrative costs. In the absence of modeling the interaction

between the penalty rate and administrative costs, analytical models usually assume a

ceiling on the penalty rate.



40
  Polinsky and Shavell (1999) examine this and other issues involved in the optimal setting of penalties for
crime including but not restricted to tax evasion.

                                                    40
7.a.2 Optimal randomness

       Auditing some taxpayers and not others inevitably introduces some ex ante

uncertainty and some ex post horizontal inequity. This suggests a link to an earlier

literature in public finance, in which Stiglitz (1982) and Weiss (1976) each argued that,

even in a world of risk-averse citizens, it may be optimal for the government to introduce

some randomness into its net tax (or transfer) to individuals. The argument depended on

the second-best nature of the problem, in which an income tax distorted the labor-leisure

choice. For some utility functions, Stiglitz and Weiss argued, the introduction of random

payments induced people to work harder, thus mitigating the labor market distortion; in

some cases the value of the increased labor more than offset the utility loss from the

randomness introduced.

       This argument has clear implications for the optimal enforcement of the income

tax, because it suggests that one of the presumed social benefits of greater enforcement --

the reduced uncertainty of payment of a given expected value of taxes -- may be mitigated

by the increased labor supply distortion. Weiss uses approximations around the point of

no evasion to describe the condition under which allowing some degree of evasion can

both increase revenue and increase welfare. However, Yitzhaki (1987) shows that, in the

examples used by Weiss, the condition that allows successful evasion is identical to the

condition that the solution is on the declining portion of the Laffer curve; in this case, any

reduction of the tax rate would increase welfare and increase revenue. This suggests that

the improvement was not caused by allowing evasion. We conclude that neither the

practical nor hypothetical relevance of this point has not yet been demonstrated.




                                             41
7.a.3. The optimal extent of enforcement

        For a given penalty structure how much resources should be devoted to enforcing

the tax laws? Or, in other words, what is the optimal probability of detection, p? Many

widely-used textbooks and several IRS commissioners presume that the answer is to

increase p until the marginal increase of revenue thus generated raised equals the

marginal resource cost of so doing. As Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1987) show, however, this

rule is incorrect. Intuitively, although the cost of increasing p (hiring more auditors,

buying better computers, etc.) is a true resource cost, the revenue brought in (through

assessed fines as well as higher compliance) does not represent a net gain to the economy,

but rather a transfer from private citizens to the government. The correct rule equates the

marginal social benefit of reduced evasion to the marginal resource cost; the social cost is

not well measured by the increased revenue, but is in this model related to the reduced

risk bearing that comes with reduced evasion.41 This result implies that privatization of

revenue collection will inevitably lead to a socially excessive amount of resources

devoted to that purpose unless restrictions are put on the resources and behavior of the

agency.


7.a.4. Optimal auditing rules

        One of the key simplifying assumptions of the Allingham-Sandmo model is that

the probability of evasion being detected is fixed and unrelated to any actions of the

taxpayer. In Section 2.b we investigated the implication of p increasing with the amount

of evasion, but this relationship was exogenously imposed. Other models allow the audit


41
  Note, though, that Baldry (1984) has shown that complete enforcement of income tax laws (p high
enough to deter evasion) is inefficient.

                                                  42
strategy of the tax collection agency (henceforth the IRS) to depend on the report of the

taxpayer in a way that maximizes an explicit objective function; the taxpayer, in turn,

forms some expectation of what the IRS’ auditing rule is, and acts accordingly. In

modeling the game between taxpayers and the IRS, researchers have generally assumed

that the IRS attempts to maximize net revenue collected. As we discussed earlier, this is

not likely to characterize the social-welfare-maximizing solution to how big the

enforcement budget ought to be, although it might characterize the optimal allocation of

resources for a given IRS budget. Another critical model element is whether it is

assumed that the IRS can commit to an announced audit rule, or whether it cannot

commit, and therefore will opportunistically audit whatever returns it wishes once the

returns are filed. Finally, it is critical whether the IRS budget is assumed to be fixed.

   Following Reinganum and Wilde (1985), models of this question generally assume

that the probability of audit depends on reported income only. Most papers conclude that

the optimal strategy in this context is to randomly audit individuals who report below

some threshold level of income. In equilibrium only low-income individuals report

honestly, while high-income taxpayers report exactly at the threshold level of income and

are never audited. Sanchez and Sobel (1993) derive this result in the context of risk-

neutral taxpayers with a continuous distribution of actual income and no labor supply

decisions, and where penalties for detected evasion are bounded and exogenously set.

Cremer and Gahvari (1996) reach similar conclusions when they allow for endogenous

labor supply, although they consider just two types of individuals. Mookherjee and P'ng

(1989) consider risk-averse individuals. Imposing mild restrictions on the level of risk

aversion, they show that the optimal policy is characterized by random audits and finite



                                             43
penalties. It is still true that above some income level taxpayers are not audited, but it is

no longer true that everyone reporting an income below that level is honest.42 Scotchmer

(1987) relaxes the assumption that the IRS can only observe the taxpayer's report, and

instead assumes that it is possible to assign taxpayers to a number of audit classes based

on observable characteristics. Although the optimal audit policy within each class is

similar to that described above, this policy introduces a regressive bias to the effective tax

system, because the agency will audit taxpayers with low-income reports with higher

probability that high-report taxpayers, thus making it less attractive for low-income

taxpayers to underreport income. This bias may be difficult to undo through the statutory

tax system if the tax code cannot depend on the audit class.

         This state of affairs provides an obvious temptation to the IRS to reverse its pre-

announced audit rule and instead to audit only those taxpayers that report exactly the

threshold level of income; those that report below the threshold are, after all, reporting

truthfully. Because of that temptation, an announced precommitment is not likely to be

credible. Describing the equilibrium outcome in the absence of precommitment is more

complex, as Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1996) discuss. One class of models, first

investigated by Graetz, Reinganum, and Wilde (1986), introduces a set of taxpayers at

each income level who report truthfully regardless of their incentives to do otherwise.

This enriches the model because it implies that at each level of income report there are

both honest and evading taxpayers. Melumad and Mookherjee (1989) take another tack

by assuming that although the government cannot commit to a particular audit policy, it

can commit to the total amount spent on audits. In this context they demonstrate that the


42
  Note that, in all of the papers in this literature, in the optimal policy taxpayers revealed to be honest are
rewarded, a decidedly counterfactual prediction.

                                                       44
problem of commitment may be solved by delegating this task to a separate agency, and

they describe the optimal contract that guarantees a unique equilibrium and provides

incentives for the agency to audit optimally. Such a contract is welfare improving.

       In the context of models of tax compliance in which the strategies of both the

taxpayers and the IRS are objective-maximizing, the impact of a change in, say, the tax

rate, depends on one’s forecast of how both sets of actors respond. For example, if the

tax rate increases it may become optimal for the IRS to audit more returns; in Graetz,

Reinganum and Wilde (1986), with an unconstrained budget, an increase in the tax rate

on the high-income taxpayers who are potential evaders decreases evasion.

Whether this prediction turns out to be accurate depends on whether in practice the IRS

budget increases concomitantly with the tax rate, and there is no empirical evidence that

supports this.


7.a.5. Optimal allocation of enforcement resources

       Administrative costs are inputs into the revenue raising process. But what should

be the target of the administration, and how should economic considerations be

introduced into the tax-revenue production function? To address this issue, one has to

define the objectives of the tax administration and its production function -- how much

revenue is produced with different combinations of inputs (subject, of course, to the tax

law). Then one can analyze whether the allocation of funds for administration is efficient

or to check whether, as Tanzi and Pellechio (1996) put it, "personnel are often assigned to

tasks that have low productivity while important functions get unattended."




                                            45
         Yitzhaki and Vakneen (1989) develop a model that introduces microeconomic

considerations into the management of tax administration.43 They assume that the

objective of the administration is the maximization of revenue and that taxpayers can be

classified into groups based on having returns of similar complexity. These assumptions

allows them to present the inspection process of tax returns as a decision tree in which the

"inspector" has to spend a given amount of his time to review the return, and the reaction

of the taxpayer (whether to appeal) is determined by the quality of the assessment. If they

continue to disagree, the results are determined by the court. The solution to this decision

tree problem can be determined in a dynamic programming model. Estimation of the

decision tree enables one to estimate the present value of future tax revenue that is

collected by each activity of the tax administration. Yitzhaki and Vakneen argue that an

administration should equalize the rate of return, in terms of tax revenue, for each

activity. This principle should govern sampling of tax returns for inspection, as well as

which items on the return to inspect.


7.b.     Optimal Tax Systems

         The previous section addressed how to evaluate the appropriate setting of tax

enforcement instruments, for a given specification of tax base and rates. The more

general problem is to consider all of these aspects simultaneously, what Slemrod (1990)

calls the theory of "optimal tax systems." Certainly, the ease of administering various

taxes has critical implications for the optimal structure of tax systems. Tax codes which

are based on unobservable and practically unmeasurable quantities (such as an ability tax)



43
  See also Wertz (1979), the first modern treatment of the optimal allocation of the work force in a tax
collection agency.

                                                     46
often look desirable on paper. Integrating the issue of administrative ease into normative

tax theory requires a shift of emphasis away from the structure of preferences, which has

been the principal focus of optimal tax theory, toward the technology of tax collection.


7.b.1. The choice of tax instruments

         With some exceptions, optimal tax theory has dealt with the issue of

administering a tax by making extreme assumptions about what kinds of taxes are

available to the policymaker. The fundamental results of optimal tax theory depend on

implicit assumptions about which taxes can be administered and which cannot. The

problem of optimal commodity taxation is interesting only because the possibility of

lump-sum taxation is ruled out,44 presumably because it is infeasible. Production

efficiency is desirable only if all commodities can be taxed and 100 percent taxation of

profits is feasible (or if no profits exist). When consumers are not identical, an ability tax

dominates an income tax because it causes no distortion in behavior. The study of

optimal income taxation is appropriate when ability taxes are ruled out, usually by

appealing to the difficulties of measuring ability for the purpose of basing tax liability on

it.

         Extreme assumptions about the feasibility of tax instruments are analytically

convenient, but incorrect. Ability can be measured, although with some expense and

error. On the other hand, income cannot be measured perfectly, and the degree of

accuracy in income measurement depends on the resources expended toward this goal.



44
  To be sure, the optimal commodity taxation literature yields insights about the less analytically tractable,
but more realistic, multi-person environment. Nevertheless, in most models in which the use of lump-sum
taxes are limited, this is done as an assumption rather than as a choice based on the costs and benefits of this
instrument.

                                                      47
         Extreme assumptions about the feasibility of tax instruments may also preclude

consideration of fundamental changes in policy.45 For example, a common assumption

made in optimal taxation models of developing countries is that income and consumption

arising in the agricultural sector are not taxable, although marketable surplus is taxable.

Much interesting analysis proceeds from this assumption, but none asks at what point it

makes sense for a country to attempt to tax agricultural income, even assuming that it will

have only limited success in doing so. There is clear evidence (Riezman and Slemrod,

1987) that countries with low literacy rates tend to rely on highly distorting but

(relatively) easily collectable import and export taxes, and shy away from efficient but

administratively difficult land taxes. Under what conditions should an imperfect land tax

be tried? The answers to these questions depend on the resource cost of administering the

new tax instrument relative to its effectiveness, or degree of success. This latter notion

has several dimensions, including the true revenue yield and the extent and nature of the

mistakes that are made in administration.

         Stern (1982) models the choice between an optimal nonlinear income tax, in

which income is costlessly observable, and a system of differential lump-sum taxes based

on characteristics of taxpayers which can be ascertained with some error. The lump-sum

tax system is superior if there are no errors in classifying individuals but, when enough

mistakes are made, income taxation may be the preferred system. Stern’s analysis

recognizes that the two tax systems each have their own information requirements (the


45
  The desirability of introducing the choice among tax instruments into the optimal tax problem has been
noted by, among others, Hahn (1973) and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980, p. 363), who state that "for a
complete theory of the choice of tax base, a fully articulated model is necessary of the information available
to the government and cost of observing the different characteristics." Diamond (1987, p. 640) agrees that
this would be ideal, but adds that the standard simplifications "may do little damage to the policy
conclusions if the set of feasible policies is well chosen, although the problem of choosing well is a difficult
one."

                                                      48
lump-sum system requires classifying individuals, the income tax system requires

observing incomes). The two systems will also likely have different administrative costs

as well, although for the sake of simplicity Stern assumes these costs are identical.

Greater accuracy in the classification of individuals could be achieved with higher cost, as

could more accurate measurement of income.46

           The optimal tax system framework has also been applied to a more immediately

policy-relevant choice, that between direct and indirect taxes. It has frequently been

claimed that a shift from income taxation to value added taxation can combat evasion by

taxing the spending on goods from the compliant sector by individuals who evade taxes

on their income. Boadway, Marchand, and Pestieau (1994) consider the optimal mix

between a general non-linear income tax and commodity taxes under the assumption that

evasion is possible only for the income tax. Granting this assumption provides a strong

case for commodity taxation to supplement an income tax. The authors recognize that the

results would have to be "seriously adjusted" (p. 73, fn. 2) if there is more evasion on

indirect than on direct taxes. In contrast, Kesselman (1993) concludes that changing the

tax mix toward indirect taxes will have little or none of the claimed anti-evasion effects.

Underlying this conclusion is a two-sector model in which the income tax is paid only by

workers in the above-ground sector, and the indirect tax is paid completely by above-

ground workers but incompletely in the underground sector. This is justified on the

grounds that to evade the income tax successfully requires evasion of the indirect tax on

output as well, since honest reporting of gross sales for the indirect tax would signal to

the authorities the extent of the income tax evasion. Which analysis better captures the

reality depends on the technology of tax avoidance and evasion.


46
     This is an example of the issue of optimal "tagging" discussed in Akerlof (1978).
                                                       49
7.b.2. Presumptive taxes

         The general nature of the optimal tax systems problem is well illustrated by

considering a class of taxes -- known as presumptive taxes -- which are a pervasive

element in the tax systems of many developing countries. This kind of tax makes sense in

cases where the otherwise desirable tax base is difficult for the tax authorities to measure,

verify, and monitor. As a substitute for the desired base is the "presumed" tax base,

which is derived from a formula, which itself may be simple or complex, based on more

readily monitored items.47 For example, at one time in Israel a taxi driver had a choice of

a tax based on book income or a levy on the accumulated mileage of the taxicab; for

shopkeepers, the alternative to a tax on book income was a tax based on the square

footage of the shop and other observable characteristics of the business. The wide variety

of presumptive taxes used in the developing world is nicely surveyed in Tanzi and

Casanegra de Jantscher (1989) and in Rajaraman (1995).

         The problem that presumptive taxes address -- the difficulty of monitoring certain

potential tax bases -- is not confined to developing countries, and use of presumptive

taxes, albeit with different names, is also widespread in developed countries. Examples

include the use of fixed depreciation schedules in place of asset-specific measures of the

decline in asset value (economic depreciation), taxation of capital gains on a realization

basis, and floors on deductible expenses. Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1994) and Kaplow




47
  There are two general categories of presumptive taxes. In the first, tax liability is based on an easily
monitorable base which is presumably correlated with the ideal tax base. The tax on taxicab mileage or a
tax on electricity used by a laundry are examples. In many cases, the monitorable base is a specific input,
and the presumptive tax is actually a tax on an input. The second category includes (effective or de facto)
exemptions or floors, intended to eliminate monitoring costs of "nonfruitful" populations. Examples
include exempting businesses with less than a certain number of employees, or floors on deductible
expenses.

                                                     50
(1994a) analyze the U.S. standard deduction as a presumptive tax; a higher value reduces

the administrative and compliance cost of monitoring itemized deductions, but it

increases horizontal inequity by increasing the range of taxpayers for which the "proper"

amount of deduction is replaced by a single number.48

        Upon reflection it is clear that all taxes are presumptive, to some degree. The

conceptually pure tax base--be it the flow of income, wealth, sales revenue, or something

else - cannot be perfectly measured, and the tax authority is constrained to rely on some

correlate of the concept. We label particular taxes as presumptive when the calculation of

the tax base deviates in a substantial way from the ideal concept. But there is a pervasive

tradeoff between accuracy and the costs of complexity.49




7.b.3 Optimal commodity taxes

        The characterization of optimal commodity taxes is a cornerstone of the standard

theory of optimal taxation, dating back to Ramsey (1927). The standard theory, though,

assumes that taxes on all commodities can be verified and collected costlessly.

        Yitzhaki (1979) investigates the optimal size of the commodity tax base in a

representative consumer economy when there is a resource cost, related to administration,

to adding goods to the tax base. If, as he assumes, preferences over all goods are Cobb-

Douglas, then uniformity of rate for all taxed goods is optimal. Expanding the tax base to

cover more goods will reduce the excess burden of taxation, but it increases the

administrative cost. The optimal tax system equates the marginal excess burden of


48
   See also Sadka and Tanzi (1993), who argue in some situations for a presumptive tax on assets as a
substitute for a income tax.
49
   Kaplow (1994, 1996) addresses the equity and efficiency issues involved in making this tradeoff.

                                                    51
raising a dollar of revenue to the marginal administrative cost, and thus minimizes the

total resource cost of raising revenue. Wilson (1989) generalizes the framework to

constant-elasticity-of-substitution utility functions.

        The fact that changes in administrative costs are likely to be discontinuous with

respect to changes in tax policy is important in more general treatments of the optimal set

of tax instruments. The theory of optimal taxation tells us that, except in special cases, all

goods should be taxed at different rates. However, it is likely that administrative cost

depends on the number of different tax rates as well as the number of commodities taxed.

This is not an issue when one assumes a utility function that implies uniform optimal

taxes (e.g., Cobb-Douglas), but is very important under more general preferences; in that

case there is a tradeoff between administrative and compliance costs on the one hand and

the standard excess burden on the other.

        Both the Yitzhaki and Wilson papers assume that a commodity is either in the tax

base and taxed at the uniform rate, or out of the tax base entirely. Boadway, Marchand,

and Pestieau (1994), Cremer and Gahvari (1993) and Kaplow (1990) investigate general

characterizations of optimal commodity taxation with evasion, administrative costs and

costly enforcement.50 In Cremer and Gahvari (1993), the optimal tax on a commodity is,

ceteris paribus, lower when the elasticity of induced avoidance response to a tax increase

is higher; intuitively, this increases the marginal social cost per dollar raised from taxing

that commodity.




50
 Skinner and Slemrod (1985) suggest that enforcement policy can be part of an optimal tax system in
which the statutory tax rates are constrained to be suboptimal; for example, lax enforcement of a good
whose statutory tax rate exceeds the optimal rate may be appropriate.

                                                    52
7.b.4 Optimal Progressivity

       In the optimal linear income tax literature, where only a demogrant and single

marginal tax rate are chosen, what constrains redistribution is the marginal excess burden

caused per dollar raised by the marginal tax rate, and the fact that this ratio increases with

the marginal tax rate levied. Cremer and Gahvari (1994) investigate how the introduction

of evasion and concealment expenses change the optimal setting of a linear income tax,

when the audit probability is also optimally chosen. They characterize the optimal

marginal tax rate in the presence of evasion, but conclude that one cannot hope for an

unambiguous result in general about whether in a model with evasion the marginal tax

rate is higher or lower compared to in a model without evasion.

       If other aspects of the tax system are not set optimally, there is no presumption

that the tax rate that is optimal, given the value of the other instruments, is also the global

optimum. To be concrete, if enforcement instruments are set suboptimally, so that the

marginal cost of raising revenue is higher than it need be, then the optimal tax rate will

appear lower than if the enforcement parameters are set optimally.

       The point is that the optimal level of taxes or tax progressivity can be properly

assessed only simultaneously with the instruments the government uses to control

avoidance and evasion. Slemrod (1994) constructs an example of this issue by modeling

a two-person economy in which the only possible response to taxation is avoidance. The

government must choose three instruments to maximize social welfare: a demogrant, a

(single) marginal tax rate, and an avoidance-control policy denoted p, which at a cost

reduces both the level of avoidance and its responsiveness to changes in the marginal tax

rate. An example shows that, with p set suboptimally, the optimal policy can be to lower


                                              53
t; however, a superior policy is to raise both p and t. The intuition here is that the

calculation of marginal excess burden of the marginal tax rate should be done assuming

the other policy instruments are set optimally. Using the metaphor of Okun (1975), the

"leak" in the revenue system, which limit both redistribution and the size of the public

sector, can be "fixed," albeit at some cost.

       Slemrod and Kopczuk (1999) expand on this notion by isolating the effect of a

policy instrument on the elasticity of taxable income, which summarizes the magnitude of

the behavioral response to taxes that limits optimal progressivity. They formally

characterize the optimal elasticity, emphasizing that in many settings it is appropriate to

think of this as a policy choice rather than an exogenous constraint. In a special case

where the policy instrument is the breadth of the tax base, Kopczuk and Slemrod show

that more egalitarian societies will feature lower elasticities of taxable income, as will

societies with a lower marginal cost of tax administration. Thus, this research

simultaneously addresses optimal progressivity and the optimal ease of collecting taxes,

and focuses on a critical difference between real substitution responses on the one hand

and avoidance and evasion responses on the other. Economists nearly always assume that

the former is an immutable, or primitive, parameter that is immune to policy (or any kind

of) manipulation. Whatever the truth of that assumption as it applies to, say, labor supply

response to taxation, it is certainly untenable as it applies to avoidance and evasion

responses. Their availability is certainly a (perhaps highly constrained) policy choice.

Truly optimal tax policy does not accept the current state of administration and

enforcement as given, but instead chooses these aspects and the statutory tax structure

together.



                                               54
7.c.   The Marginal Efficiency Cost of Funds

       A principal theme of this chapter is that acknowledging the range of behavioral

responses to taxation suggests a rich set of new empirical and conceptual issues and alters

the answers to some fundamental questions of public finance. For some other questions,

though, the anatomy of behavioral response may not matter. For example, Feldstein

(1999) argues that, for the purpose of calculating the marginal efficiency cost of taxation,

the critical parameter is the tax rate elasticity of taxable income, and the etiology of the

elasticity -- be it increased leisure, evasion, or increased untaxed fringe benefits, for

example -- is irrelevant. The intuition is that at the margin people are willing to incur a

dollar's worth of cost to save a dollar of taxes, and that cost may take the form of a

distorted consumption basket, a fee to an accountant, or increased exposure to the risk of

punishment for evasion. However, because Feldstein derives this conclusion in a model

which allows real substitution response but neither avoidance nor evasion, it begs the

question of whether the taxable income elasticity is a sufficient statistic for measuring the

efficiency cost of raising taxes and for comparing the relative efficiency of alternative

ways to raise revenue.

       This problem has been treated in the context of the concept referred to as the

marginal cost of funds or marginal efficiency cost of funds, and was developed by Usher

(1986), Mayshar (1990, 1991), Wildasin (1984), and Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996). This

model also allows us to place the issues raised above into a more general normative




                                              55
framework. We first discuss the concept in the absence of administrative costs, evasion,

or avoidance, and then extend it to apply to these issues.51

         Following Mayshar (1991), assume that the government sets a level of public

goods, G, and a vector E of tax policy instruments so as to maximize V(U*(E,w),G),

where w is the wage rate and U* is the utility derived from private goods. He shows that

the optimum is characterized by MBF = MCFi, where MBF is the social marginal benefit

of funds (in terms of private consumption), and MCFi is the marginal cost of funds of tax

instrument i. Mayshar and Yitzhaki (1995) decompose the MCFi term into:

(10)    MCFi = DCi*MECFi

where DCi is Feldstein's (1972) distributional characteristic of the tax instrument, while

MECFi is the marginal efficiency cost of the tax instrument. In the absence of evasion or

avoidance, MECFi is equal to Xi/MRi, where Xi is the change in revenue assuming no

behavioral response, and MRi (marginal revenue) allows behavioral response. Thus, in

the case of an income tax, Xi/MRi equals 1/(1 + εi), where εi is the elasticity of taxable

income with respect to tax instrument i.

         Note that the above interpretation is not limited to reforms involving tax rates.

One may define the marginal cost of funds with respect to marginal changes in any

parameter of the tax system (e.g., income brackets, exemption levels, penalties for tax

evasion, etc.). Nor does its application rely on an assumption that tax policy has been set

optimally. As Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996) show, away from the optimum the MECF

concept can be used to identify incremental changes in the tax system that would increase



51
  Although what follows can be generalized to apply to a multi-individual framework and to public goods,
here we restrict ourselves to the representative individual model of tax analysis. See Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(1999) for a treatment of the more comprehensive problem.

                                                    56
social welfare.

       To see how the MECF can be extended to evasion and avoidance, recall that the

potential change in tax revenue (assuming an inelastic base) is Xi but, because of

taxpayers’ response, the government collects only MRi. We can divide the potential tax

Xi into two components as follows:

(11)   Xi = (Xi - MRi) + MRi,

where MRi dollars are collected and (Xi - MRi) "leaks" outside the tax system. The

critical question is how to evaluate, from a social point of view, the leaked dollars. To do

this one must ask how much a taxpayer is ready to expend (on the margin) to save a dollar

of taxes or, alternatively, how much utility loss he is willing to suffer to save a dollar of

taxes. The answer is that a rational taxpayer will be ready to sacrifice up to, but no more

than, one dollar in order to save a dollar of taxes. Hence, on the margin the private cost,

which is equal to "leaked" dollars multiplied by their cost per dollar, is (Xi - MRi); the

collection of MRi dollars results in a loss of (Xi - MRi) to the taxpayer over and above the

taxes paid. If we assume that the utility loss to the individual (private cost) of the leaked

tax revenue should be accorded the same social cost as the utility loss due to the taxes

paid, then the cost to society of transferring a dollar to the government is (Xi - MRi)/MRi

= (Xi/MRi) -1. The total marginal cost to the individual taxpayer, including the taxes

paid, is Xi/MRi.

       Consider now a taxpayer who also has the option to evade part of the additional

tax. On the margin, he would be ready to sacrifice utility valued at one dollar (in

additional risk bearing due to evasion and/or due to substitution to cheaper but less

rewarding activities) in order to save a dollar of taxes. Hence, we do not have to know



                                              57
whether the "leak" was through evasion or real substitution to evaluate the costs to

society. The same rule applies to avoidance activity and, in fact, to any activity under

taxpayer control. Therefore, all one needs to know is the potential tax (i.e., assuming an

inelastic tax base) that will be collected from a change of a parameter of the

tax system, and the actual change (taking into account all behavioral responses) in order

to evaluate the marginal efficiency cost of raising revenue. It is in this sense that

Feldstein’s (1999) claim about the central importance of the elasticity of taxable income

generalizes to avoidance and evasion.

       Calculating the MECF involves two critical assumptions that deserve further

attention. The first of these is that at the margin the taxpayer sacrifices exactly one dollar

(instead of up to one dollar) to reduce tax liability by one dollar. However, it may be that

the taxpayer is at a corner solution with respect to behavioral response, so that the

marginal utility loss may be less than a dollar. For an example of a taxpayer at a corner,

consider the case of individual retirement Accounts (IRAs). An employee can contribute

up to $2,000 per year into an IRA, deduct the contribution from taxable income, pay no

tax on accrued earnings in the account, and pay tax on the principal when withdrawn.

Although IRAs were designed to increase saving, there is nothing to prevent an individual

who in the absence of taxes would have invested $4,000 in a similar account from

diverting $2,000 into the IRA. There may be a cost to this, as IRAs have early

withdrawal penalties which in some cases limit the flexibility of using these funds. Thus,

contributing to an IRA can save taxes, does not require a change in one’s consumption

basket, but may entail some cost. However, it cannot be presumed that, at the margin of

an IRA contribution, the private value of the sacrifice is equal to the tax saving; the IRA



                                              58
contribution is limited to $2,000 only because of the statutory limit on contributions. As

another example, consider the MECF of raising the tax rate on labor income in a situation

where, in an economy with two taxpayers, one taxpayer reports no labor income at all

and, at that corner, is bearing risk valued at 20 cents (rather than a dollar, as would be true

at an interior solution) to evade, including penalties, an expected value of one dollar. The

other taxpayer, with identical labor income, reports all of it. Assuming no labor supply or

avoidance response, the MECF with respect to an increased tax rate is 1.2.

       To take account of the possibility of the taxpayer being at such corner solutions,

one can generalize the expression for the MECF by introducing a parameter γ, 0<γ≤1,

which is a weighted average of the marginal value to the taxpayers of the leaked revenue,

Xi - MRi. Introducing γ reduces the simplicity of the MECF expression because its value

varies, depending on the situation under study.

       The second critical assumption is that the cost borne by taxpayers in the process

of reducing tax liability is equivalent to the social cost. This is certainly true in many

situations, such as when the private cost takes the form of a distorted consumption basket.

But in some cases the private cost is not identical to the social cost. An example is when

the act of the taxpayer causes some externality. Consider the case where being caught

evading imposes a stigma on the taxpayer, as in Benjamini and Maital (1985) or Gordon

(1989), and assume that the larger the number of evaders the lower the stigma attached to

each act. In this case the social cost of evading taxes diverges from the private cost

because the potential evader does not take into account the impact of his action on other

members of the society.




                                              59
       Fines for tax evasion present another example of the potential divergence between

the private and social costs of tax-reducing activities. The possibility of a fine for

detected tax evasion is certainly viewed as a cost by the taxpayer, but from society’s point

of view it reduces the amount of revenue that would otherwise have to be collected.

(This is in contrast to imprisonment, unless the prisoner is forced to produce socially

valuable products while imprisoned.) Thus, the MR term should include fine collections.

Note that, if the fine itself is the policy instrument, this argument implies that its MECF

could be close to zero, and almost certainly less than one, making an increase in fines

look like an attractive policy option indeed. As discussed in Section 7.a.1, there are

reasons unrelated to efficiency cost minimization which render undesirable increasing

fines for tax evasion without limit.

       Applying the MECF rule to administrative and compliance issues clarifies the

common thread tying together models of optimal tax systems. In the generic problem,

there are two ways to raise revenue: to increase a set of tax rates, and by so doing to

increase excess burden, or via an alternative which involves increasing administrative

costs (e.g., by broadening the tax base as in Yitzhaki (1979), or by increasing the

probability of a tax audit, as in Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1987)). On the margin, it is

optimal to equalize the marginal costs of raising revenue under the two alternatives. If

one defines the costs of taxation as deadweight loss plus administrative costs, at an

optimum the MECF of each tax rate should be equal to the MECF of administrative

improvements that raise revenue. In calculating the MECF of administrative

improvements, it is important to account for the fact that these expenses come out of

funds that were presumably raised with tax instruments that have an MECF in excess of



                                              60
one. In other words, administrative improvements that raise net revenue decrease the

excess burden; hence, on the margin and for given revenue, the saving in excess burden

should be equal to the increase in administrative costs. In this way, the MECF criterion

can be applied to tax administration, too.52

        Compliance costs are additional costs imposed on the taxpayer. Therefore, they

should be added to the burden imposed on the taxpayer. They serve as a substitute to

administrative costs, but the expenses are borne directly by the taxpayer rather than

through the government budget.

        The revised MECF that includes all these factors, derived and discussed in

Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996), is

                     γ( X i − MR i ) + Ci + MR i
(12)     MECF i =                                ,
                              MR i − A i

where γ is the social value of the utility the taxpayer is sacrificing at the margin in order

to save a dollar of tax. Ci is the marginal private compliance cost associated with the ith

instrument, Ai is the marginal administrative cost, and MRi - Ai is the net revenue

collected at the margin. The intuitive interpretation of the expression is the same as

before, with some qualifications. The potential tax is Xi. Xi - MRi is leaked at a social

cost of γ per dollar, MRi is collected by the government, and Ci is the additional

involuntary compliance cost. Hence, the total burden on society is the sum of those

components. Of the MRi collected by the government, Ai is spent on administration,

leaving MRi - Ai in the coffers. The MECF is the burden on society divided by what is




52
  Yitzhaki and Vakneen (1989) use the term "the shadow price of a tax inspector," which is the revenue
collected by adding another tax inspector. Note that the MECF is actually the reciprocal of the shadow
price of a tax inspector.

                                                     61
collected after subtracting the cost of doing business. This yields the marginal costs of a

dollar collected.

         Because in equation (12), Ci is added in the numerator and Ai is subtracted in the

denominator, the key conceptual difference between the two is explicit -- only the latter

uses revenue raised from taxpayers. To illustrate this difference, consider that a tax for

which Ci = MRi (with Ai and Xi - MRi = 0) might conceivably be part of an optimal tax

regime (if the MECFs of other instruments exceed two), it would never be optimal to

have Ai = MRi, for at the margin this instrument has social cost but raises no revenue.

     As emphasized in Slemrod (1998),applying this notion using empirical estimates of

the taxable income elasticity must be done with care. Foremost is the need to consider

the elasticity of the present value of tax revenues. Recall that a class of avoidance

responses involves the retiming of taxable-income-generating events. If a tax policy

change causes retiming, focusing only on the revenues in a subset of periods will bias the

findings. For example, the taxable income response to an anticipated future decrease in

tax rates must consider the lost revenue in the period before the tax rate change.53

Similarly, if a tax change causes an increase in deferred compensation, the increased

future tax liability must be netted against any decline in current tax payments.

Furthermore, any change in taxable income in one tax base must be netted against

changes in taxable income in other bases. For example, if a decline in personal tax rates

causes a shift from C corporation status to S corporation status, the increased personal

taxable income must be netted against decreases in corporate taxable income.



53
  Feldstein (1999) recognizes the timing effect, but whether the empirical analysis of the 1986 tax changes
from which he derives a taxable income elasticity, (Feldstein (1995)) does or does not is a controversial
question, with Slemrod (1996b) arguing that timing effects dominate the results.

                                                    62
8.      CONCLUSION

        The possibilities for evasion and the difficulties of administration have always

shaped tax systems. Until recently, formal analysis of taxation largely ignored these

realities. After a quarter of a century of research on the topic, it is time to put to rest the

claim that this is an understudied area. Instead, it is a vibrant area of research that has

clarified the positive and normative analysis of taxation.

        The research has clarified that when the tax structure changes, people may alter

their consumption basket, but they also may call and give new instructions to their

accountant, change their reports to the IRS, change the timing of transactions, and effect a

set of other actions that do not directly involve a change in their consumption basket. In

many cases, particularly for high-income taxpayers, this latter set of responses has larger

revenue and welfare implications than the real substitution responses, such as labor

supply, that tax analysis has traditionally focused on.

        Early models of this area focused on tax evasion, modeled as a gamble against the

enforcement capability of the state. More recently, the literature has examined more

general models of the technology of avoidance, with the additional risk bearing caused by

tax evasion either being a special case of this technology or one aspect of the cost of

changing behavior to reduce tax liability. A critical aspect of this technology is whether

the avoidance is inframarginal, in which case only income effects are involved, or

whether its cost depends on other aspects of behavior. If the latter is true, the choice of

consumption basket and avoidance become intertwined because certain activities may

facilitate avoidance, which alters their effective relative price or return.




                                               63
       Acknowledging the variety of behavioral responses to taxation greatly enriches

the normative analysis of taxation. It changes the answers to traditional subjects of

inquiry, such as incidence, optimal progressivity, optimal commodity taxation, and the

optimal mix between income and consumption taxes. It also raises a whole new set of

policy questions, such as the appropriate level of resources to devote to administration

and enforcement, and how those resources should be deployed. A recurring question that

runs throughout this chapter is whether the standard toolkit of positive and empirical

analysis can be applied to avoidance, evasion, and administration. The answer is a

qualified yes, as this chapter hopefully demonstrates.

       In one respect, though, the policy perspective does changes in an important way.

The magnitude of real substitution response, such as labor supply, to taxes is presumed to

be an immutable function of preferences, and not susceptible to policy manipulation in a

free society. With respect to avoidance and evasion, though, this hands-off approach is

not appropriate. On the contrary, there are a variety of policy instruments that can affect

the magnitude and nature of avoidance and evasion response, ranging from the activities

of the enforcement agency to how tightly drawn are rules and regulations. The same kind

of cost-benefit calculus applies to the choice of these instruments, implying that the

elasticity of behavioral response is itself a policy instrument, to be chosen optimally.

       A key challenge for the future is to add more empirical content to the theoretical

models of taxpayer and tax agency behavior. This will require, inter alia, addressing the

technology of raising and avoiding taxes. This is the analogue to the critical role for

traditional taxation theory of the empirical investigation of the structure of individuals'

preferences. Although by their nature the appropriate data are often difficult to come by,



                                              64
new approaches such as controlled field experiments and analysis of changes in tax

administration are promising.

       It would also be fruitful to incorporate public choice considerations into the

analysis. In some case administrative difficulties as well as widespread avoidance and

evasion are caused by the inability of compromise-seeking legislators to agree upon a

well-defined law. Furthermore, there is apparently no political constituency for tax

simplicity and adminsterability. Combining analysis of the public choice mechanisms

that produce tax systems with the kind of normative analyses discussed in this chapter

may lead to a more complete understanding of the reality of taxation.




                                            65
                                      References

Agell, Jonas and Mats Persson. "Asset Markets, Tax Arbitrage, and the Redistributive
   Properties of Progressive Income Taxation." Economic Letters, Vol. 34, No. 4
   (December, 1990), pp. 357-361.

Akerlof, George. "The Economics of 'Tagging' as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax,
   Welfare Programs, and Manpower Planning." American Economic Review, Vol. 68,
   No. 1 (March, 1978), pp. 8-19.

Allingham, Michael G. and Agnar Sandmo. "Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
    Analysis." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 1, No. 3-4 (1972), pp. 323-338.

Alm, James. "Compliance Costs and the Tax Avoidance-Tax Evasion Decision." Public
   Finance Quarterly, Vol. 16, No. 1 (January, 1988), pp. 31-66.

Alm, James. "What is an 'Optimal' Tax System?" National Tax Journal, Vol. 49, No. 1
   (March, 1996), pp. 117-133.

Alm, James. "Tax Compliance and Administration." In Handbook on Taxation, edited
   by W. Bartley Hildreth and James A. Richardson. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.,
   1999, pp. 741-768.

Alm, James, Roy Bahl and Matthew N. Murray. "Tax Base Erosion in Developing
   Countries." Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 39, No. 4 (July,
   1991), pp. 849-872.

Alm, James, Betty R. Jackson, and Michael McKee. "Estimating the Determinants of
   Taxpayer Compliance with Experimental Data." National Tax Journal, Vol. 45, No.
   1 (March, 1992), pp. 107-114.

Alt, James. "The Evolution of Tax Structures." Public Choice, Vol. 41, No. 1 (1983),
    pp. 181-222.

Andreoni, James. "IRS as Loan Shark: Tax Compliance with Borrowing Constraints."
   Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 49, No. 1 (October, 1992), pp. 35-46.

Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein. "Tax Compliance." Journal of
   Economic Literature, Vol. 36, No. 2 (June, 1998), pp. 818-860.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. Lectures in Public Economics. New York:
   McGraw-Hill, 1980.

Baldry, Jonathan C. "Tax Evasion and Labor Supply" Economics Letters, Vol. 3, No. 1
   (1979), pp. 53-56.

                                          66
Baldry, Jonathan C. "The Enforcement of Income Tax Laws: Efficiency Implications."
   Economic Record, Vol. 60, No. 169 (June, 1984), pp. 156-159.

Baldry, Jonathan C. "Income Tax Evasion and the Tax Schedule: Some Experimental
   Results." Public Finance, Vol. 42, No. 3 (1987), pp. 357-383.

Balke, Nathan S. and Grant W. Gardner. "Tax Collection Costs and the Size of
   Government." Mimeo. Southern Methodist University, 1991.

Beck, Paul and Woon Oh Jung. "An Economic Model of Taxpayer Compliance Under
   Complexity and Uncertainty." Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, Vol. 8,
   (1987b), pp. 1-27.

Becker, Gary. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 76, No. 2 (January/February, 1968), pp. 169-217.

Benjamini, Yael and Shlomo Maital. "Optimal Tax Evasion and Optimal Tax Policy." In
   The Economics of the Shadow Economy, edited by W. Gartner and A. Wenig. Berlin:
   Springer Verlag, 1985.

Beron, Kurt J., Helen V. Tauchen, and Ann Dryden Witte. "The Effect of Audits and
   Socioeconomic Variables on Compliance." In Why People Pay Taxes, edited by Joel
   Slemrod. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992.

Bird, Richard M. "Income Tax Reform in Developing Countries; The Administrative
   Dimension." Bulletin for International Fiscal Documentation, Vol. 37 (January,
   1983), pp. 3-14.

Bishop, John A., K. Victor Chow, John P. Formby and Chih-Chin Ho. "The
   Redistributive Effects of Noncompliance and Tax Evasion in the U.S." In Taxation,
   Poverty, and Income Distribution, edited by John Creedy. Aldershot, Edward Elgar,
   1994.

Blough, Roy. The Federal Taxing Process. Washington, D.C.: Prentice-Hall, 1952.

Blumenthal, Marsha, Charles Christian, and Joel Slemrod. "Do Normative Appeals
   Affect Tax Compliance? Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota."
   Mimeo, University of Michigan, August, 1999.

Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, and Pierre Pestieau. "Towards a Theory of the
   Direct-Indirect Tax Mix." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1 (September,
   1994), pp. 71-88.

Burman, Leonard, Kim Clausing, and John O’Hare. "Tax Reform and Realizations of
   Capital Gains in 1986." National Tax Journal, Vol. 45, No. 1 (March, 1994), pp. 1-
   18.

                                          67
Burman, Leonard and William Randolph. "Measuring Permanent Responses to Capital
   Gains Taxes in Panel Data." American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4 (September,
   1994), pp. 794-809.

Casanegra de Jantscher, Milka. "Administering the VAT." In Value-Added Taxation in
   Developing Countries, edited by Malcolm Gillis, Carl S. Shoup and Gerardo Sicat.
   Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1990, pp. 171-179.

Christian, Charles W. "Voluntary Compliance With the Individual Income Tax: Results
   from the 1988 TCMP Study." In The IRS Research Bulletin, 1993/1994, Publication
   1500 (Rev. 9-94). Washington, D.C.: Internal Revenue Service, 1994.

Clotfelter, Charles T. "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of Individual Returns."
   Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 65, No. 3 (August, 1983), pp. 363-373.

Cowell, Frank. "Tax Evasion with Labor Income." Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
  26, No. 1 (February, 1985), pp. 19-34.

Cowell, Frank, "Tax Sheltering and the Cost of Evasion," Oxford Economic Papers,
Vol. 42, No. 1 (January, 1990a), pp. 231-243.

Cowell, Frank A. Cheating the Government: The Economics of Evasion. Cambridge:
  The MIT Press, 1990b.

Cremer, Helmuth and Firouz Gahvari. "Tax Evasion and Optimal Commodity Taxation."
   Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 50. No. 2 (February, 1993), pp. 261-275.

Cremer, Helmuth and Firouz Gahvari. "Tax Evasion, Concealment, and the Optimal
   Linear Income Tax." Scandinavian Journal of Economics Vol. 96, No. 2 (1994), pp.
   219-239.

Cremer, Helmuth and Firouz Gahvari. "Tax Evasion and the Optimum General Income
   Tax." Journal of Public Economics Vol. 60, No. 2 (May, 1996), pp. 235-249.

Cross, Rodney and G. K. Shaw. "On the Economics of Tax Aversion." Public Finance,
   Vol. 37, No. 1 (1982), pp. 36-47.

Diamond, Peter. "Optimal Tax Theory and Development Policy: Directions for Future
   Research." In The Theory of Taxation for Developing Countries, edited by David
   Newbery and Nicholas H. Stern. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987, pp. 638-
   647.

Dixit, Avinash. "The Optimal Mix of Inflationary Finance and Commodity Taxation with
   Collection Lags." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 38, No. 3
   (September, 1991), pp. 643-654.


                                          68
Domar, Evsey D. and Richard Musgrave. "Proportional Income Taxation and Risk-
  Taking." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 58 (1944), 388-423.

Dubin, Jeffrey A., Michael J. Graetz and Louis L. Wilde. "The Effect of Audit Rates on
   the Federal Individual Income Tax, 1977-1986." National Tax Journal, Vol. 43, No.
   4 (December, 1990), pp. 395-409.

Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Louis L. Wilde. "The Empirical Analysis of Federal Income Tax
   Auditing and Compliance." National Tax Journal, Vol. 41, No. 1 (March, 1988), pp.
   61-74.

Engel, Eduardo and James R. Hines Jr. "Understanding Tax Evasion Dynamics." Mimeo,
   University of Michigan, 1999.

Erard, Brian. "Self-Selection with Measurement Errors: A Microeconometric Analysis
   of the Decision to Seek Tax Assistance and its Implications for Tax Compliance."
   Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 81, No. 2 (December, 1997), pp. 319-356.

Feige, Edgar L. "How Big is the Irregular Economy?" Challenge, Vol. 22, No. 5
   (November-December, 1979), pp. 5-13.

Feinstein, Jonathan. "An Econometric Analysis of Income Tax Evasion and its
   Detection." RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 14-35.

Feldstein, Martin. "Distributional Equity and the Optimal Structure of Public Prices."
   American Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 1 (March, 1972), pp. 32-36.

Feldstein, Martin. "The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
   of the 1986 Tax Reform Act." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103, No. 3 (June,
   1995), pp. 551-572

Feldstein, Martin. "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax." Review
   of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming, 1999

Goolsbee, Austan. "What Happens When You Tax the Rich: Evidence from Executive
   Compensation." Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Gordon, James. "Individual Morality and Reputation Costs as Deterrents to Tax
   Evasion." European Economic Review, Vol. 33, No. 4 (April, 1989), pp. 797-805.

Gordon, Roger and Jeffrey MacKie-Mason. "Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on
   Corporate Financial Policy and Organizational Form." In Do Taxes Matter? The
   Impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, edited by Joel Slemrod. Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press, 1990.

Gordon, Roger and Jeffrey MacKie-Mason. "How Much Do High Taxes Discourage
   Incorporation?" Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 2 (June, 1997), pp. 477-505.

                                           69
Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. "Do We Collect Any Revenue from Taxing Capital
   Income?" In Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by Lawrence Summers.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press and National Bureau of Economic Research, 1988, pp.
   89-130.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. "Are 'Real' Responses to Taxation Simply Shifting
   Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?" In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
   Consequences of Taxing the Rich, edited by Joel Slemrod. Cambridge and New
   York: Harvard University Press and the Russell Sage Foundation, forthcoming.

Gordon, Roger and John D. Wilson. "Measuring the Efficiency Cost of Taxing Risky
   Capital Income." American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 3 (June, 1989), pp. 427-
   439.

Graetz, Michael, Jennifer Reinganum, and Louis Wilde. "The Tax Compliance Game:
   Toward an Interactive Theory of Tax Enforcement." Journal of Law, Economics, and
   Organization, Vol. 2, No. 1 (Spring, 1986), pp. 1-32.

Groves, Harold M. (Donald J. Curran, ed.) Tax Philosophers: Two Hundred Years of
   Thought in Great Britain and the United States. Madison: The University of
   Wisconsin Press, 1974.

Gutmann, Peter M. "The Subterranean Economy." Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 33,
   No. 6 (November-December, 1977), pp. 26-34.

Hahn, Frank. "On Optimum Taxation." Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 6, No. 1
   (February, 1973), pp. 96-106.

Hinrichs, Harley H. A General Theory of Tax Structure Change During Economic
   Development. Cambridge, MA: The Law School of Harvard University, 1966.

Internal Revenue Service. "Federal Tax Compliance Research: Individual Income Tax
    Gap Estimates for 1985, 1988, and 1992." Publication 1415, Washington, D.C.,
    April, 1996.

Kanbur, S.M. "On Risk Taking and the Personal Distribution of Income." Journal of
   Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 4 (August, 1979), pp. 769-797.

Kaplow, Louis. "Optimal Taxation with Costly Enforcement and Evasion." Journal of
   Public Economics, Vol. 43, No. 2 (November, 1990), pp. 221-236.

Kaplow, Louis. "The Standard Deduction and Floors in the Income Tax." Tax Law
   Review, Vol. 50 (Fall, 1994).




                                         70
Kaplow, Louis, "How Tax Complexity and Enforcement Affect the Equity and
   Efficiency of the Income Tax." National Tax Journal, Vol. 45, No. 1 (March, 1996),
   pp. 135-150.

Kaplow, Louis. "Accuracy, Complexity, and the Income Tax." Journal of Law,
   Economics and Organization, Vol. 14, No. 1 (April, 1998), pp. 61-83.

Kau, James B. and Paul H. Rubin. "The Size of Government." Public Choice, Vol. 37,
   No. 2 (1981), pp. 261-274.

Kay, John A. "The Anatomy of Tax Avoidance." In Income Distribution: The Limits to
   Redistribution. Proceedings of the 31st Symposium of the Colston Research Society,
   University of Bristol. John Wright & Sons, Ltd., 1980, pp. 135-148.

Kesselman, Jonathan R. "Income Tax Evasion: An Intersectoral Analysis" Journal of
   Public Economics, Vol. 38, No. 2 (March, 1989), pp. 137-182.

Kesselman, Jonathan R. "Evasion Effects of Changing the Tax Mix." The Economic
   Record, Vol. 69, No. 205 (June, 1993), pp. 131-148.

Klepper, Steven and Daniel Nagin. "The Anatomy of Tax Evasion." Journal of Law,
   Economics, and Organization, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring,1989), pp. 1-24.

Kolm, Serge-Cristophe, "A Note on Optimum Tax Evasion." Journal of Public
   Economics, Vol. 2, No. 3 (July, 1973), pp. 265-270.

Long, Susan. "Social Control in the Civil Law: The Case of Income Tax Enforcement."
   In Law and Deviance, edited by H. L. Ross. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1981,
   pp. 185-214.

Maki, Dean M. "Portfolio Shuffling and Tax Reform." National Tax Journal, Vol. 49,
  No. 3 (September, 1996), pp. 317-329.

Mansfield, Charles. "Tax Administration in Developing Countries." International
  Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 35, No. 1 (March, 1988), pp. 181-197.

Mayshar, Joram. "On Measures of Excess Burden and their Application." Journal of
  Public Economics, Vol. 43, No. 3 (December, 1990), pp. 263-289.

Mayshar, Joram. "Taxation with Costly Administration." Scandinavian Journal of
  Economics, Vol. 93, No. 1 (1991), pp. 75-88.

Mayshar, Joram and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "Dalton-Improving Tax Reform." American
  Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 4 (September, 1995), pp. 793-807.




                                         71
Melumad, Nahum and Dilip Mookherjee. "Delegation as Commitment: The Case of
   Income Tax Audits." RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 2 (Summer, 1989),
   pp. 139-163.

Mookherjee, Dilip and Ivan P’ng. "Optimal Auditing, Insurance, and Redistribution."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 2 (May, 1989), 399-415.

Musgrave, Richard A. Fiscal Systems. New Haven and London: Yale University Press,
  1969.

Okun, Arthur M. Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff. Washington, D.C.: The
   Brookings Institution, 1975.

Pencavel, John. "A Note on Income Tax Evasion, Labor Supply and Nonlinear Tax
   Schedules." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1 (August, 1979), pp. 115-
   124.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Steven Shavell. "The Economic Theory of Public Enforcement
    of Law." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6993, March,
    1999.

Rajaraman, Indira. "Presumptive Direct Taxation: Lessons from Experience in
   Developing Countries." Economic and Political Weekly (Mombai, India), May 6-13,
   1995.

Ramsey, Frank. "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic Journal, Vol. 37
   (March, 1927), pp. 47-61.

Randolph, William. "Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of Charitable
   Contributions." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103, No. 4 (August, 1995), pp.
   70-138.

Reinganum, Jennifer R. and Louis L. Wilde. "Income Tax Compliance in a Principal
   Agent Framework." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 26, No. 1 (February, 1985),
   pp.1-18.

Reinganum, Jennifer R. and Louis L. Wilde. "Equilibrium Verification and Reporting
   Policies in a Model of Tax Compliance." International Economic Review, Vol. 27,
   No. 3 (October, 1986), pp. 739-760.

Reinganum, Jennifer R. and Louis L. Wilde. "A Note on Enforcement Uncertainty and
   Taxpayer Compliance." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 103, No. 4
   (November, 1988), pp. 793-798.

Richupan, Somdiai. "Measuring Tax Evasion." Finance and Development, Vol. 21, No.
   4 (December, 1984), pp. 38-40.


                                          72
Riezman, Raymond and Joel Slemrod. "Tariffs and Collection Costs."
   Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Vol. 123, No. 3 (1987), pp. 545-549.

Rosen, Harvey. "Tax Illusion and the Labor Supply of Married Women." Review of
   Economics and Statistics, Vol. 58, No. 2 (May, 1976), pp. 485-507.

Roth, Jeffrey A., John T. Scholz, and Ann Dryden Witte. Taxpayer Compliance, Volume
   1: An Agenda for Research Volume 2: Social Science Perspectives. Philadelphia:
   University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.

Sadka, Efraim and Vito Tanzi. "A Tax on Gross Assets of Enterprises as a Form of
   Presumptive Taxation." Bulletin for International Fiscal Documentation. Vol. 47,
   No. 2 (February, 1993), pp. 66-73.

Sanchez, Isabel and Joel Sobel. "Hierarchical Design and Enforcement of Income Tax
   Policies." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 50, No. 3 (March, 1993), pp. 345-369.

Sandford, Cedric. The Hidden Costs of Taxation. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies,
   1973.

Sandford, Cedric. (ed.) Tax Compliance Costs: Measurement and Policy. Bath: Fiscal
   Publications, 1995.

Sandmo, Agnar. "Income Tax Evasion, Labour Supply and the Equity-Efficiency
   Tradeoff." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 16, No. 3 (December, 1981), pp. 265-
   288.

Scholz, John Karl. "Tax Progressivity and Household Portfolios: Descriptive Evidence
   from the Surveys of Consumer Finances." In Tax Progressivity and Income
   Inequality, edited by Joel Slemrod. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Scotchmer, Suzanne. "Audit Classes and Tax Enforcement Policy." American Economic
   Review, Vol. 77, No. 2 (May, 1987), pp. 229-233.

Scotchmer, Suzanne. "Who Profits from Taxpayer Confusion?" Economics Letters, Vol.
   29, No. 1 (1989), 49-55.

Scotchmer, Suzanne and Joel Slemrod. "Randomness in Tax Enforcement." Journal of
   Public Economics Vol. 38, No. 1 (February, 1989), 17-32.

Shoup, Carl, Roy Blough, and Mabel Newcomer, eds. Facing the Tax Problem. New
   York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1937.

Skinner, Jonathan and Joel Slemrod. "An Economic Perspective on Tax Evasion."
   National Tax Journal, Vol. 38, No. 3 (September, 1985), pp. 345-353.



                                          73
Slemrod, Joel. "Optimal Taxation and Optimal Tax Systems." Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Winter, 1990), pp. 157-178.

Slemrod, Joel. "Fixing the Leak in Okun’s Bucket: Optimal Tax Progressivity When
   Avoidance Can be Controlled." Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1
   (September, 1994), pp. 41-51.

Slemrod, Joel. "Which is the Simplest Tax System of Them All?" In Economic Effects of
   Fundamental Tax Reform, edited by Henry Aaron and William Gale. Washington,
   D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1996a.

Slemrod, Joel. "High-Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy
   of Behavioral Response." In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, edited
   by Martin Feldstein and James Poterba. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and
   NBER, 1996b.

Slemrod, Joel. "Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income
   Elasticities." National Tax Journal, Vol. 51, No. 4 (December, 1998), pp. 773-788.

Slemrod, Joel. "A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation."
   International Tax and Public Finance, forthcoming.

Slemrod, Joel, Marsha Blumenthal and Charles Christian. "Taxpayer Response to an
   Increased Probability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in
   Minnesota." Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Slemrod, Joel and Wojciech Kopczuk. "The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income."
   Mimeo. University of Michigan, 1999.

Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "The Optimal Size of a Tax Collection Agency."
   Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 89, No. 2 (1987), pp. 183-192.

Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "Analyzing the Standard Deduction as a
   Presumptive Tax." International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 1, No. 1 (May, 1994),
   pp. 25-34.

Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "The Cost of Taxation and the Marginal Efficiency
   Cost of Funds." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 43, No. 1 (March,
   1996), pp. 172-198.

Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "Integrating Expenditure and Tax Decisions: The
   Marginal Cost of Funds and the Marginal Benefit of Projects." Mimeo, University of
   Michigan, September, 1999.

Sorensen, Peter Birch. "From the Global Income Tax to the Dual Income Tax: Recent
   Tax Reforms in the Nordic Countries." International Tax and Public Finance, Vol.
   1, No. 1 (May, 1994), pp. 57-79.

                                          74
Stern, Nicholas. "Optimum Taxation with Errors in Administration." Journal of Public
    Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2 (March, 1982), pp. 181-211.

Steuerle, C. Eugene. Taxes, Loans, and Inflation: How the Nation’s Wealth Becomes
   Misallocated. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1985.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case for Random Taxes."
    Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 18, No. 1 (June, 1982), pp. 1-33.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "The General Theory of Tax Avoidance." National Tax Journal, Vol.
    38, No. 3 (September, 1985), pp. 325-337.

Tanzi, Vito. "The Underground Economy in the United States: Estimates and
   Implications." Banco Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, No. 135 (December,
   1980), pp. 427-53.

Tanzi, Vito. "Theory and Policy: A Comment on Dixit and on Current Theory."
   International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 39, No. 4 (December, 1992) pp. 957-
   966.

Tanzi, Vito and Milka Casanegra de Jantscher. "The Use of Presumptive Income in
   Modern Tax Systems." In Changes in Revenue Structures, Proceedings of the 42nd
   Congress of the International Institute of Public Finance edited by Aldo Chiancone
   and Ken Messere. Detroit: Wayne University Press, 1989, pp. 37-51.

Tanzi, Vito and Anthony Pellechio. "The Reform of Tax Administration." In Institutions
   and Economic Development: Implications of a New-Institutional-Economics
   Approach for Growth, Poverty Reductions, Democracy, and External Assistance,
   edited by Christopher Clague. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1996.

Usher, Dan. "Tax Evasion and the Marginal Cost of Public Funds." Economic Inquiry,
   Vol. 24, No. 4 (October, 1986), pp. 563-586.

Watson, Harry. "Tax Evasion and Labor Markets." Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
  27, No. 2 (July, 1985), pp. 231-246.

Weiss, Lawrence. "The Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness in the
  Optimal Income Tax." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No. 6 (December,
  1976), pp. 1343-1352.

Wertz, Kenneth L. "Allocation by and Output of a Tax-Administering Agency."
  National Tax Journal, Vol. 32, No. 2 (June, 1979), pp. 143-156.

Wildasin, David E. "On Public Good Provision with Distortionary Taxes." Economic
   Inquiry, Vol. 22, No. 2 (April, 1984), pp. 227-243.


                                          75
Wilson, John Douglas. "On the Optimal Tax Base for Commodity Taxation." American
   Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 5 (December, 1989), pp. 1196-1206.

Yaniv, Gideon. "Withholding and Non-withheld Tax Evasion." Journal of Public
   Economics, Vol. 35, No. 2 (March, 1988), pp. 183-204.

Yaniv, Gideon. "Collaborated Employee-Employer Tax Evasion." Public Finance, Vol.
   47, No. 2 (1992), pp. 312-321.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo, "A Note on ‘Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis’". Journal
   of Public Economics, Vol. 3, No. 2 (May, 1974), pp. 201-202.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo. "A Note on Optimal Taxation and Administrative Costs." American
   Economic Review, Vol. 69, No. 2 (June, 1979), pp. 475-480.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo. "On the Excess Burden of Tax Evasion." Public Finance Quarterly,
   Vol. 15, No. 2 (April, 1987), pp. 123-137.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo and Yitzhak Vakneen. "On the Shadow Price of a Tax Inspector."
   Public Finance, Vol. 44, No. 3 (1989), pp. 492-505.




                                        76
