                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PRESERVING THE OCEAN CIRCULATION:
                             IMPLICATIONS FOR CLIMATE POLICY


                                              Klaus Keller
                                               Kelvin Tan
                                          François M.M. Morel
                                           David F. Bradford


                                           Working Paper 7476
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7476


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 Klaus Keller, Kelvin Tan, François M.M. Morel, and David F. Bradford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Preserving the Ocean Circulation: Implications for Climate Policy
Klaus Keller, Kelvin Tan, François M.M. Morel, and David F. Bradford
NBER Working Paper No. 7476
January 2000
JEL No. Q20, Q30, D90

                                                ABSTRACT


        Climate modelers have recognized the possibility of abrupt climate changes caused by a
reorganization of the North Atlantic’s current pattern (technically known as a thermohaline circulation
collapse). This circulation system now warms north-western Europe and transports carbon dioxide to the
deep oceans. The posited collapse of this system could produce severe cooling in north-western Europe,
even when general global warming is in progress. In this paper we use a simple
integrated assessment model to investigate the optimal policy response to this risk. Adding the constraint
of avoiding a thermohaline circulation collapse would significantly reduce the allowable
greenhouse gas emissions in the long run along an optimal path. Our analysis implies that relatively small
damages associated with a collapse (less than 1 % of gross world product) would justify a considerable
reduction of future carbon dioxide emissions.


Klaus Keller                                                     Kelvin Tan
Department of Geosciences                                        Woodrow Wilson School of Public
153 Guyot Hall                                                   and International Affairs
Princeton University                                             Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                              Princeton, NJ 08544
klkeller@princeton.edu


François M.M. Morel                                              David F. Bradford
Department of Geosciences                                        Woodrow Wilson School of
153 Guyot Hall                                                   Public and International Affairs
Princeton University                                             and Department of Economics
Princeton, NJ 08544                                              Princeton University
morel@princeton.edu                                              Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                                 and NBER
                                                                 bradford@princeton.edu
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 1

Introduction

The UN framework convention on climate change [UNFCCC, 1992] requires a stabilization of

greenhouse gases at a level that will “prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the cli-
mate system”. Which stabilization level for greenhouse gases would avoid dangerous interference
and whether this risk justifies costly reductions in greenhouse gas emissions is controversial. The

policies derived from optimal growth analyses of climate change typically suggest relatively small
reductions in carbon emissions [Nordhaus, 1992, Nordhaus, 1997, Tol, 1997]. Such policies may
result in a global mean atmospheric warming in excess of 6 o C within 500 years [Nordhaus, 1997],

a temperature increase comparable to the warming since the last Ice Age [Lorius et al., 1990].
  In contrast to these conclusions, several authors have suggested that the dangerous level of inter-
ference may start when anthropogenic climate change exceeds substantially the range of relatively

recent (e.g., over the last millennium) natural variations [WBGU, 1995, Azar and Rodhe, 1997].
This more precautionary view — partially motivated by the possibility of catastrophic and/or ir-
reversible climate events caused by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions — implies that the
greenhouse gas emissions should be limited to considerably lower levels than suggested by many

optimal growth analyses. One might ask whether the precautionary view adopts a value framework
different from that of the optimal growth analysis or rather differently evaluates the possibility of
negative climate effects.
  It is important to note that “optimal” refers here to a policy that maximizes a function of per
capita consumption within an economic growth model, which depends on a variety of simplifying
assumptions and value judgments. It is possible that the omission of high damage and/or irre-

versible events in previous optimal growth studies may explain most of the discrepancies between
the optimal growth studies and the more precautionary view. Here we investigate whether a po-
tential change in the ocean circulation system may constitute such an event and what an optimal

growth framework prescribes as the policy response to this risk.
  Coupled ocean-atmosphere models indicate that a long lasting change in the ocean circulation
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                   2

(technically known as a thermohaline circulation collapse) is a plausible response to increasing

greenhouse gas concentrations [Manabe and Stouffer, 1993, Wood et al., 1999, Schmittner and
Stocker, 1999, Rahmstorf and Ganopolski, 1999]. An important link between atmospheric green-
house gas concentrations and the ocean circulation is the density of the surface waters in regions

like the North Atlantic where ocean deep waters are formed. Warm and salty oceanic surface wa-
ters flowing towards the North Atlantic cool by heat loss to the overlying atmosphere. This cooling
acts to increase the densities of the surface waters. This effect of the cooling is, however, counter-

acted by the net freshwater input into the North Atlantic [Baumgartner and Reichel, 1975], which
acts to decrease the salinities (and in turn the densities) of the surface waters. Surface waters reach-
ing a density sufficiently higher than the underlying waters sink and form deep-waters. Because

this density-driven ocean circulation is governed by changes in temperature and salt content, it is
referred to as the “thermohaline circulation”.
  Both concentration and rate of increase of atmospheric greenhouse gases influence the intensity

of the thermohaline circulation [Stocker and Schmittner, 1997]. The concentration of greenhouse
gases is important because higher greenhouse gas concentrations cause higher atmospheric temper-
atures. A warmer atmosphere acts (i) to increase the temperature of ocean surface waters, and (ii)
to increase the freshwater input into the North-Atlantic (via an increase in the atmospheric water

vapor transport) [Schmittner and Stocker, 1999]. Both processes act to decrease the surface water
densities and the deep-water formation rates. One reason why the rate of increase of greenhouse
gas concentrations affects the thermohaline circulation is the limited oceanic heat transport to the

deep-waters [Schmittner and Stocker, 1999, Stocker, 1999]. Higher rates of increase of greenhouse
gas concentrations result in larger heat fluxes into the surface waters and the oceanic heat transport
to the deep-waters becomes relatively less important. As a result, the surface waters heat up more

and the deep-water formation rates are lower compared to situations with lower rates of increase
of greenhouse gas concentrations. These mechanisms are detailed, for example, in Schmittner and
Stocker [1999], and Stouffer and Manabe [1999]. Note, that the projected thermohaline circulation

response to the greenhouse gas forcing is uncertain due to model uncertainties.
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 3

  The consequences of such a thermohaline circulation collapse might include decreased oceanic

carbon uptake, decreased heat and water vapor transport to Europe with concomitant climate mod-
ifications, decreased fishery and agricultural yields, increased warming in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, as well as damages to natural ecosystems [Rahmstorf, 1997, Broecker, 1997, Rahmstorf

and Ganopolski, 1999, Schmittner and Stocker, 1999]. Previous studies have considered economi-
cally optimal pathways for carbon dioxide (CO2 ) stabilization (e.g., Richels and Edmonds [1995],
Wigley et al. [1996]), rate-dependent damages of global warming (e.g., Peck and Teisberg [1994],

Toth et al. [1997]), or the possibility of abrupt climate changes (e.g., Lempert et al. [1994]). How-
ever, the specific damage and the dependency of the thermohaline circulation collapse on the rate
of greenhouse gas increase have not been analyzed in an optimal growth framework so far.

  We use a simple integrated assessment model that incorporates published simulation results of
an ocean circulation model. We derive, for a range of climate sensitivities, the optimal investment
and emissions paths in our model with the added constraint to preserve the thermohaline circula-

tion. We compare the additional costs of maintaining the thermohaline circulation with estimates of
the specific damages caused by a thermohaline circulation collapse and evaluate the trade-offs the
equivalent carbon dioxide concentration (PCO2 ) at various levels. Finally, we argue that preserv-
                                                ;e



ing the thermohaline circulation may be justified in a benefit-cost sense for lower bound estimates

of the specific damages and conventional values of the pure rate of social time preference.


Choice of integrated assessment model

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change calls for a cost-effective policy

to stabilize CO2 concentrations at levels that would ”prevent dangerous anthropogenic interfer-
ence with the climate system.” Causing a breakdown of the ocean circulation system might well
deserve the label ”dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system”. A policy that

maximizes a weighted sum of the welfare of the different generations (subject to the constraint
to avoid such a breakdown) might well be described as cost-effective in avoiding this specific an-
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  4

thropogenic interference. This method is similar to the climate targeting approaches discussed, for

example, by Nordhaus [1997], or Ha-Duong et al. [1997]. We refine a basic integrated assess-
ment model to include specific consideration of the thermohaline circulation. In particular, we add
the preservation of the thermohaline circulation as a constraint to an optimal growth model. This

results in an optimal emissions path which conserves the thermohaline circulation and specifies a
necessary stabilization level for greenhouse gases. One benefit of this method is that the choice of
greenhouse gas stabilization level is motivated by a threshold response in the natural system. This

choice is likely more efficient in the sense of an optimal growth model than an arbitrary choice of
greenhouse gas stabilization level. This approach allows us additionally to consider the economic
trade-offs associated with accepting the natural threshold.

  We defer to the DICE model [Nordhaus, 1994] as the basis for our study. DICE has several
advantages: (i) the model results are generally consistent with more complex integrated assessment
models [Dowlatabadi, 1995, Weyant et al., 1996]; (ii) it is relatively simple and transparent such

that the effects of the model refinements are easily identified; (iii) the DICE model has been used in
a large number of sensitivity studies (for example, with respect to the representation of the carbon
cycle [Kaufmann, 1997, Schulz and Kasting, 1997]), so our results can be compared relatively
easily to those of other studies; and (iv) the model identifies the optimal policy, given a set of

explicit value judgments.
  The model-derived policy recommendations should, however, be interpreted with caution. The
DICE model is nothing more than a tool to draw consistent conclusions from a set of assumptions.

The assumptions include more or less radically simplified descriptions of the natural system (e.g.,
the carbon cycle) and the economic system (e.g., there is just one consumption good and only
one kind of representative consumer at each point in time), and the objective of the policy is to

maximize a weighted sum of utilities. The model can of course not predict misfortunes not yet
identified that would render its application inappropriate. The function of such models, rather, is
to allow us to work out the implications of stylized interactions between natural and economic

systems and simple but explicit specification of value judgments.
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                    5

THE DICE     MODEL OF ECONOMICALLY OPTIMAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY


The DICE model is a dynamic model of optimal economical growth that incorporates a simple

feedback mechanism between economic activities and climate change. Central to the model is
a criterion for ranking distributions of social well-being over time, which means in effect across
generations. Well-being is represented in the model by a flow of aggregate utility U , defined as

the product of the logarithm of per capita consumption per year c, and the exogenously given
population L:


                                         U (t) = L(t) ln c(t):                                       (1)


The choice among alternative paths of utility thus defined is determined by the maximization of a
discounted sum (U ):

                                              X
                                              t
                                     U =            U (t) (1 + ),t;                                (2)
                                              t=to


which is calculated by applying a “pure rate of social time preference”  to the flow of utility at
time t from some starting point to to an appropriate time horizon t. It is important to note that
discounting in this objective function applies to utility, not money values, and serves the function
of specifying a value judgment about the distribution of utility across generations. A positive pure
rate of social time preference implies that future utility is discounted relative to present utility. Be-
cause reducing CO2 emissions causes present costs but avoids mostly future climate damages, the

optimal CO2 emissions derived from a discounted utilitarian approach (equation 2) are sensitive
to the pure rate of social time preference (e.g., Manne [1995]). We will return later to a discus-
sion of this important, and controversial, point. Note also, that this single-actor model neglects

intragenerational distribution effects like an asymmetric distribution of benefits and costs between
the northern and southern hemisphere (e.g., Dowlatabadi and Lave [1993]). Last but not least, it
is important to stress that the underlying benefit-cost reasoning likely misrepresents non-market
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 6

values, thus potentially resulting in too lenient abatement measures (for a further discussion see,

for example, Nordhaus [1994], or Bradford [1999]).
  Feasible consumption paths depend on the economy’s output. The gross world product            Q is
assumed to be determined by a Cobb-Douglas production function of capital        K and population
with the parameters: level of technology A, output scaling factor , and elasticity of output    with
respect to capital:


                                Q(t) = (t) A(t) K (t) L(t)1, :                                   (3)


Gross world product is gross with respect to depreciation of capital but net with respect to abate-
ment costs and climate related damages. The effect of abatement costs and climate related damages

on output is incorporated into the model via the output scaling factor (discussed below). Total con-
sumption C is the difference between gross world product and gross investment I :


                                       C (t) = Q(t) , I (t):                                     (4)


  To simulate the feedback between economic activities and climate change, the DICE model
assumes that carbon emissions, E, during one year into the atmosphere are proportional to the

gross world product, with the proportionality determined by the time-varying exogenous carbon
intensity of production  and the policy choice of the level of carbon emissions abatement :


                                 E (t) = [1 , (t)] (t) Q(t):                                   (5)


A constant fraction    of carbon emissions is added to the atmospheric carbon stock     M (the rest
is assumed to be absorbed by carbon sinks). A portion M of the atmospheric carbon in excess of

the preindustrial stock of 590 Gt is exported during each time step to the deep ocean so that the
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                7

atmospheric stock evolves according to


                                    M (t) = 590 + E (t , 1)
                                 +(1 , M )[M (t , 1) , 590]:                                    (6)


Atmospheric carbon dioxide acts as a greenhouse gas, causing a change F in the radiative forcing

from the preindustrial level according to:


                                 F (t) = 4.1 ln(Mln(2)
                                                  (t)=590) + O(t);                               (7)


where O represents the (exogenously determined) change in forcing due to other greenhouse gases
like methane or CFCs. An increase in radiative forcing causes an increase in global mean atmo-
spheric temperature T from its preindustrial level, which is modeled using a simple atmosphere-
ocean climate model according to:


                          T (t) = T (t , 1) + (1=R1)[F (t) , T (t , 1)
                                   ,(R2=12)(T (t , 1) , T (t , 1))]:                           (8)


In this equation R1 and  R2 denote the thermal capacity of the oceanic mixed layer and the deep
ocean, respectively,  is the climate feedback parameter, 12 is the transfer rate from the oceanic
mixed layer to the deep ocean, and T  is the deviation of the deep-ocean temperature from the
preindustrial level approximated by:


                             T (t) = T (t , 1) + (1=R2 )[(R2=12)
                                             (T (t , 1) , T (t , 1))]:                          (9)


A key property of the climate system is the ”climate sensitivity,” which is the hypothetical increase
in equilibrium temperature for a doubling of atmospheric CO2, placed by the IPCC between 1.5
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                   8

and 4.5 o C. In the DICE model, the climate sensitivity is inversely related to the parameter .

Specifically, the modeled climate sensitivity is given by the ratio of the increase in radiative forcing
for a doubling of atmospheric CO2 (equal to 4.1, equation 7) to .
  The damages relative to gross world product (D) are assumed to be a function of the deviation
of the global average temperature from it’s preindustrial value:


                                          D(t) = 1 T (t)2 ;                                      (10)


where 1 and 2 are model parameters. The cost of CO2 emissions abatement TC , measured as a
fraction of gross world product, is given by:


                                         TC (t) = b1 (t)b2 ;                                      (11)


where b1 and b2 are model parameters. Given the calculated abatement costs and climate damages,
global output is rescaled with the scaling factor :


                                    (t) = [1 , TC (t)]=(1 + D(t)):                                 (12)


This scaling factor approximates the effects of small damages reasonably well, compared to the
explicit accounting, which would imply      (t) = 1 , TC (t) , D(t).
  In the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario of this model, carbon emissions are unabated. Dis-
counted utility is maximized, but only through the choice of an optimal investment path over time.

The BAU scenario is then compared with the results of optimally setting both investment and
emission abatement rates over time.
  Model parameter values are used from the original DICE model, with one exception. We adopt

a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C instead of the previously used 2.9 o C as our standard value. Based
on the analysis of climate data and the expert opinion of the IPCC, Tol and de Vos [1998] estimate
the values of the median and the standard deviation of the climate sensitivity as 3.6 and 1.1 o C.
                                         Preserving the Ocean Circulation                             9

R EPRESENTATION        OF THE        N ORTH ATLANTIC       THERMOHALINE CIRCULATION COLLAPSE


To represent the sensitivity of the thermohaline circulation to changes in radiative forcing (which

depends on the atmospheric CO2 concentration as well as the forcing by other greenhouse gases
(eq. 7)), we express the radiative forcing term in the DICE model as an equivalent carbon dioxide
level (PCO2 ), according to:
            ;e




                                                              F (t) ln 2 
                                        PCO2  ;e
                                                   = 280 exp       4:1      :                      (13)


The calculated PCO2 levels are compared with the critical PCO2 level beyond which the thermo-
                           ;e                                               ;e



haline circulation is supposed to collapse. This critical level is calculated by a polynomial fit to the
model results of Stocker and Schmittner [1997] (Figure 1). At a rate of PCO2 increase of 0.68
                                                                                    ;e



% a,1 (approximately the present rate in the DICE model) and a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C the

critical PCO2 is 776 ppmV (denoted by the star in Figure 1). A climate sensitivity of 4 o C results
                 ;e



in a lower critical PCO2 of 665 ppmV. The PCO2 stabilization level necessary to maintain the
                                ;e                            ;e



thermohaline circulation is very sensitive to the climate sensitivity parameter, which is, however,

only imperfectly known. The uncertainty in the climate sensitivity, which has been characterized
by Tol and de Vos [1998] as having a standard deviation of 1.1 o C, implies considerable variations
in the critical PCO2 levels.
                      ;e




S OLUTION    METHOD


To calculate the optimal emissions path that preserves the thermohaline circulation, we constrain

the DICE model to keep the PCO2 levels below the critical PCO2 level. We approximate the rate
                                         ;e                                  ;e



of increase in PCO2 by the average rate of increase for all time periods before the stabilization
                       ;e



occurred. Different values for the climate sensitivity are used in the sensitivity analysis to estimate

the economically optimal policy with and without the thermohaline circulation constraint.
  The constrained optimization problem is solved for the time period between 1965 and 2295,
                                    Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                        10

                                    critical equivalent carbon dioxide level
                           1200


                           1100


                           1000
                  [ppmV]




                           900


                           800


                           700


                           600
                             0.4                 0.6           0.8               1
                                                                      −1
                                                 rate of increase [% a ]

F IGURE 1: Critical atmospheric PCO2 concentrations as a function of the rate of PCO2 increase plotted
                                       ;e                                                   ;e

for different values of climate sensitivity. Shown are polynomial fits to the model results reported by Stocker
and Schmittner [1997]. The lines represent climate sensitivities of 4 o C (full line), 3.75 o C (dashed line),
3.5 o C (dotted line), and 3 o C (dash-dotted line). The star represents the critical atmospheric PCO2 level
                                                                                                       ;e

for the approximate present rate of PCO2 increase in the DICE model and the adopted climate sensitivity
                                            ;e

of 3.5 o C.

using the AMPL programming language [Fourer et al., 1993] and the nonlinear solver LOQO3.11

[Vanderbei, 1997] (kindly provided by R. Vanderbei). We used simulation results until the year
2765 to set the transversality conditions on the optimized run. Varying the terminal conditions has
negligible effects on the reported results. Note that a significant social rate of time preference is

needed for this approximation to work (for a discussion of this technical point see, for example,
Schultz [1996]). Our implementation of the DICE model — with the original model structure and
parameters — tracks closely the previously reported results of the original DICE model [Nord-

haus, 1994] (for example, the optimal carbon abatement in 2005 is 9.6 % in both model imple-
                                       Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                     11

mentations). In the following discussion we refer to the “DICE model” as the above defined model

structure at various climate sensitivities (with or without the thermohaline circulation constraint).


Results and Discussion

O PTIMAL    CARBON DIOXIDE TRAJECTORIES


At a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C, the optimal PCO2 levels in the unconstrained DICE model
                                                             ;e



(Figure 2, crosses) are considerably higher than the optimal PCO2 levels that maintain the thermo-
                                                                          ;e



haline circulation (Figure 2, dotted line), which stabilize around 840 ppmV.             Note that the slight

                                equivalent carbon dioxide concentrations
                       1600


                       1400


                       1200
              [ppmV]




                       1000


                       800


                       600


                       400
                         2000    2050        2100       2150      2200         2250      2300
                                                      time [a]

F IGURE 2: Model derived PCO2 trajectories for different policies and climate sensitivities. Shown are
                                  ;e

the optimal trajectory according to our implementation of the DICE model that results in a thermohaline
circulation collapse (i.e., unconstrained, crosses), and the optimal trajectory that maintains the thermohaline
circulation (i.e., constrained, dotted line) for a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C. Given for comparison are
also the optimal PCO2 trajectories to maintain the thermohaline circulation at climate sensitivities of 4 o C
                          ;e

(full line) and 3.75 o C (dashed line). The business-as-usual scenario for a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C is
represented by the circles.
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                     12

                                                abatement
                   100


                   80


                   60
             [%]




                   40


                   20


                    0
                    2000      2050       2100        2150      2200         2250     2300
                                                   time [a]

F IGURE 3: Necessary reductions in carbon emissions relative to the business as usual scenario to stabilize
PCO2 at the levels shown in Figure 2. Symbols are the same as in Figure 2.
     ;e




increase in the stabilization PCO2 relative to the estimate obtained at the present conditions (star
                                    ;e



in Figure 1) is caused by the slight decrease in the average PCO2 growth rate between the present
                                                                      ;e



and the time of PCO2 stabilization. Using a higher climate sensitivity requires stabilizing PCO2
                         ;e                                                                              ;e



at earlier times and at lower levels (Figure 2, dashed and solid line, for climate sensitivities of 3.75

and 4 o C, respectively). Perhaps surprisingly, the optimal PCO2 trajectories in Figure 2 do not
                                                                       ;e



appear to diverge much from the unconstrained DICE result until the year 2050.


N ECESSARY    EMISSION ABATEMENTS


The optimal policy neglecting the potential thermohaline circulation collapse suggests only small
emission abatements (between 10 and 20 %) for the next 300 years (Figure 3, crosses).                   To

maintain the thermohaline circulation, anthropogenic carbon emissions have to be reduced consid-
                                    Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                13


TABLE 1: Effects of variations in climate sensitivity and consideration of the thermohaline circulation
constraint on abatement in 2005 and 2035.

   thermohaline           climate           abatement         abatement
    circulation         sensitivity          in 2005           in 2035
     constraint
    considered?             [o C]              [%]               [%]

         no                 2.9                9.6               11.7
         no                 3.5                10.7              13.0

        yes                 3.0                9.8               12.0
        yes                 3.5                11.5              15.5
        yes                3.75                13.0              18.9
        yes                 4.0                14.6              22.8


erably. At a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C the optimal policy (Figure 3, dotted line) to preserve the

thermohaline circulation requires reducing carbon emissions by 59 % in 2125, over 42 percentage
points more than the policy that neglects the thermohaline constraint. Interestingly, the additional
constraint of avoiding a thermohaline circulation collapse affects abatement levels in the next 40
years only marginally in this case (e.g., 15.5 % in 2035 relative to 13.0 % in the unconstrained

case, Table 1).    However, assuming a climate sensitivity of 4 o C (Figure 3, solid line) changes
the picture substantially. To maintain a thermohaline circulation in this example, emissions have
to be reduced by roughly 23 % in 2035 (compared to 14 % in the unconstrained case), and the

emission reduction increases to roughly 70 % in 2115 (compared to 17 % in the unconstrained
case). These higher emission reductions are needed because a higher climate sensitivity results in
a lower PCO2 stabilization level that is reached earlier. To maintain the thermohaline circulation
              ;e



at a climate sensitivity of 4 o C requires a large change compared to the optimal policy suggested
by the unconstrained DICE model. Note that the increase in abatement relative to the results re-
ported by Nordhaus [1994] (with abatements ranging between 10 and 20 %) are predominantly
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                14

caused by the consideration of the thermohaline circulation constraint and not by our change in the

base-case climate sensitivity. For example, the effect of changing the climate sensitivity from the
2.9 o C estimate of Nordhaus [1994] to our base-case of 3.5 o C without the thermohaline circulation
constraint increases the abatement by less than 2 percentage points in 2115.

  Analyzing the optimal abatement measures shown in Figure 3, one could conclude that only a
slight change in the near term policy (e.g., changes in abatement in 2005 of less than 4 percentage
points, Table 1) is called for to reduce the risk of a thermohaline circulation collapse. It should

be noted, however, that the results in Figure 3 refer to implemented abatement. The DICE model
incorporates no explicit treatment of socioeconomic inertia. Several studies (e.g., Ha-Duong et al.
[1997], Hasselmann et al. [1997]) have argued that a realistic representation of socioeconomic

inertia would imply that abatement has to be initiated earlier. Further, estimates of the time re-
quired to put in place technology optimized for deep cuts in CO2 emissions range around 50 years
[Ishitani and Johansson, 1996]. So, a plan to follow the abatement path proposed by this model

would almost certainly include current planning actions and increased investments into low CO2
emitting technologies.
  Note that the optimal policy in all cases suggests roughly a 10 % reduction of carbon emissions
starting in 1995. The emission abatement implemented so far is close to zero and below the optimal

policy suggested by the model. This situation might continue in the near future, since the Kyoto
agreement imposes limits only on the Annex 1 (developed) nations.


EFFECT   OF RATE DEPENDENCY ON POLICY


Because smaller rates of increase in PCO2 allow for higher PCO2 stabilization levels (Figure 1),
                                          ;e                        ;e



reducing carbon emissions now constitutes an investment that pays off in an increased stabilization
level for future generations. Alternatively, reducing carbon emissions could be delayed to the
future, resulting, however, in a lower PCO2 stabilization level.
                                           ;e



  We evaluate the influence of the rate dependency on the estimated optimal near term policy by
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 15

replacing the rate dependent stabilization level shown in Figure 2 (dotted line) by the same value

(roughly equal to 840 ppmV) without a rate dependency. If the rate dependency of the constraint
influences the estimated optimal policy for the near future, the calculated near term abatement
should change. However, replacing the rate dependent constraint with a fixed PCO2 target results
                                                                                      ;e



in an optimal abatement path virtually indistinguishable from the rate dependent results shown in
Figure 3.
  This small effect of the rate dependency on the estimated optimal policy in the near future is

similar to the findings of Peck and Teisberg [1994], and is mainly caused in our model by the
relatively low sensitivity of the critical PCO2 level to the average rate of PCO2 increase (Figure
                                              ;e                                 ;e



1), and the relatively large pure rate of social time preference of 3 %. For example, perturbing

the optimized PCO2 trajectory shown in Figure 2 (dotted line) by stabilizing PCO2 for one year
                   ;e                                                                 ;e



in 1999 would reduce the average rate of PCO2 increase calculated over the next 130 years only
                                                   ;e



marginally. This change in policy would increase the critical PCO2 level by roughly 2 ppmV (as-
                                                                    ;e



suming an otherwise constant policy as shown in Figure 3 (dotted line) for a climate sensitivity of
3.5 o C). The expensive reduction today would hence influence the threshold level in 130 years only
little. The resulting small increase in utility in 130 years, caused by the slightly higher allowable
emissions, is furthermore reduced in significance by the application of a pure rate of social time

preference of 3 % over the 130 year time period.


D OES   PRESERVING THE THERMOHALINE CIRCULATION PASS A BENEFIT- COST TEST ?


Our model determines the optimal policy in the same way as the original DICE model but with the
additional constraint to preserve the thermohaline circulation. One may ask whether this constraint

— imposed by a precautionary policy choice — might pass a benefit-cost test.
  One possible approach to address this question is to amend the damage function in the uncon-
strained model and estimate the necessary incremental damage due to a thermohaline circulation
collapse that would preserve the thermohaline circulation as an optimization result. However, this
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                16

approach introduces local maxima and non-smooth gradients in the objective function which com-

plicate the solution method considerably. To report solely the optimization results would also hide
the trade-offs between costs and benefits for the different policy choices. We hence choose an
alternative and more transparent method by analyzing the changes in costs and damages due to the

additional constraint and weigh them by the discount rate on goods.
  We calculate the time dependent discount rate on goods along the optimal path from the original
DICE model. Using the original DICE model results in a high estimate of the discount rate since it

neglects the thermohaline circulation constraint and uses a relatively low climate sensitivity. The
discount rate can be calculated either from the marginal productivity of capital or from the path
of per capita consumption. Although these two methods should — in theory — yield identical

results, the numerical implementation gives slightly different numbers. We choose to calculate
the discount rate from the marginal productivity of capital which yields higher estimates of the
discount rates on goods than the alternative method (and as a result higher thermohaline specific

damages to justify the PCO2 stabilization in a benefit-cost sense). Note that this approach differs
                            ;e



from that usually applied in benefit-cost analyses, which applies a constant discount rate on goods
(e.g., Maddison [1995]). By using the discount rate on goods representative for the optimal growth
trajectory, we additionally consider effects like the decreasing rate of technological progress that

cause the future discount rate on goods to decline. For example, our calculated discount rate on
goods declines from 5.9 % in 1995 to 3.5 % in 2295.
  To test whether a policy to preserve the thermohaline circulation passes a benefit-cost test we

first calculate the present value of the additional abatement costs introduced by this constraint.
We then determine the hypothetical thermohaline circulation specific damage that would result in
a present value of avoided damages that balances the present value of the additional abatement

costs. Finally, this hypothetical damage is compared with our independent estimate of the likely
economic effects of a thermohaline circulation collapse.
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  17

Costs of maintaining an active thermohaline circulation

At a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C, the projected total abatement costs along the optimal path subject

to the thermohaline circulation constraint rise roughly from 2 billion U.S.$ per year in 1995 to 2.3
trillion U.S.$ per year in 2155 (expressed in 1989 prices) (Figure 4 A, dotted line). Compared
to the policy suggested by the unconstrained DICE model (Figure 4 A, crosses), the extra costs

of preserving the thermohaline circulation are negligible in the near future but very significant
starting in roughly 50 to 100 years. Higher climate sensitivities result in higher abatement costs.
Maintaining an active thermohaline circulation implies an extra sacrifice, which may range —

depending, for example, on the climate sensitivity and the future levels of technology — between
2 and 3 % of gross world product in the long run (Figure 4 B).


Thermohaline circulation specific damages that would justify the constraint in a benefit-cost sense

The minimum level of thermohaline circulation collapse specific damages that would justify a
PCO2 stabilization would just equate present values of the costs and benefits caused by this policy
     ;e



at the appropriate discount rate on goods. We assume that the thermohaline circulation specific
damages are proportional to the gross world product and occur in a step function whenever PCO2       ;e



in the unconstrained model exceeds the calculated PCO2 stabilization level in the next time step.
                                                           ;e



This very simplified representation of the specific damages is supposed to mimic the hysteresis
response of the thermohaline circulation to the forcing [Rahmstorf, 1996]. Once the deep water
formation rate is below a certain level, removing the forcing will not restore the full thermohaline

circulation for a considerable time. By iteration we then determine the minimum level of ther-
mohaline circulation collapse specific damages that would justify a PCO2 stabilization as defined
                                                                            ;e



above. This specific damage is estimated in our model as roughly 0.86 % of gross world prod-
uct (for a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C and based on a discounting implied by optimizing with a

pure rate of social time preference of 3 %). The elements of this calculation can be illustrated by
referring to Figure 5.
                                                        Preserving the Ocean Circulation                 18




                                                              total abatement costs
                                              5
                                                  A
                                              4
                       [trillions of U.S.$]




                                              3


                                              2


                                              1


                                              0
                                              2000    2050    2100      2150      2200     2250   2300


                                                             relative abatement costs
                                              3
                                                  B
                            2.5
              [% of GWP]




                                              2

                            1.5

                                              1

                            0.5

                                              0
                                              2000    2050    2100      2150      2200     2250   2300
                                                                      time[a]

F IGURE 4: Costs of climate change abatement expressed in constant 1989 $ (upper panel, A) and as % of
gross world product (lower panel, B). Symbols are the same as in Figure 2.
                                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                          19


                                                  differences in costs and benefits
                                        6
                                            A
                                        4
                [trillions of U.S.$]


                                        2

                                        0

                                       −2

                                       −4
                                        2000    2050    2100       2150       2200    2250   2300


                                                               net benefits
                                        3
                                            B

                                        2
                [trillions of U.S.$]




                                        1


                                        0


                                       −1
                                        2000    2050    2100       2150       2200    2250   2300
                                                                 time [a]

F IGURE 5: Comparison of the differences in total costs and benefits between the constrained and uncon-
strained policy. Shown are results (in 1989 U.S.$ per year) for a climate sensitivity of 3.5 o C, and a specific
damage caused by a thermohaline circulation collapse of 0.86 % of gross world product. The total benefits
of avoiding a thermohaline circulation collapse (full line, upper panel, A) are the sum of the avoided dam-
ages by a temperature increase (dash-dotted line, upper panel, A) and the constant relative damage specific
to a thermohaline circulation collapse (shown as the difference between the solid and the dash-dotted line
in the upper panel, A). The total costs of implementing the necessary abatement of carbon emissions are
shown in the upper panel as dashed line. The net benefits of maintaining the thermohaline circulation for
this example are shown in the lower panel (B).
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  20

  To preserve the thermohaline circulation, the PCO2 levels have to be reduced relative to the
                                                        ;e



unconstrained case. The lower PCO2 levels result in less global warming and hence avoid some
                                      ;e



temperature dependent damages. The avoided temperature dependent damages (shown in Figure 5
A, dash-dotted line) are one important benefit of preserving the thermohaline circulation.

  A second benefit of preserving the thermohaline circulation is the avoided damages caused by a
thermohaline circulation collapse, [shown in Figure 5 A as the difference between the total benefits
(solid line) and the temperature dependent benefits (dash-dotted line)].

  The benefits of preserving the thermohaline circulation are then compared to the additional
costs of more stringent abatement measures (Figure 5 A, dashed line). The net benefits of the
stabilization policy are shown in Figure 5 B. For this example, the present value of benefits slightly

exceeds the present value of the costs. Given our assumptions, stabilizing PCO2 around 840 ppmV
                                                                                 ;e



is worth accepting in a benefit-cost sense and would be a profitable policy. Note that the above
analysis is only an approximation to the optimal growth model since it neglects, for example,

changes in investment.
  It may seem surprising that an apparently relatively small damaging effect in relation to GWP —
under 1% — can justify a shift from a policy that would imply no limit on PCO2 (ca. 930 ppmV in
                                                                                 ;e



the year 2125 and 1200 ppmV in the year 2205 in the unconstrained model) to one that would cap

the concentration at about 840 ppmV by 2135 (Figure 2). To describe a climate catastrophe that
would justify a temperature stabilization policy, Nordhaus uses a damage function with an extreme
nonlinearity in the form of a very high exponent (12, to be precise) on temperature, implying

damages of 60 % of global GWP for a temperature increase of 3.5 degrees (Nordhaus [1994, p.
115]). Chao [1995] uses a similar value to describe a catastrophic climate event. Our analysis
implies that much lower climate damages can justify a PCO2 stabilization in a benefit-cost sense.
                                                              ;e



  The high sensitivity of abatement to additional damages can be explained as follows. First,
abatement over the relatively near term is already rather sensitive to small additional damages in
the original DICE model of Nordhaus [1994]. For example, doubling the intercept of the damage

function in the model formulation of Nordhaus [1994] results in additional damages of about 1.2
                                Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                21

percent of GWP in 2095. These additional climate damages increase abatement in 2045 from 12.5

to 18 % [Nordhaus, 1994]. 18 % is very similar to the 17 % abatement in 2045, justified in our
analysis by avoiding a thermohaline circulation collapse (which would otherwise cause additional
damages of 0.86 % of GWP from 2095 on). (Note, though, that in the unconstrained DICE model

with the doubled damage function intercept, PCO2 rises without limit.)
                                                  ;e



  Second, stabilizing PCO2 to preserve the thermohaline circulation results in the additional ben-
                           ;e



efits of lower climate damages due to lower atmospheric temperatures. These additional benefits

amplify the benefits of preserving the thermohaline circulation. As can be seen in Figure 5 A, the
additional benefits of less global warming are rather large and even exceed the benefits of avoided
thermohaline circulation damages within the next century. As a result, preserving the thermoha-

line circulation yields benefits that grow faster than the costs of emission abatement (Figure 5A),
mainly because technological efficiency increases.
  Third, we use a climate sensitivity slightly higher than Nordhaus (1994), which amplifies the

benefits of PCO2 stabilization relative to his model formulation. Fourth, note that stabilizing
                ;e



PCO2 is a less costly objective than stabilizing atmospheric temperatures — the scenario analyzed
    ;e



by Nordhaus (1994). The latter would require more stringent abatement levels (and in turn higher
climate damages as a justification). Finally, our benefit-cost analysis neglects changes in invest-

ment on utility. It is conceivable that somewhat higher thermohaline circulation specific damages
are necessary to result in the same PCO2 stabilization policy in an utility maximizing optimal
                                          ;e



growth model.


Estimate of the specific damages of a thermohaline circulation collapse

Current methods used to assign monetary values to the damages caused by global climate change
are still under development and yield a wide range of results [Fankhauser, 1994, Pearce et al.,
1996]. We are aware that attempts to quantify the potential economic impacts of largely unknown
changes in climate on future societies involve a significant amount of guesswork and typically
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 22

result in order-of-magnitude estimates. We nonetheless attempt to describe and when possible

quantify the likely range of economic impacts for a subset of damages caused by (i) the decrease
in oceanic carbon uptake, (ii) the decrease in fishery yields, and (iii) the changes in temperature
distributions. Since we consider only a subset of the potential impacts (for example, by omitting the

non-market damages caused by species loss), a more complete attempt of quantifying the potential
damages would arguably result in higher damage estimates.
  First, the decrease in future oceanic uptake associated with a thermohaline circulation collapse

causes economic damage because a carbon sink is valuable. Cold, carbon-dioxide-rich waters are
subducted in the North Atlantic and transfer carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to the deep-ocean.
This “temperature pump” is an important sink for atmospheric CO2 to the deep ocean. A weak-
ening in the thermohaline circulation may cause a reduction in oceanic carbon uptake. Sarmiento
and Le Quéré [1996] estimate the reduction in oceanic carbon uptake due to a weakening of the
thermohaline circulation at around 3 billion tons of carbon per year. If atmospheric carbon dioxide

levels are constrained, any decrease in the natural sinks must be compensated by an increase in
abatement measures that causes additional costs. The marginal cost of reducing carbon emissions
in 2100 is estimated at roughly 20 U.S.$ per ton of carbon (1989 prices) [Nordhaus, 1994]. We
hence estimate the resulting damage due to the decreased oceanic      CO2 uptake to be around 60
billion U.S.$ annually. This is on the order of 0.1 % of projected gross world product in 2100.
  Second, the thermohaline circulation collapse might also decrease fishery yields, analogous to
the effects observed during past changes in ocean currents [Barber and Chávez, 1986, Grove,

1988]. The thermohaline circulation collapse may result in a decrease in sea-surface temperatures
in the North Atlantic of up to 8 o C and an increased warming of Southern Hemisphere surface
waters [Manabe and Stouffer, 1993, Schmittner and Stocker, 1999], influencing the distribution

of temperature-sensitive fish species and potentially resulting in significant losses of oceanic food
production. Constanza et al. [1997] estimate the annual value of food production by the oceans in
the vicinity of 0.8 trillion U.S.$, roughly 4 % of gross world product. While the relative impairment

of oceanic food production is uncertain, one might attempt to bracket it (rather arbitrarily) by 0.5
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  23

and 10 %, resulting in estimates of potential damages on the order of 0.02 to 0.4 % of gross world

product.
  Third, the decrease in heat transport due to a thermohaline circulation collapse may result
in largely unknown but potentially significant effects on climate patterns, particularly in north-

western Europe. Presently, the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation transports large amounts
of heat from low to high latitudes, partially causing the relatively warm climates in north-western
Europe. Attempts to quantify the temperature changes caused by the thermohaline circulation col-

lapse alone range between -20 o C in high latitudes to +5 o C in low latitudes [Schiller et al., 1997].
These changes in average temperatures are superimposed on the general global warming and the
net effect could be a cooling in high latitudes and a stronger warming in low latitudes, depending

on the timing of the thermohaline circulation collapse. Tol [1998] reports an illustrative estimate
of the economic damages in Western Europe caused by a thermohaline circulation collapse. Ac-
cording to Tol’s [1998] estimate, a thermohaline circulation collapse may temporarily increase the

climate damage by up to 3 % of gross domestic product in Western Europe (a damage exceeding
roughly 0.5 % of gross world product at present conditions). To extrapolate Tol’s [1998] study to a
global scale and different times is extremely problematic, since the damages depend, for example,
on the future degrees of industrialization and the temperature changes for all regions.

  One might reasonably conclude, however, that the first two effects alone could explain dam-
ages ranging between 0.1 to 0.5 % of gross world product. Considering additionally the largely
unknown effects of changes in climate patterns and other neglected effects, one might conclude

that the potential economic impacts of a thermohaline circulation collapse are likely to exceed
0.1 % and potentially exceed 1 % of gross world product. In the light of these considerations, the
necessary 0.86 % damages that would justify a PCO2 stabilization in a benefit-cost sense seem
                                                        ;e



plausible.
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  24

EFFECTS   OF MODEL SIMPLIFICATIONS AND UNCERTAINTIES


Our model shares with the original DICE model its simplifications and shortcomings. In particular,

certain currently neglected effects would tend to favor earlier and more stringent abatements. Here
we focus on three prominent examples: (i) the likely saturation of some carbon sinks, (ii) the
potential upwards bias in cost estimates of carbon emission abatement, and (iii) the uncertainty in

model parameters.
  First, the oceanic and terrestrial carbon sinks are likely to saturate in the future. Oceanic carbon
uptake is prone to saturate as the chemical buffering capacity of the oceans is reduced at increasing

atmospheric carbon dioxide levels [Broecker and Peng, 1982]. Terrestrial carbon uptake may satu-
rate as well, caused, for example, by a decline of forest regrowth [Fan et al., 1998], or a saturation
of the CO2 -fertilization effect at higher CO2 concentrations [Cao and Woodward, 1998]. The

exact partitioning of the anthropogenic CO2 emissions between the oceanic and terrestrial carbon
sinks (with different saturation effects) is uncertain at this time [Joos, 1994, Kaiser, 1998]. The
neglected saturation effects may reduce the intensity of the future carbon sinks. Taking the satu-
ration effects into account would increase optimal abatement measures [Kaufmann, 1997, Schulz

and Kasting, 1997].
  Second, the estimated costs of reducing CO2 emissions used in this study may be too high.
Numerous studies suggest that a sizeable fraction of CO2 emissions could be achieved at no extra

costs (for example, by alleviating existing market imperfections) and that low CO2 emissions
energy backstop technologies are increasingly likely at reasonable costs [Hourcade et al., 1996,
Parson and Keith, 1998]. Both possibilities imply cheaper abatement measures than the ones

considered in the model and would imply higher optimal abatement measures.
  Finally, the model parameters are uncertain. Parameters are better represented by probability
distributions than by single numbers. Some have concluded these uncertainties raise the optimal

abatement measures (relative to policy based on expected parameter values) (e.g., Nordhaus and
Popp [1997], Roughgarden and Schneider [1999] ).
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                    25

  Drawing the appropriate implications for policy of uncertainty about the model and its key pa-

rameters is one of the more difficult analytical challenges. To illustrate the effects of parameter
uncertainty, we consider the example of climate sensitivity. Uncertainty about the climate sensitiv-
ity translates rather directly into uncertainty about the stabilization target (Figure 1); higher climate

sensitivities result in lower values. Tol and de Vos [1998] have developed estimates of the mean
and variance of the climate sensitivity. If we treat the distribution as normal, we can describe the
cumulative probability distribution by the approximately straight line shown in Figure 6A. This

tells us that with roughly 52 % probability our base-case climate sensitivity will be revised upward
in the future, as the true value emerges with increasing precision. With roughly 48 % probability,
the climate sensitivity will be revised downward.

  There is a perhaps natural tendency toward conservatism in such a situation, suggesting one
plan for the worst, or at least the relatively bad. This might imply setting policy on the basis
of a climate sensitivity of 4 o C, instead of 3.5 o C. To prevent a thermohaline circulation collapse

would then require a stabilization level of about 710 ppmV (Figure 6B). (We neglect the possibility,
suggested by Figure 6C, that this policy might not be justified in a benefit-cost sense due to the large
abatement costs.) Based on present knowledge, with probability of 64 %, emerging knowledge
would allow easing the restraint on emissions, relative to the originally planned path.

  But revisions, whether toward more or less stringency, are costly to some degree and conser-
vatism in this sense is not necessarily the best policy. That must be based not just on the degree
of uncertainty about the parameters but on a model of the process by which that uncertainty will

be resolved. If, for example, the knowledge will emerge in a smooth way, the optimizing policy
is likely to be less sensitive to error than in the case the knowledge will itself emerge with a jump
(so that we all of a sudden discover we are about to go over the waterfall). Suppose, for example,

it were known that the true critical value of PCO2 that would cause a thermohaline circulation
                                                      ;e



collapse will be revealed in 2090, with no improvement in information between now and then. At
that point, it would be too late to make more than minor adjustments in the PCO2 to be reached
                                                                                        ;e



in the succeeding couple of decades. So, a more stringent control policy would be advised in this
                                             Preserving the Ocean Circulation                             26

                                            cumulative probability of climate sensitivity
                                  70
                                                                                            A

                                  60

                            [%]   50                                        median
                                                                        base−case

                                  40

                                  30
                                       3          3.25            3.5            3.75           4

                                                          stabilization PCO2,e
                            1100
                                                                                            B

                            1000
                   [ppmV]




                              900


                              800


                              700
                                       3          3.25            3.5            3.75           4

                                       thc specific damages justifying policy in b−c analysis
                                   3
                                                                                            C


                                   2
                       [% GWP]




                                   1



                                   0
                                       3          3.25         3.5          3.75                4
                                                     climate sensitivity [oC]

F IGURE 6: Model sensitivity analysis with respect to uncertainty in the climate sensitivity parameter. The
upper panel (A) shows the cumulative probability density function of the climate sensitivity. The square
denotes our base-case of 3.5 o C. We assume a normal distribution and adopt a median of 3.6 o C (cross) and
a standard deviation of 1.1 o C [Tol and de Vos, 1998]. The necessary PCO2 stabilization levels derived from
                                                                                     ;e

the model for a given climate sensitivity are shown in panel B. The damages of a thermohaline circulation
collapse that would justify the various PCO2 stabilization levels (panel B) in a benefit-cost sense are shown
                                                     ;e

in panel C.
                                  Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                  27

case compared to the case in which improved knowledge would emerge in adequate time to take

corrective action — even with the same present uncertainty about the true parameters.
  Note that in this paper we have laid out the consequences of uncertainty only about the climate
sensitivity. We neglect uncertainty in the other parameters, as well as the uncertainty about the

model structure other than the possibility of a thermohaline circulation collapse. Furthermore, we
consider only alternative scenarios based on perfect information (i.e., each scenario neglects para-
meter uncertainty). As the sketch of the problem indicates, a more appropriate procedure would

be to model the probabilistic structure of knowledge, including its development over time, and use
expected utility maximization as the policy criterion (along the lines discussed by Nordhaus and
Popp [1997]).


VALUE   JUDGMENTS IN THE MODEL


One of the most controversial value judgments in the model is associated with the question of

how to distribute welfare between generations. The DICE model represents society’s preference
on intergenerational welfare distribution by a pure rate of social time preference. The pure rate of
social time preference affects the investment behavior in the model which in turn influences the

discount rate on goods. Higher pure social rates of time preference imply higher discount rates on
goods along an optimal path in the model.
  Different pure rates of social time preference represent different value judgments about inter-

generational welfare distribution and result in different optimal policies, each optimal in the sense
of the value judgments incorporated in the model. In general, valuing the welfare of future gen-
erations more (and hence choosing a lower pure rate of social time preference) results in higher

abatement measures [Nordhaus, 1994, Schulz and Kasting, 1997]. While the chosen pure rate of
social time preference of 3 % may be an appropriate description of present market conditions, the
application of this value to long term projects may lead to questionable results since it significantly
devalues future utility [Heal, 1997].
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 28

  Consider, for example, the temporal distribution of costs and benefits caused by the thermohaline

circulation constraint (Figure 5 B). For the chosen example, a small cost in the beginning results in
a substantial benefit in the long run. The decision whether preserving the thermohaline circulation
is profitable is in this case sensitive to the underlying pure social rate of time preference and the

investment opportunities in the optimal growth model since they affect the applied discount rate
on goods.
  To further illustrate the intergenerational distribution effects of the discounted utilitarian ap-

proach, we analyze the effect of the thermohaline circulation constraint on per capita consumption.
We compare the per capita consumption for the constrained and unconstrained policy neglecting
for simplicity any economic damage of a thermohaline circulation collapse. Regardless whether

PCO2 is stabilized or not, per capita consumption in this stylized example increases significantly
     ;e



with time (Figure 7 A), driven mainly by technological progress.
  The per capita consumption for the stabilization policy (Figure 7 A, dotted line) is only marginally

lower compared to the unconstrained policy (Figure 7 A, crosses). The decrease in per capita con-
sumption caused by the higher abatement costs for a PCO2 stabilization shows an interesting
                                                               ;e



intergenerational distribution (Figure 7 B). In the near future, per capita consumption is virtually
unaffected. Significant increases in abatement costs occur only after a considerable time (Figure

5, dashed line) causing first a concomitant decrease in per capita consumption. The roughly con-
stant abatement costs are in the long run more and more compensated by the increasing benefits
of avoided global warming (Figure 5 A, dash-dotted line). In the long run, benefits grow faster

than abatement cost so that consumption losses are regained and per capita consumption in the
constrained case is commensurate with per capita consumption in the unconstrained case — and
in fact exceeds it in the end.

  The allocation of per capita consumption over time shown in Figure 7 is mainly due to two
factors: (i) Per capita consumption is higher in the future and the decrease in the utility of con-
sumption for a given cost is lower than in the present. (ii) The model values future utilities less.

Whether this distribution of burden represents the preference of society is open to debate. Alter-
                                                          Preserving the Ocean Circulation                 29




                                                                per capita consumption
                                               14

                                                    A
                 [thousands of $ per capita]
                                               12

                                               10

                                                8

                                                6

                                                4

                                               2000     2050    2100       2150      2200    2250   2300


                                                         Difference in per capita consumption
                                        0.5
                                                    B
                                                0

                       −0.5
               [%]




                                               −1

                       −1.5

                                               −2
                                               2000     2050    2100       2150      2200    2250   2300
                                                                         time [a]

F IGURE 7: Effect of constraining the PCO2 levels on per capita consumption. Shown in the upper panel
                                                                 ;e

(A) are results considering (dotted line) and neglecting (crosses) the thermohaline circulation constraint.
The lower panel (B) depicts the relative decrease in per capita consumption by choosing to stabilize PCO2  ;e

at approximately 840 ppmV. Note that the calculations shown neglect any economic damages associated
with a thermohaline circulation collapse.
                                 Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                 30

native patterns of distributing the burdens (like equalizing the decrease in utility, or maximizing

the long term maintainable flow of utility [Heal, 1997]) are possible and could be used in this
framework.
  It should be noted that a lower pure rate of social time preference does not only increase optimal

CO2 abatement levels but also acts to increase the unabated CO2 emissions. This is because valu-
ing the welfare of future generations more results in the model in decreasing present consumption
and endowing future generations with higher capital stocks. Higher capital stocks result in higher

production levels that act to increase unabated carbon emissions. This effect of increasing un-
abated CO2 emissions counteract the effects of higher CO2 abatements. These two effects of
changing the pure social rate of time preference are of comparable magnitude in the DICE model.

As a result, the atmospheric CO2 levels are rather insensitive to changes in the pure social rate
of time preference. For example, cutting the pure social rate of time preference by two thirds in
the unconstrained model reduces the accumulation of atmospheric CO2 until 2165 by less than

9 %. This rather low sensitivity of atmospheric CO2 to changes in the pure social rate of time
preference in the optimal growth model suggests that the results of our benefit-cost analysis are
not very sensitive to the choice of the pure social rate of time preference.


C OMPARISON    WITH PREVIOUS STUDIES


The first step of our analysis is to identify optimal policies to maintain an exogenously defined

environmental standard. This step is perhaps closest to the approach proposed by the German
advisory council on global change [WBGU, 1995], which allows changes in climate only within a
specific “tolerable window” (see also Toth et al. [1997], or Toth et al. [1998]).

  One tolerable window proposed by the WBGU is defined by a maximal anthropogenic tem-
perature increase of 2 o C, and a maximal rate of temperature change of 0.2 o C/decade [WBGU,
1995]. This specific choice of climate constraints is partially motivated by the uncertainties in the
climate models and impact estimates. Compared to making predictions about an uncertain future,
                                   Preserving the Ocean Circulation                             31

the climate history may be a better indicator for bearable climates. Less stringent tolerable win-

dows are derived by allowing higher and faster temperature increases, or by using estimates for the
sensitivity of the thermohaline circulation to global warming (e.g., Toth et al. [1998]).
  Implementing the WBGU window in our model as a constraint shows that all our discussed

PCO2 stabilization scenarios would violate the WBGU-constraints (for example by causing a
     ;e



global mean atmospheric warming exceeding 2 o C). More stringent (and costly) reductions in
carbon emission than discussed in our study would be needed to reduce the risks of climate change

to the level favored by the WBGU. Whether the lower risks associated with the WBGU constraints
justify the higher abatement costs is an open and controversial question. Although the tolerable
windows approach does not address this trade-off between costs and benefits explicitly (e.g., Toth

et al. [1998]) this question can be analyzed using our framework.
  The discrepancy between the WBGU constraints and the thermohaline circulation constraint
discussed in this study illustrate again that the presented PCO2 stabilization scenarios cannot ex-
                                                                  ;e



clude a thermohaline circulation shutdown or other surprises not considered in our simple model.
However, the profitable PCO2 stabilization levels derived in our study are significantly lower than
                              ;e



suggested by previous optimal growth analyses (e.g., Nordhaus [1992], or Tol [1997]), even for a
significant pure rate of social time preference.


Conclusions

We estimate optimal policies to reduce the risk of a North Atlantic thermohaline circulation col-
lapse for a range of climate sensitivities. Our results indicate (mediated by numerous caveats)

that in order to reduce the risk of a thermohaline circulation collapse considerably, the equiva-
lent carbon dioxide concentrations have to be stabilized far below the concentrations suggested
by previous optimal growth studies. The high sensitivity of the optimal policy to previously ne-

glected and still largely unquantifiable effects is an indication of the caution with which optimal
growth studies should be interpreted. However, our study decreases the discrepancy between the
                                      Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                             32

strong precautionary view that significantly restrict carbon emissions and the policy recommen-

dations suggested by many previous optimal growth studies that are less restrictive. Clearly, our
knowledge about the likelihood as well as the potential socioeconomic impacts of a thermoha-
line circulation collapse are sketchy at best. Causing a thermohaline circulation collapse would,

however, arguably result in a “dangerous level of interference with the climate system” and would
violate the UN framework convention on climate change. Our analysis suggests that maintaining
the thermohaline circulation, with the implied increased rates of emission abatement, is probably

worth the costs.


Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Ben Bolker, Thomas Bruckner, Frank von Hippel, Paul
Higgins, William Nordhaus, Michael Rothschild, Stefan Rahmstorf, Tapio Schneider, Stephen Schneider,
and Ron Stouffer for invaluable feedback and ideas. We thank Rob Vanderbei for help with the AMPL code
and for providing us with the newest LOQO version. P. Schulz and T. Roughgarden supplied us with their
model code, which is gratefully acknowledged. We would like to express our gratitude for extensive com-
ments of four anonymous reviewers. Any remaining mistakes are solely the responsibility of the authors.


                                                  REFERENCES

 Azar, C., and H. Rodhe, Targets for stabilization of atmospheric CO2, Science, 276, 1818–1819, 1997.

 Barber, R. T., and F. P. Chávez, Ocean variability in relation to living resources during the 1982-83 El Niño,
      Nature, 319, 279–285, 1986.

 Baumgartner, A., and E. Reichel, The World Water Balance, Elsevier, 1975.

 Bradford, D. F., On the uses of benefit-cost reasoning in choosing policy toward global climate change, in Discount-
      ing and Intergenerational Equity, edited by P. R. Portney and J. P. Weyant, pp. 37–44, Resources for the Future,
      1999.

 Broecker, W. S., Thermohaline circulation, the achilles heel of our climate system: Will man made CO2 upset the
      current balance, Science, 278, 1582–1588, 1997.

 Broecker, W. S., and T.-H. Peng, Tracers in the Sea, Eldigio Press, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory,
      Palisades, NY, 1982.

 Cao, M., and F. I. Woodward, Dynamic responses of terrestrial ecosystem carbon cycling to global climate change,
      Nature, 393, 249–252, 1998.
                                     Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                             33

Chao, H.-P., Managing the risk of global climate catastrophe: an uncertainty analysis, Risk Analysis, 15, 69–78,
     1995.

Constanza, R., R. d’Arge, R. deGroot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, B. Hannon, K. Limburg, S. Naeem, R. V. O’Neill,
     J. Paruelo, R. G. Raskin, P. Sutton, and M. van den Belt, The value of the world’s ecosystem services and
     natural capital, Nature, 387, 253–260, 1997.

Dowlatabadi, H., Integrated assessment models of climate change, Energy Policy, 23, 289–296, 1995.

Dowlatabadi, H., and L. B. Lave, Pondering greenhouse policy, Science, 259, 1381–1382, 1993.

Fan, S., M. Gloor, J. Mahlman, S. Pacala, J. Sarmiento, T. Takahashi, and P. Tans, A large terrestrial carbon sink in
     North America implied by atmospheric and oceanic carbon dioxide data and models, Science, 282, 442–446,
     1998.

Fankhauser, S., The economic costs of global warming damage: A survey, Global Environmental Change, 4,
     301–309, 1994.

Fourer, R., D. M. Gay, and B. W. Kernighan, AMPL A modeling language for mathematical programming, Boyd
     and Fraser Publishing Company, Danvers, Massachusetts, 1993.

Grove, J. M., The little Ice Age, Methune and Co., New York, 1988.

Ha-Duong, M., M. J. Grubb, and J.-C. Horcade, Influence of socioeconomic inertia and uncertainty on optimal
     CO2-emission abatement, Nature, 390, 270–273, 1997.

Hasselmann, K., S. Hasselmann, R. Giering, V. Ocana, and H. v.Storch, Sensitivity study of optimal CO2 emission
     paths using a simplified structural integrated assessment model (SIAM), Climatic Change, 37, 345–386, 1997.

Heal, G., Discounting and climate change, Climatic Change, 37, 335–343, 1997.

Hourcade, J. C., R. Richels, J. Robinson, W. Chandler, O. Davidson, J. Edmonds, D. Finon, M. Grubb, K. Hal-
     snaes, K. Hogan, M. Jaccard, F. Krause, E. LaRoche, W. D. Montgomery, P. Nastary, A. Pegov, K. Richards,
     L. Schratenholzer, D. Siniscalco, P. R. Shukla, Y. Sokona, P. Sturm, and A. Tudini, 1996, Climate Change
     1995, Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change, Contribution of Working Group II, Chapter 8 :
     Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases, pp. 263–296. Cambridge University Press.

Ishitani, H., and T. B. Johansson, 1996, Climate Change 1995, Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate
     Change: Scientific-Technical Analysis, Contribution of Working Group II, Chapter 19 : Energy supply mitiga-
     tion options, pp. 598–647. Cambridge University Press.

Joos, F., Imbalance in the budget, Nature, 370, 181–182, 1994.

Kaiser, J., Possibly vast greenhouse gas sponge ignites controversy, Science, 282, 386–387, 1998.
                                     Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                           34

Kaufmann, R. K., Assessing the DICE model: Uncertainty associated with the emissions and retention of greenhouse
     gases, Climatic Change, 35, 435–448, 1997.

Lempert, R. J., M. E. Schlesinger, and J. K. Hammitt, The impact of potential abrupt climate changes on near-term
     policy choices, Climatic Change, 26, 351–376, 1994.

Lorius, C., J. Jouzel, D. Raynaud, J. Hansen, and H. Le Treut, The ice core record: Climate sensitivity and future
     greenhouse warming, Nature, 347, 139–145, 1990.

Maddison, D., A cost-benefit analysis of slowing climate change, Energy Policy, 23, 337–346, 1995.

Manabe, S., and R. J. Stouffer, Century-scale effects of increased atmospheric CO2 on the ocean-atmosphere system,
     Nature, 364, 215–218, 1993.

Manne, A. S., The rate of time preference implications for the greenhouse debate, Energy Policy, 23, 391–394, 1995.

Nordhaus, W. D., An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse gases, Science, 258, 1315–1319, 1992.

Nordhaus, W. D., Managing the global commons: The economics of climate change, The MIT press, Cambridge,
     Massachusetts, 1994.

Nordhaus, W. D., Discounting in economics and climate change — an editorial comment, Climatic Change, 37,
     315–328, 1997.

Nordhaus, W. D., and D. Popp, What is the value of scientific knowledge? An application to global warming using
     the PRICE model, The Energy Journal, 318, 1–45, 1997.

Parson, E. A., and D. W. Keith, Fossil fuels without CO2 emissions, Science, 282, 1053–1054, 1998.

Pearce, D. W., W. R. Cline, A. N. Achanta, S. Fankhauser, R. K. Pachauri, R. S. L. Tol, and P. Vellinga, 1996,
     Climate Change 1995 Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change, Chapter 6: The Social Costs of
     Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control, pp. 181–224. Cambridge University Press.

Peck, S., and T. Teisberg, Optimal carbon emission trajectories when damages depend on the rate or level of global
     warming, Climatic Change, 28, 289–314, 1994.

Rahmstorf, S., On the freshwater forcing and transport of the Atlantic thermohaline circulation, Climate Dynam-
     ics, 12, 799–811, 1996.

Rahmstorf, S., Risk of sea-change in the Atlantic, Nature, 388, 825–826, 1997.

Rahmstorf, S., and A. Ganopolski, Long-term global warming scenarios computed with an efficient coupled climate
     model, Climatic Change, 43, 353–367, 1999.

Richels, R., and J. Edmonds, The economics of stabilizing atmospheric CO2 concentrations, Energy Policy, 373–
     378, 1995.
                                      Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                               35

Roughgarden, T., and S. H. Schneider, Climate change policy: Quantifying uncertainties for damages and optimal
     carbon taxes, Energy Policy, in press, 1999.

Sarmiento, J. L., and C. Le Quéré, Oceanic carbon dioxide uptake in a model of century–scale global warming,
     Science, 274, 1346–1350, 1996.

Schiller, A., U. Mikolajewicz, and R. Voss, The stability of the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation in a coupled
     ocean-atmosphere general circulation model, Climate Dynamics, 13, 325–347, 1997.

Schmittner, A., and T. F. Stocker, The stability of the thermohaline circulation in global warming experiments,
     Journal of Climate, 12, 1117–1133, 1999.

Schultz, P. A., 1996, Optimal reductions in CO2 emissions, Ph. D. thesis, Pennsylvania State University.

Schulz, P. A., and J. Kasting, Optimal reduction in CO2 emissions, Energy Policy, 25(5), 491–500, 1997.

Stocker, T. F., Abrupt climate changes: from the past to the future — a review, International Journal of Earth
     Sciences, 88, 365–374, 1999.

Stocker, T. F., and A. Schmittner, Influence of CO2 emissions rates on the stability of the thermohaline circulation,
     Nature, 388, 862–865, 1997.

Stouffer, R. J., and S. Manabe, Response of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to increasing atmospheric carbon
     dioxide: Sensitivity to the rate of increase, Journal of Climate, 12, 2224–2237, 1999.

Tol, R. S. J., On the optimal control of carbon dioxide emissions: An application of FUND, Environmental Modeling
     and Assessment, 2, 151–163, 1997.

Tol, R. S. J., Potential slowdown of the thermohaline circulation and climate policy, Discussion Paper DS98/06
     Institute for Environmental Studies Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1998.

Tol, R. S. J., and A. F. de Vos, A Bayesian statistical analysis of the enhanced greenhouse effect, Climatic Change, 38,
     87–112, 1998.

Toth, F. L., T. Bruckner, H.-F. Fussel, M. Leimbach, P.-H. G., and H. Schnellnhuber, The tolerable windows approach
     to integrated assessments, in Proceedings of the IPCC Asia-Pacific Workshop on Integrated Assessment Models
     [IAMs], United Nations University, Japan, 1997.

Toth, F. L., P.-H. G., and T. Bruckner, Kyoto and the long term climate stabilization, in OECD workshop on climate
     change and economic modelling. Backgrund analysis for the Kyoto protocol. Sept. 17–18., OECD headquaters,
     Paris, 1998.

UNFCCC, 1992, UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
                                     Preserving the Ocean Circulation                                          36

Vanderbei, R. J., LOQO user’s manual - version 3.10, Princeton University, Tech. Rep. SOR-97-08, Statistics and
     Operations Research, 1997.

WBGU, Szenario zur Ableitung globaler CO2-Reduktionsziele und Umsetzungsstrategien, Wissenschaftlicher Beirat
     der Bundesregierung Globale Umweltveränderungen (WBGU), Geschäftsstelle am Alfred-Wegener-Institut für
     Polar-und Meeresforschung, 1995.

Weyant, J., O. Davidson, H. Dowlatabadi, J. Edmonds, M. Grubb, E. A. Parson, R. Richels, J. Rotmans, P. R. Shukla,
     R. S. J. Tol, W. Cline, and S. Fankhauser, 1996, Climate Change 1995, Economic and social dimensions of
     climate change, Chapter 10: Integrated Assement of Climate Change: An Overview of Approaches and Results,
     pp. 369–396. Cambridge University Press.

Wigley, T. M. L., R. Richels, and J. A. Edmonds, Economic and environmental choices in the stabilization of
     atmospheric CO2 concentrations, Nature, 379, 240–243, 1996.

Wood, R. A., A. B. Keen, J. F. B. Mitchell, and J. M. Gregory, Changing spatial structure of the thermohaline
     circulation in response to atmospheric CO2 forcing in a climate model, Nature, 399, 572–575, 1999.
