                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                             This is a revised version of the working paper
                            that was originally distributed in January 2000.



                            THE DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF AN
                        INVESTMENT-BASED SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM


                                                 Martin Feldstein
                                                 Jeffrey Liebman

                                              Working Paper 7492
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w7492


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 2000




This paper was presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on Distributional Aspects of
Social Security and Social Security Reform in Woodstock, Vermont on October 23rd, 1999. We are grateful to
Jeffrey Brown, Glenn Ellison, Kathleen Feldstein, Steven Goss, James Poterba, David Pattison, Elena Ranguelova,
and other conference participants for discussions about this research, and to Joyce Manchester, Olivia Mitchell, and
Kent Smetters, . We thank Joshua Pollet, Peter Spiegler, Elizabeth Welty, and Ying Qian for excellent research
assistance. Feldstein acknowledges financial support from the Ford Foundation. Liebman acknowledges support
from the Russell Sage Foundation and the National Institute on Aging. This research was conducted while Liebman
was also a Census Bureau research associate at the Boston Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census. This
paper has been screened by a Census Bureau employee to insure that no confidential data are revealed.

© 2000 by Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Distributional Effects of an Investment-Based Social Security System
Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman
NBER Working Paper No. 7492
Revised September 2000
JEL No. H55, I3
                                         ABSTRACT

         In this paper we study the distributional impact of a change from the existing pay-as-you-
go Social Security system to one that combines both pay-as-you-go and investment-based
elements. Critics of investment based plans have been concerned that such plans might reduce
the retirement income of low-paid workers or of surviving spouses relative to what they would
get from Social Security, and might therefore increase the extent of poverty among the aged. Our
analysis in this paper shows that this is generally not the case, even in plans that make no special
effort to maintain or increase redistribution.

        Our principal finding is that virtually all of the demographic groups that we examine
would receive higher average benefits under a mixed system with an investment-based
component than the benefits that they would receive under current Social Security rules. There
would also be a smaller share of individuals with benefits below the poverty line. While the
transition to a mixed system would require additional resources for the next few decades, in the
long run the extra cost of funding the mixed system – a three percent saving contribution rather
than a six percent rise in the tax rate -- is substantially lower than that of funding the pay-as-you-
go system.

         Our individual-level data permit us to go beyond comparing group means to analyze the
full distribution of the benefits that individuals would receive under the two different systems.
These comparisons show that the overwhelming majority of individuals would have higher
benefits with the investment based system than with the pure pay-as-you-go system. The
relatively small number of individuals who would receive less from the investment based system
is further reduced when the effects of the Supplementary Security Income program are taken into
account. These basic conclusions remain true even if the future rate of return in the investment-
based component of the mixed system is substantially less than past experience implies.


Martin Feldstein                                       Jeffrey Liebman
National Bureau of Economic Research                   Kennedy School of Government
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                              Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
617 868-3905                                           617 495-8518
msfeldst@nber.org                                      jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu




Ssdist.09012000.wpd
              The Distributional Effects of an Investment-Based Social Security System

                               Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman*

        In this paper we study the distributional impact of a change from the existing pay-as-you-

go Social Security system to one that combines both pay-as-you-go and investment-based

elements.1 Such a transition can avert the large tax increases that would otherwise be necessary to

maintain the level of benefits promised under current law as life expectancy increases.

According to the Social Security actuaries (Board of Trustees, 1999), retaining the existing pay-

as-you-go system would eventually require raising the current 12.4 percent Social Security

payroll tax rate to about 19 percent to maintain the current benefit rules or cutting benefits by

more than one-third in order to avoid a tax increase. In contrast, previous research showed that

adding an investment-based component with savings equal to two percent of covered earnings to



        *
         Martin Feldstein is Professor of Economics at Harvard and President of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Jeffrey Liebman is Assistant Professor at the Harvard Kennedy
School of Government and a Faculty Research Fellow of the NBER. This paper was presented at
the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on Distributional Aspects of Social
Security and Social Security Reform in Woodstock, Vermont on October 23rd, 1999. We are
grateful to Jeffrey Brown, Glenn Ellison, Kathleen Feldstein, Steven Goss, James Poterba, David
Pattison, Elena Ranguelova, and other conference participants for discussions about this research,
and to Joyce Manchester, Olivia Mitchell, and Kent Smetters, . We thank Joshua Pollet, Peter
Spiegler, Elizabeth Welty, and Ying Qian for excellent research assistance. Feldstein
acknowledges financial support from the Ford Foundation. Liebman acknowledges support from
the Russell Sage Foundation and the National Institute on Aging. This research was conducted
while Liebman was also a Census Bureau research associate at the Boston Research Data Center.
Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census. This paper has been screened by a Census
Bureau employee to insure that no confidential data are revealed.
        1
        For a discussion of the distributional impact of the existing Social Security system see
Liebman (this volume), Coronado et al (1999), Gustman and Steinmeier(1999) and the classic
papers by Hurd and Shoven (1995) and Boskin et al (1987).

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               1
the existing 12.4 percent pay-as-you-go system would be sufficient to maintain the benefits

promised under current rules without any increase in tax rates (Feldstein and Samwick 1997,

1998a, 1998b).

        Most proposed investment-based systems would increase the link between a worker’s

earnings and the worker’s retirement benefits, potentially reducing the amount of redistribution

that occurs through the Social Security system. Critics of investment based plans have been

concerned that such plans, even if desirable for a typical employee, might reduce the retirement

income of low-paid workers or surviving spouses relative to what they would get from Social

Security, and might therefore increase the extent of poverty among the aged. Our analysis shows

that this need not be the case, even in plans that make no special effort to maintain or increase

redistribution, so long as sufficient funding is contributed to the investment-based component

(and current funding levels are continued for the PAYGO component).

        To analyze the actual distributional effect of a shift to a mixed system of Social Security

funding, we use a rich data set of government administrative records on the lifetime earnings of

a cohort of workers and spouses who retired in the early 1990s combined with a government

survey of those same individuals. More specifically, we use the 1990 and 1991 panels of the

Survey of Income and Program Participation matched to Social Security administrative data on

earnings and benefits. We simulate the impact of alternative potential reforms using the cohort

of individuals from the SIPP-SSA match who were born between 1925 and 1929 (and were

therefore between the ages of 61 and 65 in 1990) and present results in a way that can be thought

of as representing the impact of the reforms on the entire cross-sectional population of aged

Social Security beneficiaries at a point in time. We use these data to study who the likely future


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              2
gainers and losers would be after a transition to such a system as well as to analyze some of the

options for increasing the progressivity in such a system that have been proposed in the recent

public debate on Social Security reform.

        We focus our analysis on the benefits for retirees and their surviving spouses, excluding

disability benefits and benefits for children and non-aged parents. Financing this portion of the

overall OASDI program with pure pay-as-you-go financing would require raising the relevant

portion of the Social Security payroll tax from 9.4 percent today to 15.4 percent in 2075.2 The

mixed system that we analyze leaves the portion of the payroll tax allocated for retirement

benefits at 9.4 percent and supplements this with a three percent contribution to Personal

Retirement Accounts that invest in a stock-bond portfolio. While the three percent account

contributions require extra resources in the next few decades compared with a completely pay-as-

you-go-system3, in the long-run they replace the six percent of payroll tax increase that would

otherwise be necessary.4 We assume that the future pay-as-you-go benefits are reduced by the


        2
         Of the total 19.9 percent of payroll in OASDI costs that are forecast for 2075, 2.59
percent are for DI benefits, roughly 0.28 percent are for young survivors (including children), and
roughly 1.6 percent are OASI benefits at ages 65 and above for people who converted from DI
benefits when they reached the normal retirement age. The DI estimate comes directly from the
1999 Trustees’ Report. The other two estimates rely on Table II.H2 in the Trustees’ Report
which provides projections of the number of beneficiaries of each type in future years and weight
these projections by the average benefit levels for each type of beneficiary in 1997 from the
Annual Statistical Supplement.
        3
         The additional resources could come from a temporary increase in the payroll tax or
from transfers from general revenue. Feldstein and Samwick (2000) present a third mechanism
– borrowing by the trust fund with subsequent repayment made possible by the returns to the
increased capital accumulation.
        4
         Thus total contributions in the mixed plan are 15.4 percent – a payroll tax of 12.4 (9.4
percent for retirement and 3 percent for DI and young survivors) plus the 3 percent for personal
retirement accounts. In the long-run, this is substantially less than the 19 percent payroll tax that

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               3
same proportion as the tax revenue (i.e., by 39 percent since 6 percent is 39 percent of 15.4

percent) and analyze how the sum of the remaining pay-as-you-go benefits and the Personal

Retirement Account annuities received by each individual compares to the Social Security

benefits that would be paid with the full 15.4 percent tax.

        We assume that worker’s personal retirement accounts are annuitized at the person’s

retirement date, using a single unisex mortality series for everyone. Each spouse in a married

couples is required to obtain a joint and survivor’s annuity that pays the widow/er two-thirds of

the benefit the couple received when both spouses were alive. We further assume that accounts

are split equally upon divorce, and that workers who die before age 65 bequeath their accounts to

their surviving spouse if they have one and to any other designee if they do not. The annuities in

our simulations are variable annuities that allow beneficiaries to continue to receive the same rate

of return in retirement as workers receive in that year.

        Our principal finding is that in the long run virtually all of the demographic groups that

we examine would receive higher average benefits under a mixed system with an investment-

based component than the benefits that they would receive under current Social Security rules

with a substantially higher tax cost. There would also be a smaller share of individuals with

benefits below the poverty line than under a pure pay-as-you-go system that maintained current

law benefit rules. Taking into account the lower cost of funding the mixed system in the long run

– a three percent saving contribution rather than a six percent rise in the tax rate -- also implies

higher internal rates of return on the taxes-plus-savings in the fully phased-in mixed system than


would be necessary in total to continue the pay-as-you-go system. In both plans there is also
revenue from the taxation of benefits. In the mixed plan, we allocate all of this revenue to
finance DI benefits and benefits for young survivors.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               4
on the taxes paid in the pure pay-as-you-go system. Transition generations would also

experience higher retirement benefit levels than under current Social Security rules, and again

this would apply to virtually all demographic groups. However, these generations might also

face higher contribution rates.5

        Our individual data permit us to go beyond comparing group means to analyze the full

distribution of the benefits that individuals would receive under the two different systems. These

comparisons show that the overwhelming majority of individuals would have higher benefits

with the investment based system than with the pure pay-as-you-go system. The relatively small

number of individuals who would receive less from the investment based system is further

reduced when the effects of the Supplementary Security Income program are taken into account.

        These basic conclusions remain true even if the future rate of return in the investment-

based component of the mixed system is substantially less than past experience implies. We

repeat our analysis for various demographic groups and individuals on a “low rate of return”

assumption, i.e., on the assumption that the rate of return in the investment based portion is so

low that the odds are nine-to-one that it would be exceeded in practice. Even in this worst tenth

percentile case, there are few individuals who would be significantly worse off under the mixed

system than they would be with the pure pay-as-you-go system.

        Note that by comparing the benefits under the mixed plan to the full Social Security

benefits promised under current law, we are setting a high hurdle for the mixed plan. Many

proposed Social Security reform plans would reduce benefits compared with current law. If we

were to compare the mixed plan to such a plan, the results would be much more impressive.

        5
            See footnote 3 above.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              5
        We also explore two options for increasing the redistribution to individuals with low

incomes or retirees with low benefits. We find that without any increase in the total cost of the

Personal Retirement Account deposits such a system can provide beneficiaries who have low

lifetime-incomes with the same average percentage increase in benefits as higher-income

beneficiaries, while still allowing most high-income individuals to have higher benefits in the

investment based-system than in the pay-as-you-go system. Moreover, such funding of the

personal retirement accounts substantially diminishes the chance that lower income families will

have lower benefits than under current law in the case that financial market performance does not

achieve its historic average.

        The paper begins in section 1 with a review of the basic economics of converting from a

pay-as-you-go system to a system that is wholly or partially investment-based. Section 2 then

discusses the data and technical assumptions used in our calculations. The analysis of results

begins with the simplification of the extreme case of a pure investment based system. Section 3

examines the effects of such a system on the mean benefits of different demographic groups, the

fraction of each group that would gain or lose from such a shift, and the effect on the number of

people who would potentially be in poverty. Section 4 then goes beyond these averages and

proportions to look at each individual and assess the distribution of gains and losses within each

demographic group. With this simplified extreme case as background, section 5 then examines a

more realistic mixed system in which the current 12.4 percent OASDI payroll tax rate continues

and is supplemented by a three percent saving rate in Personal Retirement Accounts instead of

the six percent tax rate increase that would be needed to fund current law benefits. Section 6

then considers the effect of substituting a low probability poor return performance that has only


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              6
about one-chance in ten of occurring. Finally, section 7 modifies the assumption that the Personal

Retirement Accounts deposits are a fixed percentage of each individual’s covered earnings to

consider PRA deposits that are either the same number of dollars for all participants or a

combination of a fixed dollar amount and a portion of earnings.

1.       Investment-Based Social Security Reform: The Economics of Prefunding

        The Social Security Administration Office of the Actuary projects that rising life

expectancy and continued low rates of fertility will reduce the ratio of workers to beneficiaries

from 3.4 today to 2.0 in 2035 and 1.8 in 2075. This aging of the population implies that, in order

to maintain the level of benefits promised under current law under a (largely) pay-as-you-go

system, OASDI taxes would have to rise from the current level of 12.7 percent of payroll

(including both the 12.4 percent payroll tax and revenue from the taxation of benefits) to 19.9

percent of payroll in 2075, an increase of 57 percent.6 As we noted above, financing the current

law rules for retiree benefits alone would require increasing the tax rate by six percent of covered

earnings, from 9.4 percent of earnings to 15.4 percent of earnings.

        This large future tax increase (or the equivalent benefit cut) can be averted by prefunding

future Social Security benefits. Prefunding involves setting aside resources today that would

otherwise be consumed and allowing them to accumulate until they are needed to finance

retirement benefits in the future. The basic intuition is that a dollar in benefits 35 years from now

can be funded by setting aside a much smaller amount today.



        6
         Some academic demographers suggest that the needed tax increase could be even
higher (Lee and Tuljapurkar, 1998). It is important to note that the tax increase is not a
temporary phenomenon associated with the retirement of the baby-boom generation; rather it is a
permanent change associated with long run demographic trends.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              7
        From the standpoint of the entire economy, additional savings today earn a real rate of

return equal to the pre-tax marginal product of capital, which is likely to be around 7.5 percent .7

Thus $100 of retirement benefits (in today’s prices) 35 years from now could in principle be

financed by setting aside only $7.96 today , i.e., the present value of $100 in 35 years discounting

by a real return of 7.5 percent [$7.96 = $100 / (1.075)35 ].

        Four points about this rate of return are worth emphasizing. First, the rate of return

earned through prefunding can be obtained for the economy as a whole only by increasing

national savings. Simply shifting funds into private assets that would otherwise be used for

reducing national debt (as some plans for investing the trust fund in equities as well as some

carve-out individual account plans do) would simply move returns from the private to the public

sector without increasing total national resources.8

        Second, all of the economic logic behind prefunding applies whether the prefunding

occurs through collective investing on behalf of the Social Security trust fund or through

individual retirement savings accounts. While there are serious arguments both for and against

collective investing,9 we believe that it is highly unlikely that the political system would adopt

the magnitude of prefunding discussed in this paper unless the prefunding occurs through private


        7
          Poterba (1997) estimates that the pre-tax marginal product of corporate capital is 8.5
percent. Since some capital may be invested in housing or abroad, the marginal product for all
capital could be somewhat lower than this. In addition, the increase in the capital stock could
cause the marginal product of capital to fall. Feldstein and Samwick (1997) show that with
Cobb-Douglas production technology, the reduction in the marginal product would be about 20
percent in the long run.
        8
        Elmendorf and Liebman (2000) examine the impact of Social Security reform on
national savings.
        9
            See for example Diamond (1999) and the comments on it by Feldstein (1999).

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               8
savings accounts.

        Third, prefunding comes at a cost. It requires the current generation to give up

consumption in order to make future generations (with higher standards of living) better off. The

logic behind prefunding is that the high rates of return on additional savings imply that current

generations must give up only a little consumption to prevent future generation from giving up a

large amount of consumption. Equivalently, if individuals today accept a slightly higher tax rate

than would otherwise be necessary, it will be possible to avoid a much larger tax increase in the

future. Whether, this tradeoff is worth making depends on one’s view of the intergenerational

social welfare function (see Feldstein, 1996 and the explicit calculations presented in Feldstein

and Samwick 1997, 1998a) and the increased excess burden that would be caused by higher

future tax rates.10

        Fourth, part of the national return to incremental saving occurs to governments through

taxes. Even when those savings are invested in stocks and bonds in “tax exempt” personal

retirement accounts, a portion of the total return is collected by the federal, state and local

governments in the form of corporate profits taxes and business property taxes. While in

principle these incremental tax revenues could be rebated to the investment-based Social Security

accounts (just as the Federal government transfers the income taxes collected on Social Security

benefits to the Trust Fund), we recognize that such transfers may be politically unlikely,



        10
           The low rates of observed savings by the current generation is not evidence that current
workers would oppose this transfer to future generations. Private savers cannot (outside of tax
favored retirement accounts) earn the pre-income tax rate of return on their savings, thus their
savings is distorted by the income tax. In addition, the need for a government provided Social
Security retirement system is largely predicated on the inability of individuals to make farsighted
savings decisions.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                9
especially with respect to the taxes collected by state and local governments. In the calculations

that follow we therefore underestimate the total return to the economy by assuming that the

investment-based Personal Retirement Accounts earn the return on a balanced stock-bond

portfolio, a return that therefore is after all taxes paid at the corporate level.

        More specifically, we assume a portfolio with 60 percent stock (the Standard and Poors

500 portfolio) and 40 percent corporate bonds, a balance that reflects the ratio in which

corporations finance their capital accumulation. The real logarithmic return on such a portfolio in

the half century from 1946 to 1995 was 5.9 percent. We subtract 40 basis points for

administrative costs to obtain the 5.5 percent real return that we use in most of our calculations.

We discuss in section 3 why this understates the actual mean return since 1946. In section 6 we

explicitly recognize the uncertainty of this return and analyze a low-probability “poor portfolio

performance” case.

        To assess the extent to which prefunding can reduce the required pay-as-you-go tax rate,

it is necessary to consider the implicit rate of return on the pay-as-you-go system. In the long-

run, the pay-as-you-go system has an implicit rate of return equal to the rate of growth of the

Social Security tax base (Samuelson, 1958). According to the OASDI trustees (1999), that tax

base will expand in real terms by about 1.1 percent a year over the next 75 years as labor force

growth averages 0.2 percent a year and real taxable wage growth averages 0.9 percent a year.

        The comparison of the 1.1 percent growth rate for the payroll tax base and the 5.5 percent

rate of return on investment-based accounts shows the profound effect that prefunding can have

on the cost of financing future Social Security benefits. Consider an individual who works from

age 25 to age 65 and then retires with a life expectancy of nearly 20 years. To illustrate this, we


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                10
approximate the costs of financing each $100 of benefits under the two systems by assuming that

all of the contributing or saving is done at the midpoint of the working years (age 45) and all of

the benefits are paid at age 80. With this 35 year time span, each $100 in retirement benefits

requires contributions to the pay-as-you-go system of $100 / (1.011)35 = $68.18 or savings in the

investment based system of $100 / (1.055)35 = $15.35. Thus each dollar of tax required in a pay-

as-you-go system with a 1.1 percent implicit rate of return can be replaced by 15.35/68.18 =

0.225 dollars in an investment based system with a 5.5 percent rate of return.

        These calculations imply that the 15.4 percent long-run OASI tax could in principle be

replaced with a 3.5 percent Personal Retirement Account saving rate (i.e., 0.225 x 15.4 percent

= 3.5 percent). Alternatively, a pure prefunded system could use a saving rate that is higher than

this 3.5 percent in order to achieve a higher expected benefit, to provide a cushion against the

possibility of a lower than expected rate of return, and to ensure that even those individuals who

receive a higher than average return from the current Social Security system come out with

higher benefits under the reformed system. Therefore, in this paper we assume a 9 percent

Personal Retirement Account saving rate, i.e., a rate that is only slightly more than half (58

percent) of the required long-run pay-as-you-go tax rate.

        The relative cost of investment-based and pay-as-you-go benefits (i.e., 0.225) can also be

used in evaluating the mixed system by calculating the cost of avoiding the 6 percent increase in

the tax rate from 9.4 percent to 15.4 percent that would be necessary to finance retirement

benefits under the current pay-as-you-go Social Security system. This calculation implies that a

1.35 percent Personal Retirement Account saving rate can replace a 6 percent increase in the

payroll tax rate. The analysis of the mixed system in this paper assumes instead a 3.0 percent


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              11
Personal Retirement Account saving rate. This is only half of the increase that would be required

in the long-run with the pure pay-as-you-go system but provides both a higher level of expected

benefits and a cushion against the risk of a lower rate of return.

        It is important to emphasize that the analysis in this paper deals with only the long-run

situation in which the demographic change has increased the cost of the pay-as-you-go system

and the alternative plans are fully phased in. In practice, of course, it would be necessary to go

through a transition period in which the population is aging and the new funding system is

gradually put into place. Thinking about the pure funded case shows the nature of the transition

problem and how it can be solved in practice. Nearly all of the 12.4 percent OASDI payroll tax

is currently needed to pay benefits to current retirees, survivors and disabled beneficiaries. Over

time this would grow to 19.9 percent if no investment based component is introduced. The 0.225

percent relative cost factor implies that the 19.9 percent could be financed in the long run by

saving 4.47 percent of covered earnings. But adding that 4.47 percent to the 12.4 percent at the

start of the transition would no doubt be a politically unacceptable burden. It is unnecessary,

however, to go immediately to the long-run funding rate. A gradual transition is possible in

which the saving rate starts at less than its long-run value and increases gradually as the rising

level of investment-based benefits makes it possible to reduce the pay-as-you-go tax rate.

Feldstein and Samwick (1997) show how the current 12.4 percent can be gradually replaced with

a much lower prefunded investment-based system by increasing the initial combination to 14.4

percent and then gradually bringing that total down to less than the initial 12.4 percent.

        The distributional impact during the transition period will depend on the exact timing of

the pay-as-you-go benefit declines relative to the distribution of the personal retirement account


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              12
annuities. Throughout the transition a smaller fraction of benefits will come from the individual

accounts and a larger fraction from the traditional defined benefit Social Security system than

will be the case at the end of the transition. If the cuts in traditional Social Security benefits are

phased in at the same rate as the individual accounts accumulate, then retirees in the transition

generations will also have higher expected retirements benefits than under current law.

However, some transition individuals may also pay higher total contribution rates than under

current law. We do not consider any of these transition issues in the current paper.

2.      The Microsimulation Model11

        As we noted above, our microsimulation model is based on a match of the 1990 and 1991

panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to Social Security

administrative earnings and benefit records for those same individuals. We select SIPP sample

members who were born from 1925 through 1929, and construct lifetime earnings and marital

histories from age 21 through age 64 using the administrative records and the SIPP topical

module on marriage. We then simulate the sample members’ Social Security benefit levels under

today’s Social Security rules (rather than under the ones they actually experienced), and simulate

their personal retirement account accumulations under the alternative policy rules outlined in the

previous section.

        The strength of our simulation model is that it reflects the full range of experience of the

different individual members of an actual cohort, including periods of unemployment, child-

rearing, low-earnings, divorce, etc. Because we have 40 years of actual covered earnings for



        11
         Readers who are not interested in the technical description of our method can go directly
to the next section.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                13
each sample member as well complete marital histories, we can be confident that our results

portray the full range of distributional outcomes that would have occurred for this cohort if it had

experienced these alternative Social Security systems.12 Compared with other microsimulation

models used to study the distributional implications of Social Security reform, we rely little on

projected or imputed data. Since we are particularly concerned about the lower tail of the benefit

distribution, our ability to observe extreme cases and to reflect the complicated cross correlations

between marital status, earnings, retirement, and mortality is important.

        Our data have two drawbacks, however. The first is that the future cohorts affected by

Social Security reform will differ along important dimensions from the cohort that we study. In

particular, women in future cohorts of retirees will reach retirement having had much more

extensive labor market experience, and marriage rates will be lower, particularly in some lower-

income populations. Second, we have to make some imputations to account for spouses who

were absent at the time of the 1990/1991 SIPP (due to death or divorce) and because our

administrative earnings data were truncated at the Social Security taxable maximum. The full

details of our matching and imputation methods are described in the data appendix.

        Once we have constructed complete earnings and marital histories, we calculate benefit

streams for ages 60 through 100. We assume that sample members claim benefits at their actual

retirement age (obtained from the Social Security benefit records). For the individual account

plans, we similarly assume that sample members annuitize their accounts at the same age that




        12
             We ignore behavioral responses to these alternative Social Security rules.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                14
they chose to start receiving Social Security benefits or at age 65, whichever is earlier.13 We then

calculate Social Security benefits at each age from 60 to100.14 For married and divorced sample

members, we calculate separate benefit streams corresponding to the benefits the sample member

would receive if his or her spouse were still alive and if the spouse were dead (assuming that the

sample member were still alive).

        Using these benefit streams, we construct a simulated cross-section of Social Security

beneficiaries by treating each benefit-year as an observation and weighting each observation by

the probability that the sample member is alive in that year. For married and divorced

individuals, the weights on each of the two benefit streams account additionally for the

probability that the spouse is alive. We use mortality tables classified by age, race, sex, and

education thereby incorporating socioeconomic differences in mortality. Brown, Liebman, and

Pollet (this volume) constructed these mortality tables by fitting a Gompertz-Makeham function

to data from the 1979-1985 National Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS) using non-linear

least squares. The period life tables estimated from the NLMS were used to create mortality

ratios (at each single year of age) for each race-education-sex group relative to the overall

mortality rate for the relevant sex. These ratios were then applied to Social Security

Administration life tables for male and females born in 1990 to produce the mortality tables used

in this paper. Potential benefit-years with zero benefits are not included in the sample. For



        13
           This assumption is made in order to facilitate comparisons between the different
systems. In practice, it would probably make more sense to have a standard annuitization age in
order to avoid adverse selection problems.
        14
          Benefits vary by age because they can depend on whether the sample member’s spouse
has started receiving benefits yet.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              15
example, only widows who take benefits at age 60 have observations at age 60.15

        Table I displays two sets of means for our sample. The first column displays the means

for our 2720 sample members, weighted for sampling and to correct for sample attrition due to

imperfect matching to administrative data.    At the time of the SIPP surveys, 54 percent of the

members of our 5-year cohort were female, 74 percent were married, and 92 percent were white.

Column 2 presents weighted means for our simulated cross-section of beneficiaries. Thus each

of the 2720 sample members contributes up to 41 observations from age 60 to 100 weighted by

the probability that they survive to that point in time. As would be expected, due to lower

mortality rates of women, a higher fraction, 59 percent, of this simulated cross section of

beneficiaries is female. The fraction that is married declines as spouses die. Thus, in the

simulated cross-section of beneficiaries 53 percent are married compared to 74 percent at the

time of the SIPP, and 38 percent are widow/ers compared to 14 percent at the time of the survey.

Similarly, the fraction that is black is lower in the simulated cross section because of higher

mortality rates for blacks than for whites.



3.      A Pure Prefunding System

        Although our primary interest is in the distributional effect of a mixed system that

combines the existing pay-as-you-go finance with an investment based component, we begin our



        15
          We adopted this cross-sectional methodology after seeing a similar approach used by
David Pattison at the Social Security Administration. However, our approach differs from that
used in studies such as Social Security Administration (1999) because we do not discount the
benefit levels back to age 65 as SSA does. We believe that our approach better represents the
cross-sectional distribution of all beneficiaries and does not underweight older beneficiaries,
particularly older widows.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              16
analysis in the current section by considering the analytically pure case of completely replacing

the traditional pay-as-you-go financing with a prefunding system of individual accounts. Since

there are different possible combinations of pay-as-you-go and investment based systems, the

pure prefunding system provides a useful limiting case. It also exaggerates the distributional

effects and makes them easier to study.

        We follow the procedure described above to compare the benefits that the retirees in our

sample would receive in a pure pre-funded system (after it is fully phased in) with the benefits

that they would receive under the existing pay-as-you-go Social Security rules (which we will

refer to as the individual’s benchmark Social Security benefits.) Our focus in this section is just

on the beneficiaries and the amounts of benefits that they would receive. In section 4 we combine

this information with the different amounts that these individuals would pay during their working

years as either taxes for the Social Security program or as savings deposited into the Personal

Retirement Accounts. This allows us to calculate the internal rates of return and net present value

for different subgroups as a way of assessing the net distributional consequences of the shift from

tax financed Social Security benefits to the funded Personal Retirement Account system.

        Although a complete shift to a pure investment based system has occurred in several

countries, other nations have combined pay-as-you-go defined benefit systems with defined

contribution investment based prefunding. A system that combines some prefunding with a

portion of the traditional pay-as-you-go finance would have a muted effect on distribution

compared to the pure prefunding system examined in the current section. We examine one such

mixed system in section 5 where we assume that the current pay-as-you-go tax rate continues to

exist and that benefits are scaled down to the amount that could be financed by such a tax rate


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              17
with the older population that will prevail in 2075, the date that we use for comparing the two

systems.16

        Currently OASDI benefits are 10.8 percent of payroll (the fact that this is lower than the

12.4 percent OASDI payroll tax explains the existence of the Social Security surplus). However,

some of these benefit payments are for disability benefits and other benefit categories such as

children and young widows that we do not model. Using numbers from the Social Security

Trustees’ Report, we calculate that the cost of the portion of the OASDI program that we

simulate in this paper will rise from 9.4 percent of payroll today to 15.4 percent of payroll in

2075. The most direct comparison of the fully phased-in version of the prefunded system with

the existing pay-as-you-go system would assume that the retirees pay the same 15.4 percent of

their wages each year during their working lives under both systems, with those funds going to

pay concurrent benefits under the pay-as-you-go system and being invested in the personal

retirement accounts in the prefunded system. However, since one of the advantages of the

prefunded system is that it would allow a lower rate of contribution in the long-run than the tax

rate of the pay-as-you-go system, our analysis assumes that individuals contribute only 9 percent

of their covered earnings to their Personal Retirement Accounts during their working lives. This

represents a 42 percent reduction in the cost of providing for their retirement income relative to

the 15.4 percent required in the pay-as-you-go system. As we noted above, we examine the

implications of this for the internal rate of return and for the net present value in different

subgroups in section 5.


        16
         Although we do not explicitly model the transition to the pure prefunded system, the
mixed system that we study in section 5 indicates the nature of the distributional effects that
might be observed along such a path.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               18
        Our analysis assumes that individuals invest in a way that produces a 5.5 percent real rate

of return on their Personal Retirement Account contributions after allowing for administrative

costs of 0.4 percent.17 As we noted above, 5.9 percent has been the mean for the period 1946 to

1995 of the logarithmic real return on a portfolio consisting of 60 percent stocks (the Standand

and Poors 500 index) and 40 percent corporate bonds. Four comments about this rate of return

are warranted.

        First, 5.9 percent is the return to investors on the portfolio of stocks and bonds and

therefore understates the overall return to the nation of the incremental savings generated in the

PRA accounts. To the extent that those savings are invested in corporate capital, they generate

taxes to the federal, state, and local governments, including both corporate profits taxes and

property taxes. This extra tax revenue permits reductions in other taxes or increases in

government spending. We make no attempt to calculate how this extra benefit would be

distributed in the population.

        Second, the 5.9 percent mean return is the mean of the logarithmic annual returns. The

corresponding mean return of the ordinary level rates of return is about one full percentage point

higher, or 6.9 percent.18


        17
          Administrative costs of 0.4 percent are about twice the rate charged by efficient equity
index funds like the Vanguard fund. Bond funds generally have lower charges than equity funds.
TIAA-CREF now offers a variable annuity with an administrative cost of 0.37 percent. These
existing funds must incur expenses in collecting funds that would be avoided in a system in
which funds are deposited annually in individual accounts by the government. For a discussion
of these issues, see the NBER volume on the administrative costs of Social Security reform
edited by John Shoven (Shoven, 1999) and the paper by Goldberg and Graetz (1999).
        18
          The lognormal approximation for the rate of return implies that E(1 + R) = exp {E( r) +
0.5 var ( r) } where R is the level rate of return, r is the logarithmic rate of return, E(x) is the
expected value of x and var (x) is the variance of x. Since E( r) = .059 and var ( r) = (0.125)2 =

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              19
        Third, ending the post-war sample period in 1995 excludes the 125 percent rise in share

prices between 1995 and 1999 and the significant if smaller rise in bond prices since that time.

Extending the period through 1999 would raise the rate of return from 6.9 percent for 1946 to

1995 to about 7.5 percent for 1946-1999. Understating the actual average past rate of return in

these two ways provides a margin of safety for the year to year fluctuations of the rate of return in

the future and for the possibility that the stock market is particularly vulnerable to a downward

correction at the present time.

        Fourth, we provide explicit calculations in section 6 of the distributional effect of a

prefunded system with a substantially lower rate of return, substituting 3.5 percent for the 5.5

percent. The statistical analysis reported in Feldstein and Ranguelova (1998) shows that the

historic experience implies that an annuity with a cumulative rate of return higher than 3.5

percent would be experienced in 90 percent of the realizations from the process that generated

the observed rates of return between 1946 and 1995.19

        Table II compares the mean benefits that would be paid to various retiree groups under

existing pay-as-you-go Social Security rules with the PRA annuities that they would receive from

the investment based accounts with the net 5.5 percent real rate of return. For each population

group we also note the percentage of beneficiaries whose PRA annuities would be greater than or


.016, the mean of the level return is given by E(1+R) = exp (0.067) = 1.069, i.e., a 6.9 percent
real level rate of return.
        19
          Some additional variance could arise because individuals would be allowed to choose
among various mutual fund managers. However, this additional variance would be quite small.
Chevalier and Ellison (1999) estimate that the standard deviations of excess returns (relative to
the market) of large growth and income mutual funds is around 3.5 percent. Since our estimates
use a market standard deviation of 12.5 percent, accounting for the extra 3.5 percent spread
would increase our overall standard deviation by less than 5 percent.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              20
equal to the benefits that those individuals would receive from the Social Security program.20 In

addition, we show the percentage of individuals whose benefits are lower than the poverty line

under the current law Social Security rules and in the PRA system.

        All of these calculations assume that the beneficiaries begin receiving benefits at their

actual age of claiming benefits or at age 65, whichever is earlier.21 The dollar amounts that we

report are per retiree. This convention implies that a married couple receives twice the benefits

that we report. Under the Social Security system, the per retiree benefit for a married couple is

found by adding the retiree benefit of the primary earner plus the spouse benefit or the second

earner’s benefit, whichever is higher, and then dividing the sum by two. In the investment-based

options, the Personal Retirement Account (PRA) annuities of both members of a married couple

are combined and the sum is divided by two. Recall that the simulation assumes that retirees

experience their actual earnings histories, restated in 1999 dollars, and will receive benefits under

the current (1999) law benefit rules. When an individual reaches the age at which he claims

benefits, his PRA balance is fully annuitized. Those individuals who die prematurely bequeath

their PRA balances to their spouse if they have one or to someone else if they have no spouse.

All amounts are in 1999 dollars and wage levels.


        20
         If benefit levels under both plans are below the SSI guarantee, we treat the two plans as
providing equal retirement benefits.
        21
          We simulate benefit levels under the current normal retirement age of 65, even though
we are considering a fully phased in system that would exist after the retirement age has been
raised to 67 (or higher). We do this because we do not want to bias the results of our analysis in
favor of personal retirement accounts in assuming no behavioral responses to the benefit cuts
implicit in raising the retirement age. In doing so, we tilt our results in favor of the traditional
Social Security system, in assuming that the benefits we simulate could be afforded with 15.4
percent of payroll. In fact, if the NRA of 65 were maintained, paygo Social Security benefits
would cost more than 15.4 percent of payroll.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              21
        The top line of the table shows (column 1) that the average annual current law Social

Security benefit in our sample of retirees, funded with a 15.4 percent payroll tax, would be

$9,291.22    By contrast, PRA annuities for the same group of individuals with the same earnings

histories, funded with 9 percent of covered earnings, produce a mean annuity of $21,412 (column

2). The mean annuity is thus more than twice as high with the PRA system as with current

Social Security rules even though the 9 percent funding rate is only slightly more than half of the

15.4 percent payroll tax rate required in the long-run for the pay-as-you-go Social Security

system with the current benefit rules.23 Column 3 reports that 98 percent of all beneficiaries

would have PRA annuities that were greater than or equal to the benefits they would receive

from Social Security under current law.

        Finally, columns 4 and 5 report the effect of the reform on the percentage of retirees

whose total income would be below the poverty level on the basis of their Social Security or

PRA benefits taken alone. We say “benefits taken alone” to emphasize that this makes no

allowance for Supplemental Security Income payments or other sources of retirement income

(private pensions, federal and state government pensions, private savings, earnings, etc.)



        22
         In comparison, the Social Security Administration reports average benefits actually
received by new beneficiaries (retired workers, husbands/wives, and widows) of $8000 in 1997.
Accounting for wage growth between 1997 and 1999 would eliminate about one-third of the gap
between the two averages. In addition, our simulation model assumes that workers faced a
taxable maximum that was equivalent to current levels throughout their careers, raising their
covered earnings relative to actual retirees.
        23
         The two mean annuities could be made equal by cutting the PRA saving rate from 9
percent to just 4.0 percent, only about one-fourth of the 15.4 percent payroll tax needed to fund
the current law Social Security benefits with the future demographics and projected earnings.
While it would be interesting to examine the distributional effects of the shift to a pure prefunded
systems with different saving rates, we do not pursue this here.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              22
Columns 4 and 5 show that the Social Security benefits taken alone would leave 18.9 percent of

beneficiaries below the poverty line while this would fall to 9.2 percent with the PRA system.

Thus PRA prefunding, using a saving rate that is less than 60 percent of the tax rate that would

be required for pay-as-you-go Social Security cuts the potential poverty rate by more than half.

        The rest of the table provides similar information for several different population

subgroups. In every group, the mean PRA annuity substantially exceeds the mean benefits that

would be paid under current-law Social Security rules, the number of beneficiaries who would

receive more from the PRA annuity substantially exceeds the number who would receive more

from Social Security, and the potential poverty rate under Social Security rules is substantially

higher than it would be in the PRA system. After commenting on some of these comparisons we

will look at a graphic representation of the outcomes for individual beneficiaries that indicates

the extent to which some individuals would receive less from the PRA system than they would

receive under existing Social Security rules.

        Although all of the subgroups do substantially better with the PRA system than with the

traditional Social Security, there are differences in the extent to which this is true. Some of these

differences are what might have been expected, but we found others surprising.

        Married individuals gain relatively less on average than other groups. The mean PRA

annuity of $17,152 of married men is 2.04 times the Social Security benefits of $8,425 per person

for the same individuals. The ratio is similar (2.15) but not identical for married women.24 By

comparison, the ratio of PRA benefits to current law Social Security benefits is 2.36 for non-


        24
        The amounts for married women are not the same as the amounts for married men
because only individuals born between 1925 and 1929 are included in the calculations. Thus
both members of married couples are not always in the sample.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              23
married (widowed, divorced, or never married) men and 2.56 for non-married women.25 This

reflects two things. First, many married couples gain from the existing Social Security rule that

gives benefits of 150 percent of the benefit of the primary earner whenever that amount is greater

than the couple would have received on the basis of their individual earnings, even if the

secondary earner had little or no earnings. Second, under the PRA system that we simulate,

women who become widows after both spouses claim benefits, receive a retirement benefit that

is two-thirds of what the couple was receiving. In contrast, Social Security provides widows

with benefits that range between 50 percent and two-thirds of the couple’s benefit, depending on

the relative earnings of the two spouses. Moreover, if the widow’s husband dies before claiming

benefits in the PRA program, the widow inherits the account balance and eventually annuitizes it

(as well as her own account if she has not previously claimed benefits either) at a single life rate.

        This explains why widows and widowers not only have greater proportional gains but

also have substantially more per capita benefits than married individuals. Divorced individuals

also do well under the PRA plan relative to Social Security, especially if their former spouse is

still alive or if their marriage lasted for fewer than 10 years. Social Security provides spouse

benefits to divorced spouses that are only one-half of the benefit received by the ex-spouse while

the ex-spouse is still alive (this prevents the system from creating an incentive for divorce).

Moreover, the system provides no benefits to divorced spouses from marriages that lasted fewer

than 10 years. In contrast, our PRA plan splits the accounts of the two spouses at the time of

divorce regardless of the length of the marriage, and therefore often results in higher benefits.


        25
         Note that although the per person benefits are higher for the single retirees of all sorts,
the benefits for the married couples with the man in the age range are twice $17,152 or $34,304,
substantially higher than the household benefits in the other groups.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              24
        The poverty figures in columns 4 and 5 show that married couples that depend

exclusively on the Social Security or PRA benefits are less likely to be below poverty than the

unmarried retirees (widows, widowers, divorcees, and those who were never married). The shift

from Social Security to the PRA benefit reduces the portion below poverty by much more among

these high poverty unmarried groups than among the married. For example, while the proportion

of married women who would be in poverty on the basis of Social Security benefits alone falls

from 13 percent to 9 percent, the proportion of non-married women who would be in poverty

falls from 26 percent to 9 percent.

        Women who become widowed or divorced at an early age are particularly vulnerable

under current Social Security rules. A woman who is widowed at 50 and who does not remarry

will receive benefits based on her own earnings record (which may have large gaps during child

raising years or may only begin at age 50) or on the limited earnings record of her husband, often

leaving her with relatively low benefits when she turns 65 . The PRA system provides her with

substantially more benefits when she retires because the amount in her husband’s account passes

to her if he dies before age 65 and accumulates value through the investment return.

        The situation is similar for women who become divorced at an early age and do not

remarry. The combination of account splitting at the time of divorce and the long period over

which to earn investment returns generally results in higher benefits than they receive under

Social Security.

        This advantage of the PRA system is shown in the row marked Early Widows and

Divorcees which refers to women who were widowed or divorced before the age of 50 and not

remarried before retirement. We combine the young widows and young divorcees for this


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                             25
calculation because the sample of each taken separately would be too small. Their mean benefit

under current Social Security rules would be only $8,249 while their PRA annuities would be

$22,044, a ratio of 2.67 and therefore substantially higher than the ratio for married men and

women. 99 per cent of the PRA annuities of these young widows and divorcees would exceed the

Social Security benefits that they would get under current rules. The percentage of “young

widow and divorcees” whose benefits at retirement age are below the poverty line declines from

46 percent under current rules to 15 percent in the PRA system.

        Table IIa also presents separate results for whites, blacks and Hispanics. All three groups

gain substantially from the switch, even those who are divorced, widowed, or never married.

The mean gain is larger for whites than for blacks but the reduction of the proportion of retirees

who are potentially in poverty is greatest among blacks, a decline from 53 percent to 21 percent

among unmarried blacks. Thus the shift to the PRA system is potentially much more important

for blacks than it is for whites in combating poverty in old age.

        Another way of assessing how the shift would affect different socio-economic groups is

to compare the potential effect on households with different primary earner education levels. All

three of the education groups enjoy a more than doubling of mean benefits both when married

and single, but the relative gain is lower among those with a college education (2.02 when

married and 2.27 with unmarried) than among those with a high school education (2.15 and 2.59)

or those with less than a high school education (2.03 and 2.48). The reduction in poverty is

greatest among the unmarried with less than a high school education; the proportion that

potentially receives less than the poverty level falls from 35 percent to 13 percent among those

with less than a high school education.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              26
        The greater relative gain among those with less than a college education is surprising at

first since it is natural to think that the lower educated group would have lower incomes and

therefore, given the nature of the Social Security rules, would have higher benefits relative to

previous earnings (and therefore to PRA benefits) than those with more education and earnings.

The contrary observed result may reflect the greater likelihood that married college attendees are

more likely to be in a couple where the wife receives benefits as a spouse rather than as a retired

worker, a situation that raises the value of Social Security benefits relative to lifetime earnings.

The college educated group also has lower age-specific mortality rates, increasing the expected

number of years of benefits.

        Table IIb presents results by lifetime income, defined as the Average Indexed Monthly

Earnings (AIME) of the higher earner in the household. The overall pattern suggests that the

reductions in potential poverty are the greatest in the lower income quintiles, while upper-income

households have the largest proportional gains from switching to a PRA system. This

classification must be regarded with great caution, however, since many of those who are

classified as in the lowest quintile on the basis of their covered earnings may have worked for

state governments or for the federal government for much of their life and have not actually had

low incomes. The distributional results are therefore more meaningful for higher income

quintiles. Education and race may also be better ways to assess how the reform would affect

those with lower lifetime earnings. Finally, it is important to emphasize that all income groups

benefit substantially from the shift, and that the reductions in potential poverty are largest for

those most at risk.

3.1     Comparing Individual Benefits


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               27
        We now go beyond the comparison of the mean benefits and other summary statistics for

each of the demographic groups that are shown in Table I to examine how each of the individuals

in our sample would do under the two systems. Figure 1 compares the simulated annual annuity

benefits from the PRA accounts (the vertical axis) to the simulated annual social security benefits

under current law (the horizontal account) for all beneficiaries. As in Table IIa, the PRA benefits

are based on a contribution of 9 percent of earnings, approximately 58 percent of the 15.4 percent

payroll tax that would be required to finance the pay-as-you-go OASI Social Security benefits for

those who retire in 2075. Each point in the figure represents an individual in the sample

weighted to represent the population sampling weight and the survival probabilities, as described

in section 2 of this paper. To conform to Census restrictions on disclosing information on

individuals, each point has been slightly modified from the actual location by adding random

noise, a process known as “random jittering” in the statistical literature. This procedure does not

change the overall appearance of the figure in a perceptible way. Note that the scale of the two

axes is different; the annual Social Security benefits (horizontal scale) range from zero to

$20,000 per beneficiary while the PRA annuities for the same individuals range from zero to

$60,000.

        The ray from the origin represents equal values of simulated Social Security benefits and

simulated PRA annuities. Any point above the line corresponds to an individual who would

receive more from the PRA system based on a 9 percent contribution rate than from the Social

Security system despite the substantially higher 15.4 percent tax rate. The figure illustrates the

statistic in Table II that nearly all individuals would receive more from the PRA system than

from the Social Security system.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              28
        The figure goes beyond that summary statistic by showing the Social Security benefit

level and the PRA annuity of each individual in our sample who would gain or lose in the shift to

a prefunded system and the magnitude of the net gain or loss. It is clear that most of those who

appear to lose from the shift are individuals with relatively low Social Security benefits. It is

significant therefore to consider the role that Supplemental Security Income (SSI) would play in

supplementing both the regular Social Security benefits and the PRA annuities. SSI is a federal

government program that currently provides means tested supplemental benefits so that the

combination of regular Social Security benefits, other income (from assets, pensions, and work)

and the SSI benefit together provide a specified minimum income. Since our figures are

benchmarked to 1999 income levels, the relevant SSI amounts are $6000 per year for a single

individual and $9012 per year for a couple. This implies that incomes below $4506 per person in

married couples and $6000 for unmarried individuals should not be observed under either the

Social Security system or the PRA system.26

        To show the implication of this in a clear way, Figure 2 repeats the points in figure 1 for

married individuals and adds vertical and horizontal lines corresponding to the federal SSI

guarantee level (i.e., $4506); to make the points clearer we limit the range to individuals with

Social Security benefits up to $12,000 per person. No point inside this SSI box would be

observed in practice. Note that some individuals with Social Security benefits at or below the SSI

level will have PRA benefits above that level and some with Social Security benefits above the

SSI level will receive only the SSI level of benefits under the PRA program. The diagonal line



        26
          Some individuals who appear to be eligible for SSI payments to not take up their SSI
benefits. McGarry (this volume) discusses this issue.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              29
from the origin still shows the equal value combinations of Social Security benefits and PRA

annuity payments, but any point inside the SSI box will be raised to the SSI level.

        Any point below the diagonal line but inside the SSI box will not correspond to lower

benefits under the actual PRA system because of the SSI supplement. The key point to note is

that in the presence of the SSI guarantee there are very few points in which the PRA system

provides lower income than the Social Security system.27

        Figure 3 shows the combinations of Social Security benefits and PRA annuity levels for

women who are not married at retirement age (i.e., are widowed, divorced or never married).

There are very few points in which the PRA benefit would be less than the Social Security

benefit. When the benefit levels in the two systems are adjusted for SSI, i.e., each individual’s

retirement income has been adjusted up to the SSI level if it would otherwise be below, the small

number of potential losers is substantially reduced. Only those points that are outside the “SSI

box” and below the diagonal line would receive lower benefits.

        The result is even more striking for “young” widows and divorcees (Figure 4) where

virtually all of the individuals in the sample would be better off under the PRA system than under

existing Social Security rules.

        Figure 5 presents the same analysis for blacks. Almost all of this group would get higher

retirement benefits under the PRA plan with a 9 percent contribution rate than under the Social

Security plan with the 15.4 percent tax rate, often very much higher. While some of this group


        27
          If a beneficiary had sufficient other income to be ineligible for SSI, then it would be
possible for a person with a point in the bottom right portion of the SSI box to have lower
income in a PRA system than under Social Security. But no one would end up with total income
below the federal SSI standard. The cost of the SSI program would also be reduced since the
PRA benefits would raise the incomes of many of those who now qualify for SSI benefits.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              30
with low Social Security benefits would have even lower PRA annuities, this would rarely occur

in practice because of the SSI program.

        Figure 6 shows a similar analysis for individuals in households in which the primary

earner had less than a high school education. Again virtually everyone in this group would have a

higher retirement income in the PRA system and SSI would eliminate many of those shortfalls

that remain.

4.      Taking Taxes into Account: Internal Rates of Return and Net Present Values

        The analysis of section 3 focused on the benefits that individuals would receive under the

two systems. Although we noted that the 9 percent long-run rate of contribution to the PRA

system would be substantially less than the corresponding 15.4 percent long-run tax required to

fund the pay-as-you-go system, our analysis did not take this into account explicitly. We now

remedy that by comparing the internal rates of return and the net present values of different

population subgroups under the current Social Security rules with the rates of return and net

present values that those groups would have in the PRA system.28

        The rate of return calculations for the PRA system are sensitive to the PRA annuity

assumptions and to the bequest rules. All PRA balances are fully annuitized when the individual

reaches retirement. Although an actuarially fair PRA system would give each individual the

same rate of return, we noted above that we assume that the PRA annuities would be calculated

using a single uniform unisex mortality table. The PRA system therefore gives a higher rate of

return to those groups that have higher life expectancies, a difference that is particularly


        28
         It is important to emphasize that these rates of return are after the transition to the new
system is complete. During part of the transition to the PRA system, contributions rates might be
higher under the PRA system than under the pay-as-you-go system.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              31
important in favoring women relative to men. With respect to bequests, we assume that a married

individual who dies before age 67 bequeaths his PRA balance to his spouse if he or she has one

and to someone else if there is no spouse.

        The internal rate of return is calculated for each individual as follows. For individuals

who are never married, we calculate the internal rate of return on the stream that begins with the

taxes paid by the individual and the individual’s employer at a combined 15.4 percent rate and

switches to the benefits that the individual receives in each year; with each year weighted by the

probability that the individual is alive at that age, using the age-sex-race-education mortality

probabilities described above. For married couples, one half of the combined payroll taxes paid

by the couple in each year that they are married is assumed to be paid by each individual (in years

in which the spouses were not married, the entire payroll tax is attributed to the spouse who paid

the tax). When the individuals receive benefits as a couple, half of the total benefit in each year

is assumed to be received by each. When one of the couple dies, the remaining benefits are

attributed only to the surviving spouse. The same procedure is followed for divorce: the

divorced individual is assumed to pay half of the couple’s combined payroll tax while married

and to receive the relevant benefits after divorce.29 In each situation, the internal rate of return

for each individual in the couple is then based on these calculated tax payments and benefit

receipts. From the SIPP marriage topical module we observe annual marital status for each

individual including up to three marriages and divorces. Rates of return are reduced to account

for the payroll taxes paid by cohort members who died before the time of the SIPP survey.



        29
       Recall that at the time of a divorce the PRA balances of the two individuals are
combined and divided equally between them.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               32
Implicitly, we assume that each deceased member of the cohort had earnings when they were

alive that were equal to the average earnings of a person in the same sex-age-race-education

subgroup. Rates of return are increased to account for the bequests by cohort members who died

while single and before claiming benefits. The full amount of the bequest is treated as a benefit

accruing to the sex-age-race-education subgroup of the decedent, and he or she is assumed to

have had a personal retirement account equal to the subgroup average for people of his or her

age.

        Our estimates of the internal rate of return in each subgroup (and for all individuals) is

done for the aggregate taxes and benefits in the relevant subgroup. Thus, individuals with higher

earnings and benefit levels receive more weight in the internal rate of return calculations.

        For all participants in our sample, the switch from the pay-as-you-go system to the PRA

system raises the rate of return from about 1.4 percent in the unfunded Social Security system30 to

5.5 percent in the PRA system. Although the differences between the two rates of return is

substantially greater for some population groups than it is for others, reflecting the redistribution

implied by the Social Security rules and the differences in PRA returns due to the use of a single

unisex mortality table for calculating the PRA annuity payments, it is also true that all of the

subgroups that we consider experience substantial rate of return increases.

        Table III presents results for each of the subgroups for which an internal rate of return can

be calculated. This is straightforward for the classifications that can be identified at age 21: sex,



        30
          This is the rate of return on Social Security contributions for the cohort that we study.
Different cohorts would have different rates of return but, after the baby-boom demographic
transition, all groups would receive approximately the rate of growth of real money wages.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               33
race, and education. We do not present results for marital status since it is not generally known

at age 21 and varies over an individual’s lifetime.

        It is tempting to say that the groups with the biggest increase in rate of return benefit most

from the shift, and in some sense this is true. But such a comparison does not take into account

the relative magnitudes of the tax and of the saving deposits under the two systems. A given rise

in the internal rate of return is worth more in absolute amount when the magnitude of the tax and

saving deposit is larger. We therefore also present estimates of the net present value of the time

paths of payments and receipts for the Social Security and PRA systems.

        The first column of Table III shows the internal rates of return of the current pay-as-you-

go Social Security system for different population subgroups. We use our age-sex-race-education

life tables to calculate the probability that each such person is alive to pay the tax in each year of

his or her working life and to receive the Social Security benefit at each age. Since we are

modeling the fully phased-in systems, we assume that the individuals (and their employers) pay

15.4 percent of their covered earnings in each year (from age 21 to their retirement age). The

corresponding PRA calculations in column 2 assume that the individuals and/or their employers

contribute 9 percent of their covered earnings and receive a 5.5 percent net rate of return on their

contributions subject to the same mortality tables.

        Women receive a higher return under Social Security than men because of their greater

longevity and lower earnings; column one shows a return of 0.62 percent for men and 1.95

percent for women. The difference between woman and men increases slightly if we shift to the

PRA system: an increase of 4.04 percent for men (to 4.66 percent) and an increase of 4.29

percent for women (to 6.24 percent), primarily reflecting the use of the unisex life table.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               34
        The results by race are quite interesting. Whites and blacks receive essentially the same

rate of return under Social Security, with blacks receiving slightly less (1.27 percent) than whites

(1.36 percent). Blacks do not receive a higher rate of return from Social Security despite their

lower incomes because of differences in mortality rates with blacks being more likely to die

before they receive any benefits and then, conditional on reaching age 65, to die earlier than

whites who reached that age. More specifically, if we look just at those who live to age 65 the

internal rate of return for blacks is slightly higher for whites, demonstrating how important

mortality before age 65 is in racial differences in returns.31

        Under the PRA, the gains for the two groups are very similar, with whites receiving

slightly higher rates of return than blacks because both groups are assumed to purchase annuities

at the same rates even though whites have a greater life expectancy.

        Columns 3 through 8 contrast the net present value of the benefits and taxes for each of

these groups, using three alternative real discount rates. We regard the 3 percent real rate (used in

columns 5 and 6) as approximately the value that could be obtained after tax by an investor who

could invest in the PRA portfolio of stocks and bonds. As a sensitivity test we repeat this

analysis for real discount rates of both one percent and five percent. All other things equal, a

group that has had higher incomes throughout its life will pay more payroll tax in the Social

Security program and make larger contributions in the PRA system; it will therefore have a larger

positive net present value (NPV) if its internal rate of return exceeds the discount rate and a


        31
          As we explained above, these rates of return are based on the total taxes and benefits for
the population subgroup, i.e., these are the weighted average of the individual rates of return with
weights equal to the amount of taxes paid and benefits received. A simple unweighted average
shows a much higher return for blacks that is more than twice the rate for whites. See Liebman
(this volume) for more detail.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               35
larger negative net present value if its internal rate of return is less than the discount rate.

        The first row shows that for the average participant the lifetime NPV of the pay as you go

Social Security system is negative ( minus $26,475) when discounting at 3 percent (column 5).

In contrast, with the PRA system the lifetime NPV for the average participant (shown in column

6) is a positive $48,414. With a one percent discount rate, both systems have positive present

values (columns 3 and 4) but the difference between the two widens: $186,992 in the PRA and

$11,510 with Social Security. A five percent discount rate makes the Social Security NPVs more

negative and reduces the NPV of the PRA system to a smaller positive amount. The higher the

discount rate, the smaller the overall NPV difference between the two systems.

        As would be expected, the higher rates of return that women get in both the current Social

Security system and the PRA system translates into more favorable NPVs for women than for

men. Results for the other demographic groups are similarly straight forward.

5.      A Mixed System: Pay-as-You-Go plus Investment Based

        Although the pure investment based system that we examined in sections 3 and 4

provides a useful benchmark, it is not a realistic prospect for the United States. The countries

that adopted pure investment based systems are ones in which the traditional pay-as-you-go

systems were generally regarded by the public as bankrupt, corrupt, and in need of fundamental

reform. That is not the situation in the United States. The Social Security program is highly

regarded and the public is seeking a way of maintaining the system (“saving Social Security”)

without the large tax increase that would be required if the pure pay-as-you-go system continued.

        As we noted above, several countries now operate Social Security retirement systems that

include both traditional defined benefits financed on a pay-as-you-go basis with an investment


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                36
based defined contribution benefit.32 Proposals for such a hybrid system have been made in the

United States by academic researchers, advisory groups, and politicians. The proposal that we

examine in this section would maintain a pay as you go system with a tax of 12.4 percent of

payroll. An estimated three percent of the 12.4 percent (along with the revenue that is collected

from the taxation of benefits) would be needed to continue the disability benefits provided in

current law as well as benefits for young survivors. Since retirement benefits will require 15.4

percent of payroll in 2075, the 9.4 percent of the payroll tax that remains after providing for DI

would be sufficient to finance 61 percent of current law benefits. This plan would supplement

these reduced pay-as-you-go benefits (implemented as an across-the-board reduction in all

retirement benefits) with a PRA system with contributions equal to 3 percent of covered

earnings, i.e. half of the 6 percent of earnings increase that would be required in the 15.4 percent

pure pay-as-you-go financing.33

        Tables IVa and IVb show the effects of this mixed system for the same population

subgroups discussed above. The resulting benefits for the mixed system are of course a hybrid of

the pure Social Security benefits shown in column 1 and the benefits that would result from a

pure PRA system (shown in column 2 of Table IIa). More specifically, the benefits shown in

column 2 of Table IV are approximately equal to 61 percent of the pure Social Security benefits

shown in column 1 of Table IIa (the ratio of the 9.4 percent current pay-as-you-go OASI tax to



        32
       See Feldstein (1998) for discussions of such mixed systems in Australia and the United
Kingdom and Feldstein and Siebert (2001) for discussions of reform in Europe.
        33
          Both systems receive additional revenue from the taxation of benefits. In the mixed
system, these revenues are used to continue to provide full (i.e. not reduced to 61 percent) DI
benefits.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              37
the 15.4 percent that would be required in the pure Social Security system) plus three-ninths of

the 9 percent pure PRA benefits shown in column 2 of Table IIa.

        The relative gains among the different marital groups are qualitatively similar to the pure

case of Table II but more muted. On average, beneficiaries see their per capita annual benefits

increase by $3,607 or 39 percent, despite the substantial reduction in the cost of financing the

combined package. The gain among married couples is around $2,600 per person, a 30 percent

rise over the traditional Social Security benefit. The relative gain is greater among the other

marital status groups: unmarried women gain 47 percent for example. Potential poverty

reduction is also greatest among these groups; for women who are widowed, divorced, or never

married, the potential poverty rates are reduced from almost 25 percent with the current Social

Security law to 15 percent with the mixed system. Women gain more than men, a reflection of

the unisex life tables and the greater annuities received by widows. More specifically, the gains

average 30 percent for married men and 41 percent for unmarried men. In contrast, married and

unmarried women gain 34 percent and 47 percent. Those women who were widowed or

divorced by the age of 50 have an even greater relative gain, rising by 51 percent. The potential

poverty rate for this group is cut from over 45 percent to 21 percent.

        Although whites gain more than blacks, the potential poverty reduction among blacks is

more substantial than among whites. Hispanics gain relatively least because a substantial share

of the Hispanics in our sample are immigrants for whom the current Social Security rules

provides a very high return on contributions.34 When the change is assessed in terms of the



        34
        On the impact of Social Security rules on immigrants, see Gustman and Steinmeier
(1998) and Liebman (this volume).

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              38
impact on potential poverty, it is the unmarried blacks who benefit most with potential poverty

falling from 53 percent to 35 percent. Hispanics benefit less because they have less time in the

country as PRA participants to benefit from the PRA accumulation.

        When beneficiaries are classified by the education of the highest earner in the household,

the smallest proportional gain tends to go to those with more than a high school education. This

group with the highest education level does well under the traditional Social Security rules

because the wives in this group are most likely to receive benefits as spouses. The less than high

school group also has the greatest gain when measured by the reduction in poverty.

        When we examine income in Table IVb, we see that all groups gain, though the higher

quintiles receive the largest percentage increases in benefits. The first two quintiles, however,

have the largest reductions in potential poverty.

5.1     Comparing Individual Benefits

        More than 95 percent of the retirees would receive more from the mixed system than

from the pure Social Security system. The proportion of gainers differs among the various

groups but exceeds 90 percent except for married Hispanics, whose gain is limited by the large

fraction of immigrants in this group.

        The scatter plots showing the way that individuals are affected are similar to the pure

PRA results shown in section 3 but with a reduced difference between the Social Security benefit

and the mixed system benefit for each individual. Any point that is above the equal-benefit line

in the pure PRA scatter diagrams (implying that the PRA benefit exceeds the Social Security

benefit) will continue to be above the line in the mixed system but with the distance reduced. We

therefore present only four scatter diagrams for comparison with the earlier results.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                 39
        Figure 7 shows the results for all beneficiaries. The key things to notice are that most

people are above the equal benefit line, that the points are more tightly clustered near the line

than they were before, and that the people who are below the line tend to be below by a very

small amount.

        Figure 8 refers to women who are divorced or widowed before age 50 and who do not

remarry and can be compared to figure 4 in section 3. Virtually all of the points are above the

equal benefit line with only a handful of individuals who are both below the line and outside the

SSI box.

        Figure 9, for blacks, shows that almost all the points are above the line and the few that

are below are mostly at levels of income at which the individuals would be eligible for SSI. In

short, all of these individuals would be better off with the mixed system than with traditional

Social Security.

        Finally, figure 10 shows that the results for the low education group (i.e., males with less

than a high school education) are similar. The losses are small and mostly in the income range

where SSI would be available. The gains for the gainers are substantially larger than the losses

for the losers.

5.2     Internal Rates of Return and NPVs in the Mixed System

        Table V presents the internal rate of return and net present value calculations for the

mixed system and compares those calculations with the corresponding estimates for the pure

Social Security system. The mixed plan produces an overall internal rate of return of 3.07

percent, reflecting the 1.4 percent on the pay-as-you-go portion and the 5.5 percent on the PRA

portion. The differences among the subgroups follow the same pattern as they did for the pure


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              40
PRA option but in a muted way. The gain in net present value (calculated as of age 21) averages

$27,666 for all beneficiaries using a 3 percent discount rate.

6.      The Risk of Low Investment Returns

        Our analysis until now has assumed that the PRA accounts earn a real return of 5.5

percent. We now examine the effects on different population subgroups and individuals of the

risk that the return earned in PRA accounts will be very much lower than it would have been in

the past.

        As we noted in section 3, the mean logarithmic real return on a balanced portfolio of 60

percent stock (the Standard and Poors 500) and 40 percent corporate bonds for the 50 year period

1946 through 1995 was 5.9 percent. We subtract 0.4 percent for administrative costs to arrive at

the 5.5 percent that we used in these analyses. As we explained above, using the mean

logarithmic return understates the mean of the actual level returns by about one percentage point,

allowing a margin of safety for fluctuations in the investment return. A further reduction of

nearly one percentage point results from not extending the sample to 1999.

        Our examination in this section draws on the Feldstein and Ranguelova (1998) and

Feldstein, Ranguelova and Samwick (1999) analyses of the investment risks in an investment

based or mixed system. Those analyses showed that the benefits generated by a pure PRA system

with a six percent PRA saving rate or by a mixed system with a 2.3 percent PRA saving rate (and

continuation of the current pay-as-you-go tax rate) have a very high probability of exceeding the

traditional Social Security benefits. Those calculations were for a representative agent with

average earnings and not for an actual sample of individuals of the type that we study here.

        We now use the disaggregated sample data to examine whether there are some


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              41
demographic groups that would be more adversely affected by investment risk than others. We

do not perform the same kind of full analysis of the complete distribution of returns that

Feldstein and Ranguelova did for the representative agent. Instead we focus on a particular low

probability “pessimistic” scenario and evaluate the effects on different population groups if this

outcome occurs. More specifically, we assume that instead of a 5.5 percent real rate of return the

PRA account earns only 3.5 percent. Simulations based on the mean-variance experience from

1946 through 1995 implies that this would be at the tenth percentile of the probability

distribution of the annuity payments that would be earned by an individual who had contributed

in every year from age 21 through age 66. Thus there is essentially a 90 percent probability

based on past experience with the variability of returns that the representative individual’s PRA

annuity would be greater than the PRA benefit based on a 3.5 percent return.35

        We begin this analysis with the pure investment based case. In our judgement this

involves more risk of benefit reductions than most individuals would want. This risk could be

reduced or eliminated by the type of pay-as-you-go supplementary benefit (conditional on the

PRA portfolio return) that is examined in Feldstein and Ranguelova (1998) and Feldstein,

Ranguelova and Samwick (1999). An alternative possibility is that a cohort that learns at age 45

or 50 that it has received an unusually low rate of return might decide to increase the PRA

savings above the nine percent, reducing the risk of shortfalls in retirement, while still paying



        35
         More explicitly, we calculated the 3.5 percent as the average level return at the tenth
percentile of the 10,000 simulations of the portfolio return performed in Feldstein and
Ranguelova (1998). This 3.5 percent return can be compared to the 4.1 real return implicit in the
current price for Treasury Inflation Protected Securities and to the 3.0 percent interest rate
assumed by the Social Security Trustees as the future real return on Treasury bonds in the Social
Security Trust Fund.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              42
substantially less than the 15.4 percent payroll tax that would be required in the pure pay-as-you-

go-system.

        Alternatively, this risk might be reduced or eliminated by private options that provide

guarantees of minimum benefits in exchange for some reduction in average or maximum returns.

We do not explore any of these ideas here. Nor do we discuss the role that a means tested

program like Supplemental Security Income might play. Instead we discuss the pure investment

based system briefly and then turn to the more realistic mixed system. The reduced dependence

on the investment-based component in the mixed system substantially lowers the risk to

individuals. Other ways of reducing the shortfall below the Social Security benchmark and the

fraction of individuals whose benefits are below the poverty level are discussed in the next

section.

        Table VIa shows that, with a 3.5 real rate of return, the mean PRA benefit for all retirees

would be $10,938, about 18 percent higher than the mean pay-as-you-go Social Security benefits.

Thus in more than 90 percent of the possible rate of return outcomes, the pure PRA system

would produce a mean benefit for all retirees that exceeds the corresponding mean of the

traditional Social Security benefits.

        Comparing the remaining rows of column 1 and 2 shows that even in this “tenth

percentile low return scenario” the mean PRA benefit exceeds the mean traditional Social

Security benefit in most demographic subgroup that we study (the exceptions are married blacks

and Hispanics and the bottom two income quintiles). Thus among married couples the mean

benefit in this low return case would be roughly $8,900 per person ($17,800 per couple) or 7

percent more than the mean Social Security benefit. For unmarried women, the relative gain is


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              43
substantially greater: a 30 percent increase from $10,112 to $13,122 Although there are

differences among the groups, the key point is that even in this very poor performance case the

mean PRA benefit is higher than the mean Social Security benefit for almost every subgroup

even though the 15.4 percent tax rate is replaced by a 9 percent saving rate.

        Although the mean PRA benefits compare favorably with the mean Social Security

benefits, a significant fraction of individuals would receive less in PRA benefits than they would

have received from Social Security. Among all the individuals in our sample, only 72 percent

would receive PRA benefits as large as their benchmark Social Security benefits; see column 3 of

table VIa. The gap between PRA benefits and Social Security benefits in these cases is however

not large. Among those with lower benefits under the PRA plan, 51 percent have benefits that

are within 15 percent of their benchmark Social Security benefits. To put this reduction in

perspective, it is helpful to bear in mind that the 9 percent saving rate is equivalent to less than

two-thirds of the tax that would otherwise have to be paid for the Social Security benefits and

that the adverse effect shown in Table VI occurs only in the worst ten percent of possible

outcomes.

        Table VIIIa presents the results for the “10th percentile low return scenario” in the mixed

system with PRA savings of three percent and a pay-as-you-go OASI tax rate unchanged at 9.4

percent. Despite this very poor investment performance, the overall average combined benefit

still exceeds the current law Social Security benchmark. Married men experience an average loss

of three percent while most unmarried subgroups have higher means in the mixed PRA system

even with this lowest tenth percentile return.

        The last two columns of Table VIIIa show that the impact of the shift on potential poverty


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               44
is usually negligible in this case of the lowest 10th percentile return. Stated differently, if the

investment experience is better than the lowest 10th percent of cases that can be expected on the

basis of the postwar record, there will be a reduction in the potential poverty among retirees.

        The estimates in column three show that only 54 percent of beneficiaries would receive

benefits from the mixed system than were greater than or equal to the current law pay-as-you-go

in this worst tenth percentile case.36 The differences however are usually fairly small. 87 percent

of the individuals with lower benefits under the mixed plan have benefits than are less than 15

percent below those in the current law Social Security system.

        This is shown in figure 11 by the fact that almost all of the points lie very close to the

equal benefit line, with the more substantial departures above the line than below. The

differences are not large and could again be offset by a conditional government payment that fills

the shortfall, by a mid-career adjustment in the cohort PRA saving rate, by private market

guarantee arrangements, or by modifying the PRA contributions in the way discussed in the next

section.

7.      Redistributive Funding of Personal Retirement Accounts

        In previous sections we have shown that most of the time a PRA system that is funded

with contributions that are proportional to earnings can provide essentially all demographic and

income groups with a combination of higher benefit levels and lower levels of taxation than

would be available under a purely pay-as-you-go system. Moreover, the reductions in potential



        36
          Recall that when both plans produce benefit levels below the SSI guarantee, the plans
are considered to provide equal benefits. Under the mixed plan with low returns, SSI costs
would be higher than under the pay-as-you-go approach. However, the additional costs would be
less than 2 percent of total retirement benefits.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               45
poverty are largest for the groups that are most at risk of poverty. Nonetheless, higher income

groups tend to receive benefit increases from a PRA system relative to the Social Security system

that are larger than those of lower income groups.37 Furthermore, low lifetime-income workers

remain at greatest risk of falling into poverty if financial markets perform worse in the future

than they have historically. Although some analysts are concerned that an investment based

system would increase the inequality of benefits, it is important to emphasize that the plans that

we study in this paper produce an increase in the income of virtually all retirees and will likely

reduce rates of poverty among the elderly.38

        Redistributive funding of personal retirement accounts can increase the relative gains for

low-income households, and reduce the risk that lower-than-expected returns leaves them in

poverty.39 A wide range of different funding formulas to do this have been suggested. In this

section, we consider two simple funding formulas that have been discussed in the policy debate .

We present options in the context of our mixed plan. Therefore, we continue to assume pay-as-

you-go benefits equal to 61 percent of current law benefits but replace the PRA savings equal to

3 percent of covered earnings with alternative contributions that have the same aggregate cost.




        37
          The presence in our sample of government workers with low covered earnings
exaggerates the percentages of low-income workers relative to what we will expect to see in
future cohorts. However, it does not have much impact on our estimates of the relative gains and
losses by workers at a given income level.
        38
             See Feldstein (1999) for a discussion of different distributive goals.
        39
           An alternative approach to protecting lower-income beneficiaries is to reduce the
traditional Social Security benefits by relatively less for this group.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                 46
More specifically, one percent of covered earnings for each employee40 has the same total cost as

$300 per worker (in 1999 dollars, indexed to average wages thereafter). In the first option, the

individual accounts contributions are a flat amount of $900 per worker, while in the second the

annual contributions into the PRA accounts are 1.5 percent of the worker’s covered earnings

plus $450.

        Table X shows mean benefits by income quintile for Social Security and the three

different formulas for funding the personal retirement accounts under a 5.5 percent investment

return. Notice that under the accounts funded with 3 percent of covered earnings, the increase in

benefits relative to Social Security rises from 19 percent in the second quintile to 39 percent in

the fifth quintile among married couples, and from 38 percent in the second quintile to 55 percent

in the fifth quintile among the unmarried. In contrast, the middle plan that mixes flat

contributions and earnings related contributions replicates the progressivity of Social Security –

with roughly equal percentage increases for each quintile: 28 percent for the second quintile , 30

percent for the fourth quintile, and 28 percent for the fifth quintile among married couples, and

from 52 percent in the second quintile to 48 percent in the fourth quintile, and 43 percent in the

fifth quintile among the unmarried.    The plan with flat contributions is substantially more

redistributive than Social Security, increasing benefits by 37 percent in the second quintile, 23

percent in the fourth quintile, and only 17 percent in the fifth quintile among married couples. A

        40
         More accurately, one percent of the covered earnings of workers who meet the current
Social Security requirement of annual earnings of $3000 a year. Many individual account plans
require a minimum level of earnings to qualify for an annual contribution in order to reduce
administrative costs associated with very small accounts. In the redistributive options that we are
discussing, a minimum earning threshold is likely to be necessary to prevent people from
gaming the system by working for only a few hours during the year but still earnings a full
contribution.

Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              47
similar pattern occurs among the unmarried. The relative increases for blacks and Hispanics are

quite a bit higher in the redistributive plans as well.

        Table XI focuses on the poverty impact of the three plans in the case in which the market

performs poorly – a 3.5 percent return. It is clear that the more redistributive plans reduce the

risk to the lowest income beneficiaries. For example, under the proportional to earnings

approach, 19 percent of widowed, divorced, or never married individuals in the second quintile

have benefits below the poverty line if the market performs poorly. In contrast, only 12 percent

have benefits below poverty in the 1.5 percent plus $450 plan, and only 9 percent in the $900 per

covered worker plan.



8.      Conclusion

        Investment-based Social Security reform provides a way to prevent the benefit cuts and

payroll tax increases that would otherwise be necessary, adjustments that would likely have

deleterious impacts on those who depend most heavily on Social Security. Nonetheless, critics

of investment-based Social Security reforms have argued that by increasing the link between

earnings and benefits, this approach threatens the progressivity of the system and could lead to

additional poverty among the elderly. This paper shows that this need not be the case. We find

that essentially all demographic and income groups can benefit from an investment based system

with a lower saving rate than the projected long-run pay-as-you-go tax, and that the potential

reductions in poverty are the largest for those most at risk of ending up poor. A mixed system

that combines the investment-based accounts and pay-as-you-go benefits can achieve such

results, even if financial markets perform extremely poorly. Finally, we show how alternative


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               48
contributions to personal retirement accounts can enable an investment-based system to equal or

exceed the redistribution of the current Social Security system.



Cambridge MA
September 1999
Revised August 2000




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                             49
                                         Data Appendix

        Our data set is created by matching the 1990 and 1991 panels of the Survey of Income

and Program Participation(SIPP) to Social Security administrative records on earnings from

1951 through 1990 (the Summary Earnings Record -- SER) and benefit records from 1995 (the

Master Beneficiary Record -- MBR) for those same individuals.

        From the public use sample of the SIPP, we selected all individuals from the first wave of

each SIPP panel who were age 60 or above in 1990 (individuals who were 60 years or above at

the start of the 1990 panel, 61 years or above at the start of the 1991 panel). We also used

variables on marital history from the wave-two topical module of the SIPP. We included data

on spouses of people in the age range, even if they themselves were not in the age range. Our

ultimate unit of observation is the individual, so a married couple with two individuals in the

appropriate age range would be counted as two observations. However, for programming

purposes, married couples were stacked into one observation. We then matched these

observations to the SER, and disgarded observations that did not match to earnings.

        Next we created our cohort -- individuals who were born from 1925 through 1929. We

chose 1929 as a cut off because it ensures that we can observe earnings through age 64 for

everyone in the sample (our earnings data extend through 1990). We wanted as narrow an age

group as possible so that we would not have age groups that had already lost significant numbers

of Social Security beneficiaries due to death. However, given our modest sample sizes, we

decided to use 5 birth years of data. We dropped individuals whose year of birth in the SER was

more than 5 years from their year of birth in the SIPP.




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                             50
        For the never married and married individuals, the SIPP-SER match produced the

earnings data necessary for our simulation.1 For previously married individuals, however, the

former spouse is not in our data set, so we do not have the spouse’s SER earnings record. For

many of these individuals (those receiving spouse benefits, widow/er benefits, or dually entitled

worker benefits), we were able to obtain the former spouse’s Primary Insurance Amount (and

therefore their Average Index Monthly Earnings) by further matching to the MBR. For the rest

(those receiving retired worker benefits only), we imputed a spouse PIA using the correlation

between respondent and spouse PIA for similar individuals from the New Beneficiary Survey --

an older sample that obtained earnings and benefit records for former spouses of sample

members. We dropped disabled individuals (and couples with a disabled member) and

unstacked married couples so that each individual in the couple counts as an observation if both

spouses were members of the 1925 to 1929 birth cohort.

        Once we had a former spouse’s PIA for the previously married individuals, we calculated

an Average Indexed Monthly Earnings ( AIME) by inverting the Social Security benefit formula.

We then calculated (separately for men and women) the average share of earnings earned in each

year for people in our sample with earnings histories (separately for men and women), and

generated an earnings record for the missing spouses by spreading their AIME according to the

average share of earnings earned in each year, subject of course to the constraint that a former

spouse of a widow or widower could not have earnings in years after his or her death.




        1
          In some case, we were required to impute earnings at the beginning or end of the career
if the 1951-1993 period did not include all years from age 21 to age 64.


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                             51
        The earnings data report earnings only up to the taxable maximum for the year. In the

past, the taxable maximum was much lower relative to average earnings than it is today. In order

to be able to simulate the current Social Security rules, we imputed a level of earnings above the

taxable maximum for sample members with earnings at the taxable maximum. We did this by

estimating a two-limit tobit regressed on a constant (i.e. with no other independent variables)

separately for men and women for each year between 1951 and 1990. The level of earnings is fit

very well by a normal distribution until a percentile that is above the current taxable maximum.

The regressions produced an estimate for mean earnings and a regression error. Using these

parameter estimates, we randomly drew from a normal distribution will the appropriate mean and

variance until each topcoded observation was replaced with a draw above the topcode.

        Based on the sample member’s earnings history and the earnings history of the spouse,

we calculated Social Security benefits. Our calculations incorporate nearly all of the retirement

benefit provisions, including covered worker requirements, the minimum benefit, spouse

benefits, survivor benefits, and reductions for claiming benefits before the normal retirement age.

We do not simulate the delayed retirement credit (instead assuming that everyone in our sample

claims benefits by age 65), nor do we have adequate information to implement government

pension offset provisions.




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                             52
                                                References

        Board of Trustees, The 1999 Annual Report of the Social Security Trustees (1999).

        Boskin, Michael J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Douglas J. Puffert, and John B. Shoven,

                  “Social Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations,”

                  National Tax Journal 40(3), March 1987, 19-34.

        Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison. “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,

                  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999, 389-432.

        Coronado, Julia, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass. 1998. “The Progressivity of Social

                  Security,” Department of Economics, University of Texas at Austin.

        Diamond, Peter “Administrative Costs in Social Security Reform,” in John Shoven,

                  Administrative Cost Aspects of Social Security Reform, Chicago University

                  Press, forthcoming (1999).

        Elmendorf, Douglas W. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2000. “Social Security Reform and

                  National Savings in an Era of Budget Surpluses.”

        Feldstein, Martin "The Missing Piece in Policy Analysis: Social Security Reform,"

                  American Economic Review, 86, No. 2, May 1996, pp 1-14.

        _____ “Don’t Waste the Budget Surplus,” Wall Street Journal, November 4, 1997.

        _____ Privatizing Social Security, (ed.) Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1998.

        _____ “Administrative Costs in Social Security Reform:Comment” in John Shoven,

                  Administrative Cost Aspects of Social Security Reform, Chicago University

                  Press, forthcoming (1999)

        _____ and Elena Ranguelova, "Individual Risk and Intergenerational Risk Sharing in an


Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              53
                  Investment-Based Social Security System,"(1998) NBER Working Paper No.

                  6839.

        _____, _____ and Andrew Samwick "The Transition to Investment-based Social

                  Security when Portfolio Returns and Capital Profitability are Uncertain," (1999) in

                  J. Campbell and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Risks Aspects of Investment Based

                  Social Security Pension, (forthcoming).

        _____ and Andrew Samwick, "The Economics of Prefunding Social Security and

                  Medicare Benefits," NBER Macro Annual 1997.

        _____"The Transition Path in Privatizing Social Security." in M. Feldstein (ed.)

                  Privatizing Social Security, (Chicago: Chicago University Press), 1998a.

        _____ "Potential Effects of Two Percent Personal Retirement Accounts," Tax Notes,

                  Vol. 79, No. 5, May 4, 1998b, pp 615-620. (An updated version is available

                      with the title, "New Estimates of the Potential Effects of Two Percent Personal

                  Retirement Accounts.")

        ______ “Allocating Payroll Tax Revenue to Personal Retirement Accounts,” Tax Notes,

                  June 19, 2000.

        Feldstein, Martin and Horst Siebert (2001). The European Pension Crisis – Where Do

                  We Stand?

        Goldberg, Fred and Michael Graetz, “Reforming Social Security: A Practical and

                  Workable System of Personal Retirement Accounts”, in John

                  Shoven, Administrative Cost Aspects of Social Security Reform,




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                                  54
                  University of Chicago Press, forthcoming (1999) Also available as

                  NBER Working Paper No. 6970.

        Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. Social Security Benefits of Immigrants and U.S.

                  Born, NBER working paper #6478, March 1998.

        Hummer, Robert A., Richard G. Rogers, Charles B. Nam, and Felicia B LeClere,

                  “Race/Ethnicity, Nativity, and U.S. Adult Mortality”, Social Science Quarterly,

                  80:1, March 1999 136-153.

        Hurd, Michael D., and John B. Shoven, “The Distributional Impact of Social Security,” in

                  Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, edited by David A. Wise. Chicago:

                  University of Chicago Press, 1985, 193-207.

        Lee, Ronald and Shripad Tuljapurkar. 1998 “Uncertain Demographic Futures and Social

                  Security Finances,” American Economic Review, May 88:2, pp. 237-41.

        Liebman, Jeffrey (1999) “Redistribution in the Current Social Security System.” This

                  volume.

        McGarry, Kathleen (1999). “Supplemental Security Income.” This volume.

        Poterba, James “The Rate of Return to Corporate Capital and Factor Shares” NBER

                  Working Paper 6263 (1997)

        Samuelson, Paul (1958). “An Exact Consumption-load Model of Interest with or without

                  the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 66, 467-

                  482.




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                               55
        Sorlie, Paul D., Erick Backlund, Norman Johnson, and Eugene Rogot (1993). “Mortality

                  by Hispanic Status in the United States,” Journal of the American Medical

                  Association, vol 270, No. 20, November 24, 1993, 2464-2468.

        Shoven, John Administrative Cost Aspects of Social Security Reform, University of

                  Chicago Press, forthcoming (1999)

        Social Security Administration (1999). Information on the Distributional Effects of

                  Various Social Security Solvency Options by Gender and Income.




Ssdist.09012000.wpd                              56
                                        Table 1
                                Characteristics of Sample

                                       1925-1929 cohorts        Simulated
                                       at time of               cross-section of
                                       1990 and 1991 SIPP       beneficiaries

Male                                             46.1 %                41.0%

Female                                           53.9 %                59.0%



Married (including separated)                    73.7 %                52.8%

Widowed                                           13.6%                38.0%

Divorced                                          8.6 %                 5.8%

Never married                                     4.1%                  3.4%



White (and other)                                 92.4%                93.2%

Black                                             7.6%                  6.8%

Hispanic (can be either race)                     4.3%                  4.0%



Less than high school                             30.8%                28.8%

High school                                       53.5%                55.5%

More than High school                             15.9%                15.6%



Age 60-61                                          NA                   2.4%

Age 62-64                                          NA                  10.7%

Age 65-75                                          NA                  40.0%

Age 75-85                                          NA                  29.2%

Age 85+                                            NA                  17.6%



Unweighted sample size                            2,720           Up to 41 benefit
                                                                   years x 2,720

Weighted sample size                          3.424 million        71.156 million
                                             (per birth year)
                                                       Table IIa
                         Comparison of Benefits Levels from 9 Percent PRA and Social Security

                                                                                   Percent with retirement benefits
                                    Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                                 Percentage of
                                            PRAs Funded With     Beneficiaries
                            Current-        9 % of Payroll       with PRA          Current-Law
                            Law Social      (5.5% Rate of        Benefits >= SS    Social
                            Security        Return)              Benefits          Security          PRA

All beneficiaries           9,291           21,414               97.9              18.9              9.2

                                                                 Married Couples

Men                         8,425           17,152               97.8              13.7              9.2

Women                       8,185           17,582               97.2              13.5              9.1



Whites                      8,413           17,657               97.6              12.9              8.5

Blacks                      6,229           10,850               96.1              29.5              22.6

Hispanics                   5,896           9,123                86.4              38.7              31.4



Less than high school       7,613           15,476               97.5              16.5              12.0

High school                 8,227           17,652               98.1              13.4              8.9

College and above           9,440           19,074               96.3              10.5              6.2



                                                       Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Men                         11,120          26,264               98.7              22.4              8.7

Women                       10,112          25,837               98.1              25.6              9.4

   Early widow/divorce      8,249           22,044               99.0              45.8              14.6



Whites                      10,673          26,933               98.2              21.8              8.0

Blacks                      7,562           16,484               98.9              53.3              20.5

Hispanics                   7,961           18,316               95.2              46.8              27.3



Less than high school       9,135           22,684               98.4              34.5              12.8

High school                 10,932          28,329               98.8              18.9              6.2

College and above           12,475          28,316               95.7              13.3              7.9
                                                  Table IIb
                     Comparison of Benefits Levels from 9 Percent PRA and Social Security

                                                                                Percent with retirement benefits
                                 Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                              Percentage of
                                         PRAs Funded With     Beneficiaries
                         Current-        9 % of Payroll       with PRA          Current-Law
                         Law Social      (5.5% Rate of        Benefits >= SS    Social
                         Security        Return)              Benefits          Security          PRA



                                                              Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income   3,899           5,189                92.8              71.4              49.9
Quintile

Second Quintile          6,610           11,270               94.4              13.8              7.3

Third Quintile           8,504           16,871               97.6              3.9               2.7

Fourth Quintile          9,462           21,339               99.8              2.2               1.6

Highest Quintile         10,478          24,240               100.0             1.9               1.3

                                                    Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married


Lowest Lifetime Income   5,414           9,651                96.0              94.1              41.7
Quintile

Second Quintile          9,310           21,196               98.3              18.7              1.0

Third Quintile           11,564          29,521               97.8              1.8               1.5

Fourth Quintile          12,947          35,819               99.9              0.0               0.0

Highest Quintile         14,722          41,210               100.0             0.0               0.0
                                                               Table III
                                    Comparison of IRRs and NPVs from 9 Percent PRA and Social Security

                           Internal Rate of Return                                   Net Present Value at Age 21
                                                                                             (per capita)

                    Current-        PRAs Funded With     1% discount rate       3% discount rate              5 % discount rate
                    Law Social      9 % of Payroll
                    Security        (5.5% Rate of                     9%                       9%                            9%
                                    Return)              SS           PRA       SS             PRA            SS             PRA

All beneficiaries   1.35            5.54                 11,510       186,992   -26,475        48,414         -31,911        5,176



Men                 0.62            4.66                 -11,323      132,172   -36,166        28,484         -36,895        -2,975

Women               1.95            6.24                 32,554       237,515   -17,543        66,782         -27,318        12,688



Whites              1.36            5.55                 12,070       194,859   -27,328        50,487         -32,987        5,458

Blacks              1.27            5.38                 5,461        101,982   -17,257        26,013         -20,285        2,126

Hispanics           1.81            5.71                 16,572       113,596   -11,835        29,881         -16,783        3,901



Less than high      1.32            5.49                 8,439        150,566   -22,658        39,020         -27,142        3,899
school

High school         1.39            5.62                 13,470       206,310   -27,660        54,046         -33,768        6,408

College and above   1.30            5.34                 11,114       196,585   -30,536        48,521         -35,614        3,493
                                                    Table IVa
                         Comparison of Benefits Levels from Mixed Plan and Social Security

                                                                                  Percent with retirement benefits
                                   Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                                Percentage of
                                                                Beneficiaries
                           Current-        Mixed Plan           with Mixed        Current-Law
                           Law Social      (5.5% Rate of        Plan Benefits     Social
                           Security        Return)              >= SS Benefits    Security          Mixed Plan

All beneficiaries          9,291           12,898               96.2              18.9              13.1

                                                                Married Couples

Men                        8,425           10.941               96.3              13.7              12.2

Women                      8,185           10,935               95.0              13.5              11.2



Whites                     8,413           11,102               95.7              12.9              11.1

Blacks                     6,229           7,478                95.8              29.5              25.8

Hispanics                  5,896           6,696                78.7              38.7              33.0



Less than high school      7,613           9,879                95.9              16.5              14.6

High school                8,227           10,984               95.9              13.4              11.3

College and above          9,440           12,211               95.0              10.5              9.0



                                                      Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Men                        11,120          15,649               97.4              22.4              12.9

Women                      10,112          14,882               96.5              25.6              15.4

   Early widow/divorce     8,249           12,462               98.1              45.8              25.1



Whites                     10,673          15,595               96.7              21.8              12.6

Blacks                     7,562           10,183               97.9              53.3              34.8

Hispanics                  7,961           11,041               91.7              46.8              40.0



Less than high school      9,135           13,225               97.2              34.5              21.7

High school                10,932          16,221               97.6              18.9              9.4

College and above          12,475          17,173               92.6              13.3              10.3
                                                    Table IVb
                         Comparison of Benefits Levels from Mixed Plan and Social Security

                                                                                 Percent with retirement benefits
                                  Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                                Percentage of
                                                                Beneficiaries
                          Current-       Mixed Plan             with Mixed       Current-Law
                          Law Social     (5.5% Rate of          Plan >= SS       Social
                          Security       Return)                Benefits         Security          Mixed Plan



                                                              Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income    3,899          4,147                  89.1             71.4              63.7
Quintile

Second Quintile           6,610          7,855                  88.9             13.8              9.9

Third Quintile            8,504          10,896                 95.7             3.9               3.1

Fourth Quintile           9,462          12,979                 99.5             2.2               2.0

Highest Quintile           10,478        14,576                 100.0            1.9               1.8

                                                    Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Lowest Lifetime Income    5,414          6,574                  94.1             94.1              66.9
Quintile

Second Quintile           9,310          12,838                 95.7             18.7              3.0

Third Quintile            11,564         17,010                 96.1             1.8               0.8

Fourth Quintile           12,947         19,967                 99.8             0.0               0.0

Highest Quintile           14,722        22,864                 100.0            0.0               0.0
                                                                Table V
                                      Comparison of IRRs and NPVs from Mixed Plan and Social Security

                                                                                      Net Present Value at Age 21
                           Internal Rate of Return                                            (per capita)

                                                         1% discount rate        3% discount rate              5 % discount rate
                    Current-        Mixed Plan
                    Law Social      (5.5% Rate of                     Mixed                     Mixed                         Mixed
                    Security        Return)              SS           Plan       SS             Plan           SS             Plan

All beneficiaries   1.35            3.07                 11,510       71,991     -26,475        1,191          -31,911        -17,154



Men                 0.62            2.27                 -11,323      39,809     -36,166        -11,301        -36,895        -22,853

Women               1.95            3.71                 32,554       101,651    -17,543        12,705         -27,318        -11,902



Whites              1.36            3.07                 12,070       74,695     -27,328        1,214          -32,987        -17,801

Blacks              1.27            3.09                 5,461        42,779     -17,257        941            -20,285        -10,162

Hispanics           1.81            3.38                 16,572       50,282     -11,835        3,814          -16,783        -8,408



Less than high      1.32            3.05                 8,439        58,577     -22,658        748            -27,142        -14,459
school

High school         1.39            3.12                 13,470       79,425     -27,660        2,223          -33,768        -17,951

College and above   1.30            2.91                 11,114       74,356     -30,536        -1,592         -35,614        -20,169
                                                     Table VIa
              Comparison of Benefits Levels from 9 Percent PRA with Lower Returns and Social Security

                                                                                 Percent with retirement benefits
                                   Average Benefit levels                        below the poverty line
                                                                Percentage of
                                          PRAs Funded With 9    Beneficiaries
                           Current-       % of Payroll          with PRA         Current-Law
                           Law Social     (3.5% Rate of         Benefits >=      Social
                           Security       Return)               SS Benefits      Security          PRA

All beneficiaries          9,291          10,938                72.1             18.9              21.5

                                                               Married Couples

Men                        8,425          8,796                 64.4             13.7              20.0

Women                      8,185          9,007                 69.6             13.5              20.2



Whites                     8,413          9,047                 67.5             12.9              19.0

Blacks                     6,229          5,639                 51.6             29.5              43.3

Hispanics                  5,896          4,836                 47.4             38.7              53.0



Less than high school      7,613          7,913                 63.6             16.5              23.7

High school                8,227          8,993                 68.5             13.4              20.8

College and above          9,440          9,935                 66.8             10.5              13.7



                                                     Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Men                        11,120         13,491                72.3             22.4              21.3

Women                      10,112         13,122                80.1             25.6              23.8

   Early widow/divorce     8,249          10,602                77.4             45.8              36.4



Whites                     10,673         13,715                78.4             21.8              20.2

Blacks                     7,562          8,453                 74.1             53.3              27.6

Hispanics                  7,961          9,368                 72.2             46.8              53.5



Less than high school      9,135          11,478                78.7             34.5              31.5

High school                10,932         14,400                79.4             18.9              17.5

College and above          12,475         14,784                71.2             13.3              15.8
                                                    Table VIb
             Comparison of Benefits Levels from 9 Percent PRA with Lower Returns and Social Security

                                                                                Percent with retirement benefits
                                  Average Benefit levels                        below the poverty line
                                                               Percentage of
                                         PRAs Funded With 9    Beneficiaries
                          Current-       % of Payroll          with PRA         Current-Law
                          Law Social     (3.5% Rate of         Benefits >=      Social
                          Security       Return)               SS Benefits      Security          PRA



                                                              Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income    3,899          2,593                 61.6             71.4              92.5
Quintile

Second Quintile           6,610          5,812                 32.5             13.8              32.9

Third Quintile            8,504          8,649                 51.1             3.9               6.4

Fourth Quintile           9,462          10,946                81.9             2.2               2.2

Highest Quintile          10,478         12,430                90.0             1.9               1.9

                                                    Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Lowest Lifetime Income    5,414          4,827                 75.9             94.1              84.5
Quintile

Second Quintile           9,310          10,845                63.5             18.7              19.4

Third Quintile            11,564         15,063                78.5             1.8               2.9

Fourth Quintile           12,947         18,323                90.9             0.0               0.0

Highest Quintile          14,722         20,903                91.8             0.0               0.0
                                                               Table VII
                             Comparison of IRRs and NPVs from PRA Plan with Lower Return and Social Security

                                                                                     Net Present Value at Age 21
                           Internal Rate of Return                                           (per capita)

                                    PRAs Funded With    1% discount rate        3% discount rate              5 % discount rate
                    Current-        9 % of Payroll
                    Law Social      (3.5% Rate of                                                                            9% PRA
                    Security        Return)             SS          9% PRA      SS             9% PRA         SS

All beneficiaries   1.35            3.53                11,510      69,640      -26,475        6,981          -31,911        -10,192



Men                 0.62            2.66                -11,323     40,574      -36,166        -4,081         -36,895        -15,068

Women               1.95            4.22                32,554      96,427      -17,543        17,176         -27,318        -5,698



Whites              1.36            3.53                12,070      72,577      -27,328        7,337          -32,987        -10,538

Blacks              1.27            3.41                5,461       37.903      -17,257        3,139          -20,285        -6,452

Hispanics           1.81            3.67                16,572      43,381      -11,835        5,150          -16,783        -5,240



Less than high      1.32            3.47                8,439       55,291      -22,658        5,061          -27,142        -8,817
school

High school         1.39            3.61                13,470      77,621      -27,660        8,645          -33,768        -10,429

College and above   1.30            3.35                11,114      72,065      -30,536        5,133          -35,614        -12,350
                                                    Table VIIIa
                Comparison of Benefits Levels from Mixed Plan with Lower Returns and Social Security

                                                                                  Percent with retirement benefits
                                   Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                                Percentage of
                                                                Beneficiaries
                           Current-        Mixed Plan           with Mixed        Current-Law
                           Law Social      (3.5% Rate of        Plan Benefits     Social
                           Security        Return)              >= SS Benefits    Security          Mixed Plan

All beneficiaries          9,291           9,406                53.7              18.9              20.8

                                                                Married Couples

Men                        8,425           8,156                39.0              13.7              17.5

Women                      8,185           8,077                50.1              13.5              17.9



Whites                     8,413           8,232                44.5              12.9              16.7

Blacks                     6,229           5,741                35.4              29.5              38.9

Hispanics                  5,896           5,267                37.1              38.7              48.5



Less than high school      7,613           7,358                40.5              16.5              21.2

High school                8,227           8,098                49.0              13.4              17.9

College and above          9,440           9,165                36.9              10.5              12.4



                                                      Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Men                        11,120          11,392               54.7              22.4              22.5

Women                      10,112          10,643               68.1              25.6              25.0

   Early widow/divorce     8,249           8,648                69.8              45.8              41.8



Whites                     10,673          11,189               64.7              21.8              21.5

Blacks                     7,562           7,506                62.9              53.3              51.6

Hispanics                  7,961           8,058                62.5              46.8              53.0



Less than high school      9,135           9,490                66.0              34.5              33.3

High school                10,932          11,578               66.6              18.9              18.6

College and above          12,475          12,663               53.0              13.3              14.8
                                                      Table VIIIb
                  Comparison of Benefits Levels from Mixed Plan with Lower Return and Social Security

                                                                                    Percent with retirement benefits
                                     Average Benefit levels                         below the poverty line
                                                                  Percentage of
                                                                  Beneficiaries
                             Current-        Mixed Plan           with Mixed        Current-Law
                             Law Social      (3.5% Rate of        Plan Benefits     Social
                             Security        Return)              >= SS Benefits    Security          Mixed Plan



                                                                  Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income       3,899           3,282                59.6              71.4              87.9
Quintile

Second Quintile              6,610           6,035                16.9              13.8              23.7

Third Quintile               8,504           8,155                27.4              3.9               4.9

Fourth Quintile              9,462           9,515                52.1              2.2               2.2

Highest Quintile             10,478          10,639               59.4              1.9               1.9

                                                        Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Lowest Lifetime Income       5,414           4,966                68.0              94.1              92.5
Quintile

Second Quintile              9,310           9,387                48.7              18.7              18.6

Third Quintile               11,564          12,191               67.6              1.8               1.6

Fourth Quintile              12,947          14,135               75.6              0.0               0.0

Highest Quintile             14,722          16,095               70.6              0.0               0.0
                                                              Table IX
                            Comparison of IRRs and NPVs from Mixed Plan with Lower Return and Social Security

                                                                                     Net Present Value at Age 21
                           Internal Rate of Return                                           (per capita)

                    Current-        Mixed Plan          1% discount rate        3% discount rate              5 % discount rate
                    Law Social      (3.5% Rate of
                    Security        Return)                          Mixed                     Mixed                         Mixed
                                                        SS           Plan       SS             Plan           SS             Plan

All beneficiaries   1.35            2.12                11,510       32,797     -26,475        -12,658        -31,911        -22,297



Men                 0.62            1.35                -11,323      9,241      -36,166        -22,174        -36,895        -26,893

Women               1.95            2.74                32,554       54,507     -17,543        -3,889         -27,318        -18,060



Whites              1.36            2.12                12,070       33,862     -27,328        -13,205        -32,987        -23,152

Blacks              1.27            2.22                5,461        21,288     -17,257        -6,750         -20,285        -13,055

Hispanics           1.81            2.49                16,572       26,794     -11,835        -4,470         -16,783        -11,476



Less than high      1.32            2.11                8,439        26,694     -22,658        -10,635        -27,142        -18,729
school

High school         1.39            2.16                13,470       36,466     -27,660        -12,943        -33,768        -23,579

College and above   1.30            2.00                11,114       32,830     -30,536        -16,065        -35,614        -25,455
                                             Table X
            Comparison of Benefits Levels Under Different Redistributive Funding Options
                        for Personal Retirement Accounts in the Mixed Plan

                                                     Average Benefit Levels

                                                                 Mixed Plan
                                                                 1.5% of
                                          Mixed Plan             payroll +
                            Current-      3 percent of payroll   $450 per         Mixed Plan
                            Law Social    accounts               worker           $900 per worker
                            Security      (5.5% Return)          (5.5% Return)    (5.5% Return)



                                                        Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income      3,899         4,147                  4,856            5,564
Quintile

Second Quintile             6,610         7,855                  8,447            9,040

Third Quintile              8,504         10,896                 10,809           10,722

Fourth Quintile             9,462         12,979                 12,330           11,680

Highest Quintile            10,478        14,576                 13,433           12,290



Whites                      8,413         11,102                 10,783           10,464

Blacks                      6,229         7,478                  8,128            8,778

Hispanics                   5,896         6,696                  7,219            7,741



                                            Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Lowest Lifetime Income      5,414         6,574                  8,422            10,270
Quintile

Second Quintile             9,310         12,838                 14,129           15,420

Third Quintile              11,564        17,010                 17,195           17,380

Fourth Quintile             12,947        19,967                 19,115           18,263

Highest Quintile            14,722        22,864                 20,981           19,099



Whites                      10,673        15,595                 15,819           16,044

Black                       7,562         10,183                 11,770           13,357

Hispanics                   7,961         11,041                 12,028           13,014
                                            Table XI
Comparison of Retirement Benefits to Poverty Level Under Different Redistributive Funding Options
         for Personal Retirement Accounts in the Mixed Plan with a 10th Percentile Return

                                  Percent with Retirement Benefits Below the Poverty Line

                                                                Mixed Plan
                                                                1.5% of
                                        Mixed Plan              payroll +
                          Current-      3 percent of payroll    $450 per         Mixed Plan
                          Law Social    accounts                worker           $900 per worker
                          Security      (3.5% Return)           (3.5% Return)    (3.5% Return)



                                                      Married Couples

Lowest Lifetime Income    71.4          87.9                    78.6             71.9
Quintile

Second Quintile           13.8          23.7                    21.0             20.0

Third Quintile            3.9           4.9                     5.3              6.5

Fourth Quintile           2.2           2.2                     2.2              2.5

Highest Quintile          1.9           1.9                     1.9              2.0



Whites                    12.9          16.7                    15.3             14.7

Blacks                    29.5          38.9                    31.9             29.1

Hispanics                 38.7          48.5                    38.8             36.6



                                          Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married

Lowest Lifetime Income    94.1          92.5                    85.2             68.0
Quintile

Second Quintile           18.7          18.6                    12.4             9.3

Third Quintile            1.8           1.6                     0.8              1.5

Fourth Quintile           0.0           0.0                     0.0              0.0

Highest Quintile          0.0           0.0                     0.0              0.0



Whites                    21.8          21.5                    18.4             14.7

Black                     53.3          51.6                    45.6             36.8

Hispanics                 46.8          53.0                    47.8             36.3
                                               Figure 1
                          All Beneficiaries (9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)

    60000




    50000




    40000




    30000




    20000




    10000




       0
            0   2000   4000     6000       8000          10000          12000       14000   16000   18000   20000
                                        Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                              Figure 2
                              Married Poor (9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)

   12000




   10000



    8000




    6000




    4000




    2000



      0
           0     2000        4000              6000               8000         10000   12000
                             Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                                       Figure 3
                       Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married Women (9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000       4000        6000        8000        10000        12000         14000   16000   18000   20000
                                              Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The Points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                                     Figure 4
                       Women Widowed or Divorced Before Age 50 (9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000      4000       6000        8000         10000        12000        14000   16000   18000   20000
                                             Simulated Annual Social Security Benefit




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                              Figure 5
                                Blacks (9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000   6000        8000        10000        12000         14000   16000   18000   20000
                                     Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                                  Figure 6

                        Males with Less Than High School ( 9 percent accounts, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000       6000         8000       10000        12000         14000    16000   18000   20000
                                         Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                              Figure 7

                                All Beneficiaries (Mixed Plan, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000   6000        8000        10000        12000         14000   16000   18000   20000
                                     Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                                  Figure 8
                      Widowed, Divorced, and Never Married Women (Mixed Plan, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0         5000                   10000                     15000                 20000   25000
                                         Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                              Figure 9
                                     Blacks (Mixed Plan, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000   6000        8000        10000        12000         14000   16000   18000   20000
                                     Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits


The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                                 Figure 10
                       Males with Less than High School Education (Mixed Plan, 5.5% return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000       6000        8000        10000        12000         14000    16000   18000   20000
                                         Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
                                            Figure 11
                               All Beneficiaries (Mixed Plan, 3.5% Return)


    60000



    50000




    40000



    30000



    20000




    10000



       0
            0   2000   4000   6000        8000        10000        12000         14000   16000   18000   20000
                                     Simulated Annual Social Security Benefits




The points have been randomly jittered to preserve confidentiality.
