The Role of Alcohol and Drug Consumption in Determining Physical
Fights and Weapon Carrying by Teenagers
Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 7500
January 2000
JEL No. I0, J13

                                           ABSTRACT



       The purpose of this study is to examine the question of whether alcohol or drug use causes

teenagers to engage in violent behaviors as measured by physical fighting, carrying a gun, or carrying

other types of weapons. Simple OLS estimation of the effects of drug and alcohol consumption on

violence may be biased because of the possibility that both behaviors are determined by unmeasured

individual traits. Two-stage least squares estimates are employed to establish causality. This method

first predicts consumption using the prices of beer, marijuana and cocaine and then enters predicted

consumption in the violence equation. This technique allows the consumption measures to be

purged of their correlation with unobserved characteristics. Data come from the National School-

Based Youth Risk Behavior Surveys, which are nationally representative samples of high school

students. Results indicate that beer and marijuana consumption do cause teens to engage in more

physical fights, while cocaine use appears to have no relationship. None of the substances lead to

increased probabilities of carrying a gun or other weapon.


Sara Markowitz
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, New York 10016
markowitz@admin.njit.edu
INTRODUCTION

        The issue of teenage violence has been thrust into the national spotlight by a recent string

of shootings in our nation’s high schools, although during the past few decades, teenage violence

has become an increasingly growing problem. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (1994 and 1999a)

reports that violent victimization rates against youths who are between the ages of 16 and 19

have been rising since the 1970s. The rate in 1973 was 61.4 per 1,000 persons. This rate grew to

64.8 in 1983, to 77.9 in 1992, and to 91.1 in 1998. Using data from the 1994 National Crime

Victimization Survey, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (1996) also reports that teens of ages 16-19

have the highest rates of victimization as compared to all other age groups for all types of violent

crimes, including rape and robbery (121.7 per 1000 people) and assault (104.8 per 1000 people).

The homicide victimization rate for teens ages 14-17 increased almost 125 percent from 1985-

1995, whereas the same rate increase by only 9 percent from 1976-1985. The rate at which teens

commit homicides have also been increasing. These rates fell between 1976 and 1985 from 10.6

to 9.8 offenders per 100,000 population, but then increased to 23.6 in 1995 (Bureau of Justice

Statistics, 1999b).

        A Recent Gallup poll highlights the prevalence of violence and weapons in the lives of

teenagers. A 1999 survey finds that 17 percent of student say that “students bringing weapons to

school” is a “very big” or “big” problem in their school. “Gangs and violence” are the third most

often cited problem teenagers say faces people their age. Three in ten teenagers fear for their

physical safety when they are in school (Newport, 1999).

        An important question for designing policies to reduce violence is to know what causes

teens to engage in violence and to carry weapons. Certainly a wide variety of factors contribute
to the culture of violence faced by today’s teenagers including family structure, environment,

and peer behavior. One of the most widely cited correlates of violent behavior is alcohol and

drug use, although it is not clear from the current literature that there exists a direct causal

relationship from drugs or alcohol to violence. This paper will examine the causal role of

alcohol and drug consumption in determining the probabilities of being in a physical fight,

carrying a gun, or carrying weapons other than guns. While the later two acts are not necessarily

violent acts, carrying a weapon implies the potential for violence. Simple ordinary least squares

regression models are compared to two-stage least squares models in which the potential

unmeasured correlation between substance use and violence is purged by the use of instrumental

variables. Prices of drugs and alcohol serve as instruments. Results indicate that beer and

marijuana consumption do play a causal role in instigating physical fights, while cocaine use

appears to have no relationship. None of the substances lead to increased probabilities of

carrying a gun or other weapon. Given that there is evidence of a causal relationship for physical

violence, a secondary aim of this paper is to examine the direct effects that increases in the price

of beer, marijuana and cocaine may have in reducing the incidence of fighting.



THE LITERATURE

The link between violent behaviors and substance use

        The association between drug or alcohol use and violent behaviors is well documented

for both youths and adults. In research on adult violence, alcohol and drug consumption has

frequently been shown to be a correlate of criminal violence (see Miczek et al. 1993 for a

complete review of this literature). Studies by Kwon et al. (1997), Jarrell and Howsen (1990)

and Kellermann et al. (1993) all show that higher alcohol consumption or availability is




                                                       2
associated with higher rates of gun-related fatalities. Kellermann et al. (1993) shows that illicit

drug use positively associated with homicides. Studies on domestic violence also show a link

between alcohol consumption and violence (Gelles and Cornell, 1990 and Leonard, 1993).

        In considering violence by youths, Rossow, et al. (1999) and Bernburg and Thorlindsson

(1999) show that when violence is measured as specific acts such as beating or threaten to beat

someone or having been in a fight with a weapon, frequent intoxication will lead to increased

violence, as will use of marijuana or other drugs. Salts and Lindholm (1995) find that alcohol

and marijuana use are highly associated with increased violent behaviors in both black and white

adolescent males. Similar findings hold for teens of both genders when examining drug use and

violence in school (Furlong et al. 1997).

        Weapon carrying by youths is also correlated with drug and alcohol use. Miller et al.

(1999) find a strong association between drinking, drugs and gun ownership by college students

in the College Alcohol Study. Their results show that among students who binge drink, 4.3

percent own a gun as compared with 2.9 percent who do not binge drink. A more striking

number is that 12.4 percent of the students who report they need a drink first thing in the

morning own a gun. Seven percent of gun owners used crack or cocaine during the semester as

compared to 3 percent of students who did not own a gun. Sheley and Brewer (1995) find that

drug activity (either using or selling) positively influences the likelihood of carrying a gun.

Hemenway et al. (1996) find the same result for alcohol consumption.



The causality issue

        It is important to note that none of these studies establish a direction of causality from

alcohol consumption or drug use to violent acts. In fact, there is no general agreement in the




                                                       3
existing literature on the direction of the causality. One prominent theory is that alcohol use

does cause violence by acting through a pharmacological mechanism that alters behavior

(Pernanen, 1981 and Fagan, 1993). A competing theory proposes reverse causality where

violence may cause alcohol consumption in that people who plan on being violent may drink in

order to give themselves courage or an excuse for the behavior (Fagan, 1990 and Cordilia, 1985).

Finally, a third theory states that alcohol and violence are both outcomes of an unobserved third

factor, for example, a risk-taking personality (Fagan, 1990).

        Even less is known about why youths carry weapons. One commonly cited reason is that

of protection (Hemenway et al. 1996), while other research has shown that weapon carrying is a

result of antisocial attitudes and behaviors (Page and Hammermeister, 1997). A third hypothesis

is the “replicative externalities” model where adolescents feel less safe when their classmates

carry guns causing them in turn to acquire guns (Hemenway et al. 1996). These theories all

imply that the link between substance use and weapon carrying are a result of a third factor, be it

measureable or unmeasurable. While there is little reason to believe that short-term alcohol use

will directly cause teens to carry weapons, participation in the illegal drug market may promote

weapon carrying (Goldstein 1985). In addition, long-term use of alcohol, marijuana, opiates,

amphetamines or PCP can alter the nervous system in a way that actually promotes tendencies

towards violence, while cocaine use can lead to paranoid or psychotic states in which violence

may occur (National Research Council, 1993 and Goldstein, 1985).



Evidence from the economics literature

        Some evidence of a causal relationship from drugs and alcohol to physical violence has

emerged from the economics literature. This literature looks at the direct effects of substance




                                                     4
prices and other related regulations on violence. Any observed direct effects of the price of

alcohol on occurrences of violence implies causality from consumption to violence because there

is no reason to expect any correlation between prices and violence except through consumption.

Grossman and Markowitz (forthcoming) examine the relationship between the price of alcohol

and violence on college campuses. The measures of violence used in this paper are indicators for

whether the student has gotten in trouble with authorities; has damaged property or pulled a fire

alarm; has gotten into an argument or a fight; and has taken advantage of another person sexually

or has been taken advantage of sexually. Results of this paper show that increasing the price of

alcohol would be a viable mechanism to reduce the incidence of these measures of violent

behaviors. In addition to the reduced form estimates of price on violence, this paper also uses a

two-stage least squares estimation technique similar to the one used in this paper to examine the

direct effects of consumption on violence. Results show that alcohol consumption does in fact

cause college students to engage in violent activities.

        Other evidence of a causal link comes from studies on domestic violence (Markowitz and

Grossman, 1998, forthcoming and Markowitz, 1999) and crime (Cook and Moore, 1993 and

Chaloupka and Saffer, 1992). The studies on domestic violence show that higher alcoholic

beverage prices lead to lower incidence of both child abuse and wife abuse. In studies on crime,

Cook and Moore (1993) and Chaloupka and Saffer (1992) examine the effects of alcohol prices

on a time series of aggregate state crime rates in the United States. In particular, both sets of

authors look at rates of murder, rape, assault, and robbery. Results of these studies indicate that

increasing the tax on beer reduces most types of violent crimes (with the exception of assault).

Other evidence on the effects of alcohol consumption and its availability on crime rates comes

from Scandinavian studies. Lenke (1975) and Takala (1973) look at changes in alcohol prices,




                                                      5
incidence of strikes by employees of liquor stores, and introduction of new sales points (i.e.

selling beer in grocery stores) to explain changes in violent crime rates. Both studies show that

violent crimes decrease when alcohol is less available.



ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

         Two simple equations highlight the possible relationships between violence and drug or

alcohol consumption:

1) Vit = α 0 + α 1 Ait + α 2 Ejt + α 3 Xit + α 4 ui + ε it ,

2) Ait = β 0 + β 1 Vit + β 2 Pjt + β 3 Yit + β 4 ui + ωit ,

where V represents a measure of violence or weapon carrying, A is a measure of alcohol or drug

use, P is the full price of alcohol or drugs, E represents variables affecting violence levels such

as law enforcement or gun control measures, and X and Y and represent observed individual

characteristics which may affect violence (X) and drug and alcohol use (Y). The vectors X and

Y may have many of the same elements in common. Unobserved individual traits, such as

personality or propensity towards violence, which do not vary over time are represented by ui.

The subscripts i, j, and t, refer to individuals, geographic area, and time, respectively.

         Many of the studies discussed in the literature review have used ordinary least

squares (OLS) regression to estimate equation 1. However, estimating equation 1 by OLS

can lead to biased and inconsistent coefficients if there is reverse causality present (β 1 ≠ 0)

or the unmeasured individual-level factor is correlated with violence and substance use (α 4

≠ 0 and β 4 ≠0). If either is the case, drug and alcohol consumption will be correlated with

the error term in equation 1, thus estimating the coefficients by OLS will violate the

requirement that the right-hand side variables be orthogonal to the error term. In the case of



                                                               6
reverse causality when there is no third factor present, alcohol is correlated with the error term in

the violence equation because all the same exogenous variables, including the error term, that

determine violence also determine alcohol consumption. This can be seen by substituting

equation 1 into equation 2. In the case where the third factor is present but there is no reverse

causality, ui is present in both the violence and alcohol equations, thus, alcohol consumption is

correlated with the error term in the violence equation.

          In order to avoid the problems presented by OLS estimation, the two-stage least

squares (TSLS) technique is used to estimate equation 1. This instrumental variable

technique requires at least one exogenous variable (instrument) that will predict drug and

alcohol use but which is not correlated with the error term in the violence equation. When

estimating equation 1 by TSLS, drug and alcohol consumption are first predicted by the

instruments and then the predicted values are used as regressors in equation 1. The

predicted values of consumption are purged of their correlation with the error term in the

violence equation, leading to unbiased estimates of drugs and alcohol use on violence. A

positive coefficient on predicted alcohol or drug consumption will indicate that increased

substance use causes increased violence. A zero coefficient rules out causality.

          A reduced form violence equation can be derived by substituting equation 2 into

equation 1:

3) Vit = δ 0 + δ 1 Pjt + δ 2 Ejt + δ 3 Yit + δ 4 Xit + δ 5 uI + ηit ,

where δ 0 = (α 0 + α 1 β 0 )/(1-α 1 β 1 ); δ 1 =α 1 β 2 /(1-α 1 β 1 ); δ 2 =α 2 ; δ 3 =α 1 β 3 /(1-α 1 β 1 ); δ 4 =α 3 /(1-

α 1 β 1 ); δ 5 =(α 1 β 4 + α 4 )/(1-α 1 β 1 ); and ηit = (ε it + α 1 ωit )/(1-α 1 β 1 ). Estimating the reduced form

equation shows the direct effect of changes in the prices of drugs and alcohol in reducing

violence or weapon carrying. A negative price coefficient implies that violence is caused



                                                                 7
by consumption since there is no intuitive reason to believe that the prices of drugs and

alcohol are determinants of violence holding consumption constant.1 An insignificant

coefficient would provide evidence against causality. Thus, the reduced form estimation

will serve as a check on the validity of the results from the instrumental variable estimation

as well as directly providing the magnitude of the effect of changing prices on the

incidence of violence or potential violence.


DATA

        Data on violent behaviors and drug and alcohol consumption come from the 1991, 1993

and 1995 National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior Surveys.2 These surveys contain

nationally representative samples of high school students in grades 9-12. In each year, a

different sample of students is interviewed. Dependent variables are constructed from the

questions on physical fighting and the carrying of weapons. The first dependent variable is a

dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent had been in a physical fight in the past year.

The second is a dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent has carried a gun in the past

30 days, and the third is a dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent carried a weapon

other than a gun, such as a knife or club, in the past 30 days. Information on yearly weapon

carrying or fighting in the past 30 days is not available from the survey questionnaire. Caution

must be exercised in interpreting the meaning of the weapon carrying variable. While the survey

question does ask the respondent specifically about carrying a weapon, it may be possible that

teens who carry pocket knives (such as Swiss Army knives) and who have no violent intentions

will respond positively to this question.

         The questions on alcohol include the number of days in the past thirty days on which the

respondent had at least one drink of alcohol (termed drink), and the number of days in the past



                                                      8
thirty days on which the respondent had five or more drinks of alcohol in a row within a couple

of hours (termed binge). Questions on drug use include the number of times in the past thirty

days the respondent used marijuana (termed marijuana) and the number of times in the past thirty

days the respondent used any form of cocaine including crack, powder, or freebase (termed

cocaine).

        The socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of the respondents are very limited

in that only age, gender, and race, are consistently reported in all surveys. All of these variables

are included in each model. Four additional measures which may help control for the

respondent’s personality or propensity towards risk are also included. The first is an indicator of

how often the respondent wears a seatbelt when he or she is a passenger in a car, the second is if

the respondent seriously considered attempting suicide in the past year, the third is the number of

sports teams run by either the school or an outside organization on which the respondent plays,

and the fourth is the number of days in the past thirty days on which the respondent smoked.

These variables may be endogenous in that they may be determined by the same unmeasured

factors that predict violence and/or drug and alcohol use. They are included because these

variables should not be causal determinants of violence, with the possible exception of suicide.

Models were tested which first exclude only the suicide indicator and second, exclude all four

measures of risk. For each of the substances, in models which exclude only the suicide variable,

the results are virtually unchanged. In models without all four variables, the OLS coefficients on

drugs and alcohol become larger in magnitude, although statistical significance is unaffected.

The TSLS estimates become smaller in absolute value and statistical significance is unaffected

for fighting and gun carrying. The TSLS estimates of the drinking and drug use variables on

weapon carrying remains negative but become insignificant in all equations, thus the results for




                                                     9
other weapons will be discussed with this caveat in mind.

         Since the set of individual characteristics is very limited in these data, some state-level

variables are included to proxy for some of the unmeasured individual-level characteristics. All

models include the percentage of the respondent’s state that are Mormon, Protestants, Southern

Baptist and Catholic, as well as real income per capita and the unemployment rate. Data on

religious affiliation in 1990 and come from Bradley et al. (1992). Data for 1991, 1993 and 1995

are interpolated based on a rate of growth from 1980 to 1990. Data on real income come from

the Bureau of Economic Analysis and unemployment figures come from the Bureau of Labor

Statistics.



Instruments

         Variables measuring the price of drugs and alcohol will serve as instruments which

are used to predict consumption but not violence. The prices are theoretically valid

instruments because there is little reason to believe that the prices of drugs and alcohol are

predictors of teen violence or weapon carrying, holding consumption constant. Prices

should, however, predict consumption. Previous research has show that consumption of

these goods is negatively related to their prices. (Leung and Phelps, 1993; Grossman, et al.

1998; and Grossman and Chaloupka, 1998; Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999).

         Three variables will be used as instruments: The real (1982-1984=1) state-level

excise tax on beer, the real price of cocaine, and an indicator for whether a state has

decriminalized the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use. Prices of

marijuana are generally not available so the decriminalization indicator is used instead.

For this variable, a value of 1 means the state has decriminalized, thus users in these states




                                                      10
face a lower expected penalty and a lower price of possessing marijuana. Beer taxes come

from the Beer Association’s Brewer’s Almanac, cocaine prices come from the Drug

Enforcement Administration's System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence

(STRIDE) and information on decriminalization of marijuana comes from the Bureau of

Justice Statistics (1995). Cocaine prices are available until 1994, so the 1995 data are

assigned cocaine prices for 1994. The methodology for creating the cocaine price series is

described in detail in Grossman and Chaloupka (1998). In addition to the three true

instruments, all the above mentioned state-level and individual-level characteristics are

used to predict consumption, although these variables also appear in the second stage

equations as well.



DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

        Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations of all the variables for the full sample

and by response for the three measures of violence. Any observations with missing data are

omitted from the analyses. Forty percent of the sample report having been in at least one

physical fight in the past year, seven percent report carrying a gun in the last 30 days, and 15

percent report having carried a weapon other than a gun in the last 30 days. In addition, 48

percent of the sample drank, 19 percent binge drank, 17 percent used marijuana and 2 percent

used cocaine in the last 30 days. These rates of teenage substance use are similar to that found in

the Monitoring the Future Study (Johnston, et al. 1998).

        The rates of drug and alcohol use by respondents who report positive instances of

fighting or weapon carrying are much higher than that for respondents who do not fight or carry

weapons. For respondents who fight, the rates of participation are 61 percent, 30 percent, 26




                                                     11
percent and 5 percent for drinking, bingeing, marijuana and cocaine use, respectively. The same

rates for respondents with no fighting history are 39 percent, 13 percent, 11 percent and one

percent, respectively. For respondents who carry a gun, participation rates for drinking,

bingeing, marijuana and cocaine use are 77 percent, 48 percent, 44 percent, and 13 percent,

respectively. Again, the drug and alcohol use is much lower for respondents who do not report

carrying a gun; 46 percent drink, 17 percent binge, 15 percent use marijuana and 2 percent use

cocaine. Similar trends hold for respondents who carry other types of weapons (64 percent

versus 45 for drinking, 30 percent versus 18 for bingeing, 26 percent versus 16 for marijuana,

and 4 percent versus 2 percent for cocaine use.) All of these proportions are statistically

different from each other.

        The Youth Risk Behavior Surveys record the number of occasions on which the

respondent used an illegal substance. As with the participation rates, the number of occasions on

which the respondent drank, binged, used marijuana or used cocaine is much higher for

respondents who report fighting or carrying a weapon (see Table 1).

        Along with higher rates of substance use, people who fight are more likely to carry a gun

(14 percent) or other weapon (23 percent) than those who do not fight (3 percent and 9 percent,

respectively). In addition, of the people who carry guns, 75 percent have been in a physical

fight. This is compared to only 37 percent of people who do not carry guns. Finally, of the

people who carry other weapons, 63 percent have been in a physical fight versus 36 percent of

people who do not carry other weapons. Unfortunately, because of the wording of the survey

question, it is impossible to determine the rates of multiple weapon carrying, i.e. the rates of gun

carrying given other weapon carrying.




                                                     12
ESTIMATION AND RESULTS

The structural model

        Linear probability methods are used to estimate equation 1. Logit models were tested but

the conclusions remain unchanged. Models were also tested which correct the standard errors

according to White (1980) and the standard errors remain virtually unchanged.

        Tables 2 and 3 show the results of bingeing, drinking, marijuana use and cocaine use

separately on the probability of being in a physical fight (columns 1 and 2), carrying a gun

(columns 3 and 4), and carrying a weapon other than a gun (columns 5 and 6).3 Table 2 presents

the results for binge drinking while Table 3 shows the results for drinking, marijuana use and

cocaine use. For brevity, the coefficients on all variables are shown in Table 2 while only the

coefficients on the illicit substances are shown in Table 3. The results of the other variables in

the regressions do not vary depending on the inclusion or exclusion of a particular substance.

Columns 1, 3 and 5 of these tables show the OLS results and columns 2, 4, and 6 show the TSLS

results. Three tests of the validity of the TSLS regressions are reported. The first is an F-

test on the set of true instruments. Bound et al. (1995) show that as the F-statistic on the

instruments gets smaller, the bias in the TSLS estimates approaches that of OLS. Thus, is it

important for the instruments to have explanatory power in predicting consumption. Second, the

Basmann (1960) overidentification test is presented. An insignificant value of this test indicates

that the overidentification restrictions are valid. In other words, an insignificant value indicates

that the instruments are not mistakenly left out of the second stage, and they are not correlated

with the error term. Finally, the Hausman (1978) test shows if the OLS estimators are consistent.

The first stage results for binge drinking, drinking, marijuana use and cocaine use are shown in

Appendix Table 2. The first stage models presented are based on the regressions for physical




                                                      13
fighting since the first stage results are very similar to that of the other two dependent variables,

and vary only because of missing values on the dependent variables.

        The OLS results of Table 2 show that binge drinking is positive and statistically

significantly related to physical fighting, carrying a gun and carrying an other type of weapon.

These OLS results are consistent with the literature discussed above. The TSLS estimates tell a

slightly different story. For physical fighting, the TSLS estimate confirms the OLS estimate.

Here, the coefficient on binge drinking is positive and significant, although the magnitude is ten

times larger than the OLS estimate. The interpretation of the TSLS coefficient is that one less

day on which the average respondent binges will lead to an decrease in the probability of being

in a physical fight by 0.108 (or 10.8 percentage points). While this effect seems large, one must

recognize that a one day decrease in the average number of days binged represents a 47 percent

decrease in the mean number of days binged. In elasticity form, a one percent decrease in

number of days on which a respondent binges will decrease the probability of being in a physical

fight by 0.293 percent.4

        The statistics at the bottom of the even numbered columns check the validity of the TSLS

estimates. In column 2, the F-test on the instruments shows that the prices of drugs and beer are

statistically significant predictors of binge drinking. Second, the overidentification restrictions

are valid, and third, consistency of the OLS coefficient is rejected. These tests provide evidence

that the TSLS is the appropriate technique for estimation and that the TSLS results for physical

fighting are unbiased.

        The TSLS results for the probability of carrying a gun do not confirm the OLS results.

The coefficient on binge drinking in the TSLS model (column 4) is negative and not statistically

significant. Interestingly, the F-test of the instruments in the first stage are statistically




                                                        14
significant, and the overidentification restrictions are valid. However, the difference in the two

estimates is not large enough to result in a significant value of the Hausman test, thus

consistency of the OLS estimator cannot be rejected.

        As with the probability of carrying guns, the OLS estimation of binge drinking on the

probability of carrying weapons shows a positive relationship, however this result becomes

negative once the unobserved correlation between binge drinking and carrying a weapon has

been purged. The coefficient on the TSLS estimate in column 6 of Table 2 is –0.08, indicating

that a one percent decrease in the number of binge drinking occasions will actually raise the

probability of carrying a weapon by 0.675 percent. The TSLS results for other weapons are

trustworthy because the first stage instruments are significant, the overidentification restrictions

are valid and consistency of OLS is rejected.

        The negative coefficients on binge drinking in the weapon carrying equation and the gun

carrying equation (the latter of which is not statistically significant) are at odds with the evidence

provided by the simple means presented in Table 1 and with the OLS estimation in Table 2. At

this point, some additional checks on the validity of this result are offered. One explanation for

this result may be based on the states the teenagers live in. The TSLS estimation relies on

variations in the state level prices of drugs and alcohol to predict consumption. In order for the

TSLS coefficient to be negative, states which have higher prices of drugs and alcohol also must

have higher probabilities of weapon carrying. If higher beer taxes are observed in states that are

traditional hunting states (as is the case in the southern states) then a positive relationship would

appear between taxes and weapon carrying, leading to a negative relationship between binge

drinking and weapon carrying. Estimates in Table 4 attempt to control for unobserved area

effects, although as shown below, adding dummies for the region of the country still results in




                                                      15
negative coefficients on the TSLS estimates for guns and other weapons, although the standard

errors of these coefficients increase. In order to further test the theory that the some weapons are

being carried for recreational purposes, a new dependent variable was created which takes on a

value of one only if the respondent carried any type of weapon to school. This question is only

available in the 1993 and 1995 cross sections. Results are not shown, but the TSLS coefficient

on binge drinking remains negative and significant at the 10 percent level in a two-tailed test

when using this dependent variable. In light of this evidence, the most plausible explanation for

the contradictory results is that the OLS estimates are biased and there is indeed no positive

causal relationship between substance use and weapon carrying, rather the positive simple

correlation between the two behaviors is a reflection of some other unmeasured trait.

        The results of the other independent variables generally do not depend on the method of

estimation (OLS versus TSLS) and are fairly consistent across the dependent variables as well.

For example, older teens are less likely to fight or carry guns and other weapons, as are females

and teens who report wearing a seatbelt when they are a passenger in a car. Being black,

Hispanic or of another non-white race is associated with higher probabilities of being in physical

fights and carrying guns. There is no association with other weapons for blacks, while Hispanics

and other races are less likely to carry other weapons. Teens who smoke are more likely to

engage in all three acts, although with the exception of the regressions that include cocaine use,

this result only holds in the OLS estimates. The most likely explanation for the insignificant

coefficient in the TSLS models is that smoking is being used to predict consumption in the first

stage, and since smoking, drinking and marijuana use are highly correlated, the effects of

smoking are being picked up by the predicted values of consumption in the second stage.5 Teens

who have thought about committing suicide are more likely to engage in violent behaviors, as are




                                                     16
teens who play on sports teams. This last result does not hold for other weapons. Finally, the

larger the percentage of the state that is reported to be Southern Baptist the lower the probability

of physical fighting but the higher the probability of carrying weapons other than guns. More

Catholics in a state leads to a lower probability of carrying a gun.

        Table 3 shows the coefficients on drinking, marijuana use and cocaine use on the

probability of physical fights, carrying a gun and carrying other weapons. The effects of

drinking (panel A) and using marijuana (panel B) on these three variables are very similar to that

of binge drinking. The OLS and TSLS estimations both show that drinking and marijuana use

are positively related to the probability of physical fighting. The TSLS estimates show that a one

percent decrease in the mean number of days of drinking will decrease the probability of fighting

by 0.42 percent, while a one percent decrease in the mean number of occasions on which

marijuana is used will decrease the probability of fighting by 0.25 percent. Whereas the OLS

results show that drinking or using marijuana is positively related to carrying a gun or other

weapon, the coefficients from the TSLS estimations are negative and insignificant for gun use

and negative and significant for other weapon carrying. For all three dependent variables, when

drinking is being considered, the instruments in the first stage are statistically significant

predictors, the overidentification restrictions are valid and consistency of OLS is rejected. The

same holds for marijuana use. The results of cocaine use on physical fighting and weapon

carrying are less trustworthy. The OLS results show that cocaine use is positively related to

physical fighting and gun use, but has no statistically significant relationship with other weapon

carrying. The TSLS coefficients for fighting and other weapon carrying are positive but are not

statistically significant, however, consistency of OLS is never rejected.

        Table 4 re-estimates the models in Tables 2 and 3, but includes three dummy variables




                                                       17
for the region of the country in which the respondent lives. The areas are the Northeast,

Midwest, and South. The West is the omitted category. Regions are included in order to further

control for unobserved state-level variation that may be correlated with teenager’s substance use

and violent behaviors. Recall that the measures such as religion, unemployment and real per

capita income also help control for unobservables. State dummies were tested, but are not used

for two reasons. First, only 38 states are represented in the three years of the survey and not all

states are available in all years. In order to include dummies for every state, a state would have

to appear in more than one year so as to not be collinear with the other state level variables.

Including only the respondents who live in states that are surveyed in multiple years reduces the

number of respondents by about 12 percent and includes only 23 states. Secondly, by including

the state dummies, the TSLS estimates become biased because the first stage results are

unreliable. This is a result of the state level prices being highly collinear with the state dummies

which leads to the problems associated with severe multicollinearity.6 Nevertheless, including

state dummies does not alter the OLS results.

        Including dummies for the broader regions of the country rather than the state dummies

allows the entire sample to be included, as well as minimizing the problem of multicollinearity in

the first stage.7 Table 4 shows the coefficients on the illicit substances. Across all models, the

OLS results remain unchanged from the corresponding estimates in Tables 2 and 3. The TSLS

estimates are also similar in sign and magnitude, but generally lose statistical significance. For

example, without regional dummies, the TSLS estimate of binge drinking is 0.108 and is

significant at the 5 percent level. With the regional dummies the coefficient falls to 0.062 and

becomes insignificant at conventional levels. Note that the F-statistic on the instruments in the

first stages have fallen. This indicates that with the regional dummies, the instruments are only




                                                      18
weak predictors of substance use, thus the bias in the TSLS estimate approaches that of OLS.

Interestingly, the coefficients on binge drinking and drinking in the other weapon equation

remain negative and are statistically significant at the 10 percent level in a two-tailed test when

regional dummies are included.

        In summary, the TSLS results in Tables 2-4 show evidence that higher alcohol and

marijuana use leads to an increased probability of physical fighting. These results also show that

increased drug and alcohol use do not lead to a higher probability of carrying guns or other types

of weapons. What is not clear, however, is why a possible negative relationship appears

between drinking or marijuana use and carrying weapons other than guns after the correlation

with the error term has been purged. Recall that the coefficients on bingeing and drinking are

negative and statistically significant in equations which both include and exclude regional

dummies, although in models of other weapon carrying which exclude the four potentially

endogenous measures of risk the coefficients on the substances are not statistically different from

zero.

        The existence of, and possible explanation for the negative coefficient on weapon

carrying needs further investigation. One suggestion for why the negative relationship emerges

is that weapons and drugs are substitute goods, that is, that teens spend their income on either

drugs or weapons. As is discussed further below, the reduced form estimates presented in Table

5 presents some evidence that the alcohol and weapons are net substitute goods. A second

possible explanation deals with the costs of engaging in criminal behavior. Becker (1968)

describes a model of crime in which the criminal’s choice level of crime is determined by

weighing the probable costs and benefits of crime. The model can be expanded to include the

role of alcohol or drugs in affecting the probability of getting caught and facing penalties. In




                                                      19
other words, if it is the case that alcohol or drug consumption affects an individual’s behavior in

such a way as to impair judgement, then a careful criminal would be less likely to consume these

substances for fear of raising the probability of getting caught (Cordilia, 1985). This argument

may be more relevant for property crimes than violent crimes, and in fact, Markowitz and

Grossman (1998, forthcoming) argue that alcohol consumption lowers rather than raises the

probability of getting caught in the case of domestic violence where alcohol can be used as an

excuse for the violence.



The reduced form

        Estimating the reduced form model as shown in equation 3 provides indirect evidence for

or against the causality link from substance use to violence, as well as providing the magnitude

of the direct effect of changes in the prices of the substances on the probability of violence. If

drinking alcohol, for example, actually causes teens to engage in physical fights, and beer taxes

are negatively related to drinking, then one would expect the beer tax to be negatively related to

physical fighting in the reduced form. If there is no causal relationship from substance use to a

measure of violence then the prices should have no direct effect on violence. In the case of

weapons, since both goods are purchased with income, the reduced form will also show whether

the goods are net substitutes, complements, or have no relation to each other.

        Table 5 shows the results of the reduced form estimates for physical fighting (column 1),

carrying a gun (column 2) and carrying an other type of weapon (column 3). The negative and

statistically significant coefficient on the beer tax in the physical fight equation confirms the

TSLS estimates from Table 2. This result indicates that a one percent increase in the beer tax

will lower the probability of physical fighting by 0.02 percent. The marijuana decriminalization




                                                       20
indicator and the price of cocaine have no direct effects on physical fighting. For cocaine, but

not for marijuana, this result is consistent with the TSLS results. The likely explanation for the

contradictory marijuana result is that the decriminalization indicator is a poor measure of the

price of marijuana and thus has no direct effect on fighting. Nevertheless, marijuana

consumption may still be adequately predicted by the models in Table 3 if the price of beer

predicts marijuana use due to complementarity or substitutability between the two substances.8

As shown in Appendix Table 2, the first stage results for marijuana use confirm that this is the

case since the coefficient on the decriminalization indicator is positive (although not statistically

significant), and the coefficient on the beer tax is negative and statistically significant.

        The TSLS results in Tables 2 and 3 for the probability of carrying a gun show no

statistically significant relationship between drinking or drug use and carrying a gun, although

the coefficients on binge drinking, drinking and marijuana use are all negative. The reduced

form is in agreement with these results, for column 2 of Table 5 shows that none of the prices are

statistically significant predictors of carrying a gun.

        Finally, column 3 of Table 5 shows the reduced form equation for other weapon carrying.

Recall that the TSLS estimate predicts that the more days on which a respondent drinks will lead

to a lower probability of weapon carrying. This result is confirmed by the reduced form where

the tax on beer is positively related to weapon carrying. The marijuana decriminalization

indicator and cocaine price have no relationship with other weapon carrying. These results also

provide evidence that beer consumption and weapons such as knives are net substitute goods

since increasing the price of beer will increase the probability of carrying a weapon, holding real

income constant. Note that the income effect estimated here is imprecise since income is

measured by a state-level per capita income and is not adjusted for the cost of living faced by




                                                          21
teens.

         Including the 3 regional dummies does not alter the sign or the magnitude of the reduced

form equations in Table 5 (results not shown). However, the addition of the dummies does raise

the standard errors of the three price coefficients. For physical fighting, the beer tax coefficient

becomes significant at only the 13 percent level in a two-tailed test. For guns, the beer tax and

marijuana decriminalization coefficients remain insignificant, and for other weapons, the beer

tax remains positive and significant at the 10 percent level.



CONCLUSION

         The purpose of this study is to examine the question of whether alcohol and drug use

cause teenagers to engage in violent behaviors as measured by physical fighting, carrying a gun,

or carrying other types of weapons. Evidence from simple means and OLS regression estimation

show that drinking (as measured by number of days the respondent had a drink and by the

number of days the respondent had 5 or more drinks in a one sitting), marijuana use and cocaine

use are all positively related to the probability of physical fighting, carrying a gun and carrying

an other type of weapon. While drugs, alcohol and violent behaviors may be linked, these

simple results do not provide evidence of causality from drugs and alcohol to violence or

potential violence. In fact, the OLS estimates may be biased because of the possibility that both

substance use and violent behaviors are determined by unmeasured individual traits.

         Causality can be established by using two-stage least squares to estimate the drug and

alcohol consumption coefficients. The technique predicts consumption using the prices of beer,

marijuana and cocaine, and then predicted rather than actual consumption is used in the violence

equation. This technique allows the consumption measures to be purged of their correlation with




                                                      22
unobserved individual characteristics. Results from the two-stage estimation show that binge

drinking, drinking and marijuana use are all causal determinants of physical violence. Cocaine

use has no relationship with physical fighting. None of the substances lead to increased

probabilities of carrying a gun or other weapon. The magnitudes of the effect on fighting of a

decrease in drinking or marijuana use may be very small. A one percent decrease in the mean

number of days on which a respondent binges will decrease the probability of being in a physical

fight by 0.29 percent. The percentage reductions in fighting from a one percent decrease in the

number of days of drinking or using marijuana are 0.42 percent and 0.25 percent, respectively.

        Reduced form estimates provide additional evidence of the causal link from drinking to

physical violence, and also show the direct effect of raising substance prices on the probability of

physical violence. Policies aimed at reducing alcohol consumption, such as raising the price of

beer through increased taxes, would be effective in reducing both consumption the incidence of

physical fights, although again, the magnitude may be very small. A one percent increase in the

beer tax will lower the probability of physical fighting by 0.02 percent. Re-criminalizing

marijuana or raising the price of cocaine through increased enforcement of drug laws would have

no direct effects on violence.




                                                    23
                                          REFERENCES

Basmann, R.L., “On Finite Sample Distributions of Generalized Classical Linear Identifiability
      Test Statistics,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55, 1960, 650-659.

Becker, Gary S, “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 76:2 March/April 1968, 169-217.

Beer Institute, Brewers’ Almanac, United States Brewers Foundation, New York, NY, various
        years.

Bernburg, Jon Gunnar, and Thorolfur Thorlindsson, “Adolescent Violence, Social Control, and
       The Subculture of Delinquency,” Youth and Society, 30:4, June 1999, 445-460.

Bound, John, David Jeager, and Regina M. Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variables
       Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous
       Explanatory Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90:430,
       June 1995, 443-450.

Bradley, Martin R., Norman M. Green, Jr., Dale E. Jones, Mac Lynn, and Lou McNeil, Churches
       and Church Membership in the United States 1990, Atlanta, Georgia: Glenmary
       Research Center, 1992.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Victimization 1998: Changes
       1997-98 With Trends 1993-98. NCJ-176353, July 1999.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Homicide Trends in the United States.
       NCJ-173956, April 1999.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Victimization 1994,
       NCJ-158022, April 1996.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. Sourcebook of Criminal Justice
       Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1995.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Violent Crime, NCJ-147486, April
       1994.

Chaloupka, Frank J., and Henry Saffer, “Alcohol, Illegal Drugs, Public Policy, and Crime,”
      Presented at the annual meeting of the Western Economic Association, San Francisco,
      California, July 1992.

Cook, Phillip J., and Michael J. Moore “Economic Perspectives on Reducing Alcohol-Related
       Violence.” In Alcohol and Interpersonal Violence: Fostering Multidisciplinary
       Perspectives, edited by Susan E. Martin. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
       Alcoholism Research Monograph 24. NIH Publication No. 93-3496. Washington, D.C.:
       U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993, 193-211.



                                                 24
Cordilia, Ann, “Alcohol and Property Crime: Exploring the Causal Nexus,” Journal of Studies
        on Alcohol, 46:2, 1985, 161-171.

Fagan, Jeffrey, “Interactions Among Drugs, Alcohol and Violence,” Health Affairs, 12:4,
        Winter 1993, 65-79.

Fagan, Jeffrey, “Intoxication and Aggression” in Drugs and Crime: Crime and Justice, A
        Review of Research, Vol. 13, Michael Tonry and James Q. Wilson, Editors. The
        University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1990.

Farrelly, Matthew C., Jeremy W. Bray, Gary A. Zarkin, Brett W. Wendling and Rosalie Liccardo
        Pacula, "The Effects of Prices and Policies on the Demand for Marijuana: Evidence from
        the National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse" NBER Working Paper No. 6940,
        February 1999.

Furlong, Michael, Manuel J. Casas Carla Corral, Annie Chung and Michael Bates, “Drugs and
       School Violence,” Education and Treatment of Children, 20:3, August 1997, 263-280.

Gelles, Richard J. and Claire P. Cornell, Intimate Violence in Families, Sage Publications, Inc.,
        Newbury Park, CA, 1990.

Goldstein, Paul J., “The Drugs/Violence Nexus: A Tripartite Conceptual Framework,” Journal of
       Drug Issues, 15, Fall 1985, 493-506.

Grossman, Michael; Frank J. Chaloupka, and Ismail Sirtalan, “An Empirical Analysis of Alcohol
      Addiction: Results from the Monitoring the Future Panels,” Economic Inquiry, 36:1,
      January 1998, 39-48.

Grossman, Michael and Frank J. Chaloupka. “The Demand For Cocaine By Young Adults: A
      Rational Addiction Approach,” Journal of Health Economics, 17:4, August 1998, 427-
      474.

Grossman, Michael and Sara Markowitz, "Alcohol Regulation and Violence on College
      Campuses," in Economics of Substance Abuse, Michael Grossman and Chee-Ruey
      Hsieh, editors, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Limited, forthcoming.

Hausman, Jerry A., “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 46, 1978, 1251-1271.

Hemenway, David, Deborah Prothrow-Stith, Jack M. Bergstein, Roseanna Ander, and Bruce P.
     Kennedy, “Gun Carrying Among Adolescents,” Law and Contemporary Problems, 59,
     Winter 1996, 39-53.

Jarrell, S. and Howsen, R.M., “Transient Crowding and Crime: the More ‘Strangers’ in an Area,
         the More Crime Except for Murder Assault and Rape,” American Journal of Economics
         and Sociology, 49:1, October 1990, 483-93.

Johnston, Lloyd D., Patrick M. O'Malley and Jerald G. Bachman, National Survey Results on
       Drug Use from the Monitoring the Future Study, 1975-1997, NIH Publication No. 98-


                                                  25
       4345, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1998.

Kellermann, A.L., F.P. Rivara, N.B. Rushford, J.G.Banton, D.T. Reay, T.T. Francisco, A.B.
       Locci, J. Prodzinski, B.Hackman, and G.Somes, “Gun Ownership as a Risk Factor for
       Homicide in the Home,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 329:15, October 7
       1993, 1084-91.

Kwon, Ik-Whan; Bradley Scott, and Scott R. Safranski, “The Effectiveness of Gun Control
      Laws: Multivariate Statistical Analysis,” The American Journal of Economics and
      Sociology, 56:1, January 1997, 41-50.

Lenke, L. “Valdbrott och alkohol: En studie I misshandelsbrottslighentens utvekling [Violent
       Crime and Alcohol: A Study of the Developments in Assaultive Crime]”. Stockholm:
       Department of Criminology, University of Stockholm, 1975.

Leonard, Kenneth E, “Drinking Patterns and Intoxication in Marital Violence: Review,
       Critique, and Future Directions for Research,” in Alcohol and Interpersonal Violence:
       Fostering Multidisciplinary Perspectives, Susan E. Martin, editor, National Institute on
       Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Research Monograph 24, NIH Publication No. 93-3469,
       Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993.

Leung, Siu Fai and Charles E. Phelps. “′My Kingdom for a Drink….?’ A Review of the Price
       Sensitivity of Demand for Alcoholic Beverages” in Economic and Socioeconomic Issues
       in the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. Gregory Bloss and Michael Hilton,
       editors, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993.

Markowitz, Sara, “The Price of Alcohol, Wife Abuse and Husband Abuse,” NBER working
      paper, No. 6916, January 1999.

Markowitz, Sara and Michael Grossman, “Alcohol Regulation and Parental Violence Towards
      Children,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 16:3, July 1998, 309-320.

Markowitz, Sara and Michael Grossman, “The Effects of Beer Taxes on Physical Child Abuse,”
      Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Miller, Matthew, David Hemenway, and Henry Wechsler, "Guns at College," Journal of
        American College Health, 48:1, July 1999, 7-12.

Miczek, K.A., J.F. DeBold, M. Haney, J.Tidey, J. Vivian, and E.M. Weerts. “Alcohol, Drugs of
       Abuse, Aggression, and Violence” in Understanding and Preventing Violence, Volume
       3. Albert J. Reiss and Jeffery A. Roth, editors. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
       Press, 1994.

National Research Council, Understanding and Preventing Violence, Albert J. Reiss and Jeffery
       A. Roth, Editors, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1993.

Newport, Frank, "Public Continues to Believe a Variety of Factors Caused Littleton," Gallup
      News Service, May 13, 1999.


                                                 26
Page, Randy M. and Jon Hammermeister, “Weapon-Carrying and Youth Violence,”
       Adolescence, 32:127, Fall 1997, 505-513.

Pernanen, Kai, “Theoretical Aspects of the Relationship Between Alcohol Use and Crime,” in
       Drinking and Crime: Perspectives on the Relationships between Alcohol Consumption
       and Criminal Behavior, James J. Collins Jr., editor. The Guilford Press, New York, NY,
       1981.

Rossow, Ingeborg, Hilde Pape and Lars Wichstrom, “Young, Wet and Wild? Associations
      Between Alcohol Intoxication and Violent Behavior in Adoloscence,” Addiction, 94:7,
      July 1999, 1017-1031.

Saffer, Henry and Frank J. Chaloupka, "Demographic Differentials in the Demand for Alcohol
        and Illicit Drugs," NBER Working Paper No. 6432, February 1998.

Saffer, Henry and Frank J. Chaloupka, "The Demand for Illicit Drugs," Economic Inquiry, 37:3,
        July 1999, 401-411.

Salts, Connie J and Byron W. Lindholm, “Predictive Variables of Violent Behavior in
        Adolescent Males,” Youth and Society, 26:3, March 1995, 377-400.

Sheley, Joseph F. and Victoria E. Brewer, “Possession and Carrying of Firearms Among
        Suburban Youth,” Public Health Reports, 110:1, January/February 1995, 18-26.

Takala, H. “Alkoholstrejkens inverkan pa uppdagad brottslighet [The Effect of the Alcohol
        Strike on Reported Crime.]” Alkoholpolitik, 1973, 36, 14-16.

White, Halbert, “A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test
       for Heteroscedasticity,” Econometrica, 48, 1980, 817-838.




                                                 27
                                               FOOTNOTES

        Research for this paper was supported by grant number 1 R01 AA10817 from the

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism to the NBER. I would like to thank

Jonathan Gruber for the data, and Michael Grossman, Robert Kaestner, and Linda Edwards for

helpful comments and suggestions. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official

NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of

Directors. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not that of NIAAA or the NBER.



        1
            One exception may be if the violence is committed by illegal drug sellers trying to

maintain monopoly prices or exclusive territories. In this sample, the proportion of teenagers

who sell illegal drugs is unknown. However, in the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth, the proportion is fairly low, about 6.6 percent sell or help to sell illegal drugs. In

addition, only 1.4 percent of the sample sold drugs regularly, that is, more than once a month for

12 months, and the majority report earning less than $100.00.
        2
            Data are available for 1997 as well. Since cocaine prices are only available until 1994,

the 1997 data are not used. However, Appendix Table 1 shows results for models which use all

4 available years of data by excluding the cocaine price and consumption variables from all

models. The magnitude and statistical significance of the OLS coefficients are very similar to

those in Tables 2 and 3. The TSLS coefficients are similar in magnitude, but the standard errors

increase, and the F-tests on the instruments in the first stage are only significant in the binge

drinking equation.
        3
            Each substance is entered into a violence equation separately since including

consumption of all three substances together in one TSLS model leads to severe multicollinearity



                                                      28
between the predicted values. This occurs because all three substances are predicted using the

same set of variables.
        4
            The elasticity is calculated by multiplying the coefficient on binge drinking by the ratio

of the average number of days binged to the proportion of respondents who fight. A similar

fromula is used for the other measures of substance use and violence.
        5
            The simple correlation coefficients between smoking and binge drinking, drinking and

marijuana use are all approximately 0.40.
        6
            In fact, a combination of state and time dummies almost perfectly predict the beer taxes.

The R-squared from a regression of the beer tax on the state dummies and year dummies is

0.985. The R-squared is 0.886 for a regression of the decriminalization on the state and year

dummies and is 0.953 for cocaine price on state and year dummies.
        7
            The R-squares of substance price on region and year dummies are much lower: 0.28,

0.33, and 0.28 for the beer tax, marijuana decriminalization and cocaine price, respectively.
        8
            Saffer and Chaloupka (1998) and Farrelly et al. (1999) show evidence that beer and

marijuana are complement goods.




                                                       29
                                                           Table 1
                                                 Means and Standard Deviations

                                                                                                       Other     Other
                              All Respondents         Fight=1    Fight=0       Gun=1      Gun=0
                                                                                                     Weapon=1 Weapon=0
                                 (N=33,430)          (N=13,310) (N=20,120)    (N=2,420) (N=31,010)
                                                                                                     (N=4,990) (N=28,440)
                               Mean       SD           Mean          Mean      Mean       Mean         Mean      Mean
Fight                          0.40     (0.49)          --            --       0.75       0.37          0.63      0.36
Knife                          0.15     (0.36)          0.23          0.09       --         --           --        --
Gun                            0.07     (0.26)          0.14          0.03       --         --           --        --
Number of days drink           2.75     (5.16)          4.20          1.79      7.72       2.36         4.21      2.49
Number of days binge           1.22     (3.08)          1.99          0.71      3.95       1.01         1.94      1.09
Number of times marijuana      3.61    (10.67)          5.74          2.19     11.27       3.01         5.73      3.23
Number of times cocaine        0.46     (4.01)          0.88          0.18      2.70       0.28         0.76      0.40
Percentage drink               0.48     (0.50)          0.61          0.39      0.77       0.46         0.64      0.45
Percentage binge               0.19     (0.40)          0.30          0.13      0.48       0.17         0.30      0.18
Percentage marijuana           0.17     (0.38)          0.26          0.11      0.44       0.15         0.26      0.16
Percentage cocaine             0.02     (0.15)          0.05          0.01      0.13       0.02         0.04      0.02
Real beer tax                  0.44     (0.40)          0.43          0.45      0.48       0.44         0.45      0.44
Marijuana decriminalization    0.31     (0.46)          0.32          0.31      0.31       0.31         0.31      0.31
Cocaine price                 95.46    (20.69)         95.65         95.34     95.25       95.48       97.10      95.17
Age                           16.21     (1.23)         16.10         16.29     16.31       16.20       16.14      16.22
Female                         0.53     (0.50)          0.43          0.59      0.15       0.56         0.30      0.57
Black                          0.24     (0.43)          0.26          0.23      0.30       0.23         0.24      0.24
Hispanic                       0.25     (0.43)          0.24          0.25      0.25       0.25         0.23      0.25
Other race                     0.07     (0.25)          0.07          0.07      0.08       0.07         0.06      0.07
Smokes                         4.06     (9.10)          6.09          2.71      8.61       3.70         6.11      3.70
Seat belt                      3.51     (1.25)          3.27          3.67      2.93       3.56         3.21      3.56
Suicide                        0.24     (0.43)          0.30          0.20      0.28       0.24         0.32      0.23
Sports                         1.21     (1.50)          1.37          1.11      1.58       1.18         1.28      1.20
Real Income                   143.21   (18.74)         143.56        142.99    141.83     143.32       143.95    143.08
Unemployment                   6.65     (1.34)          6.71          6.62      6.69       6.65         6.78      6.63
Protestant                    22.65    (11.15)         22.59         22.69     23.75       22.56       22.63      22.65
Catholic                      17.73    (10.91)         18.19         17.43     16.69       17.81       18.27      17.64
Southern Baptist               9.00     (9.24)          8.65          9.24     10.00       8.93         8.67      9.06
Mormon                         0.80     (0.79)          0.79          0.81      0.77       0.80         0.78      0.80
1993                           0.42     (0.49)          0.42          0.42      0.49       0.42         0.38      0.43
1993                           0.28     (0.45)          0.27          0.29      0.29       0.28         0.23      0.29
Northeast                      0.14     (0.35)          0.15          0.14      0.13       0.14         0.17      0.14
Midwest                        0.19     (0.39)          0.21          0.18      0.18       0.19         0.18      0.19
South                          0.46     (0.50)          0.44          0.48      0.50       0.46         0.45      0.47
West                           0.21     (0.40)          0.20          0.21      0.19       0.21         0.20      0.21




                                                                30
                                                   Table 2
                                            OLS and TSLS Estimates
                                                Binge Drinking
                                  Physical Fight                          Gun                  Other Weapon
                               OLS           TSLS                 OLS         TSLS           OLS        TSLS
                                (1)            (2)                 (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
Binge                           0.019          0.108               0.017       -0.016         0.004      -0.083
                              (21.78)**       (2.34)*           (34.18)**     (-0.64)        (6.15)**   (-2.20)*
Age                            -0.041         -0.058              -0.003        0.003        -0.013       0.003
                             (-20.47)**      (-6.49)**           (-2.51)*      (0.66)       (-8.38)**    (0.41)
Female                         -0.138         -0.084              -0.097       -0.116        -0.139      -0.191
                             (-26.52)**      (-2.92)**         (-34.26)**     (-7.60)**   (-35.46)**    (-8.26)**
Black                           0.107          0.144             0.055          0.042       0.005        -0.030
                              (15.37)**       (6.91)**         (14.66)**       (3.83)**    (0.92)       (-1.84)
Hispanic                        0.035          0.030             0.024          0.027       -0.014       -0.008
                               (5.32)**       (3.76)**          (6.73)**       (6.32)**    (-2.88)**    (-1.25)
Other race                      0.020          0.050             0.039          0.029       -0.032       -0.058
                               (1.99)*        (2.59)**          (7.06)**       (3.00)**    (-4.13)**    (-3.94)**
Smokes                          0.007         -0.004             0.002          0.006       0.002         0.013
                              (22.90)**      (-0.65)           (10.97)**       (1.91)     (10.00)**      (2.82)**
Seatbelt                       -0.036         -0.009             -0.014        -0.024       -0.017       -0.042
                             (-17.10)**      (-0.60)           (-12.33)**     (-3.15)**   (-10.65)**    (-3.77)**
Suicide                         0.118          0.078             0.020          0.034       0.067         0.104
                              (19.97)**       (3.53)**          (6.11)**       (2.94)**   (15.03)**      (6.09)**
Sports                          0.022          0.012             0.007          0.011       -0.004        0.006
                              (12.69)**       (2.04)*           (7.45)**       (3.50)**    (-3.35)**     (1.23)
Income                          0.0002         0.001             0.0004        -0.0002      0.001         0.0002
                               (0.80)         (1.99)*           (0.39)        (-0.90)      (5.97)**      (0.77)
Unemployment                    0.009          0.003             0.001          0.003       0.009         0.015
                               (4.01)**       (0.63)            (0.85)         (1.52)      (5.63)**      (4.73)**
Protestant                     -0.0003        -0.0003            -0.0001       -0.00003     0.0005        0.001
                              (-1.17)        (-1.25)            (-0.46)       (-0.24)      (2.43)*       (2.26)*
Catholic                        0.0001        -0.0005            -0.001        -0.001       0.0004        0.001
                               (0.16)        (-0.94)            (-4.67)**     (-2.88)**    (1.49)        (2.29)*
Southern Baptist               -0.001         -0.002             -0.0003        0.0001      0.001         0.002
                              (-2.27)*       (-2.77)**          (-1.11)        (0.24)      (3.97)**      (3.95)**
Mormon                          0.0001        -0.008             -0.002         0.001       0.005         0.012
                               (0.03)        (-1.31)            (-0.91)        (0.26)      (1.72)        (2.57)*
1993                           -0.009         -0.004             0.037          0.035       -0.061       -0.067
                              (-1.47)        (-0.52)           (11.19)**       (8.97)**   (-13.25)**   (-10.89)**
1995                           -0.026         -0.034             0.021          0.024       -0.073       -0.068
                              (-3.58)**      (-3.69)**          (5.48)**       (5.26)**   (-13.54)**    (-9.60)**
Observations                    35,276         35,276          35,408         35,408      35,201        35,201
R-squared                        0.12           0.08            0.12           0.08        0.07          0.04
F on instruments                                5.524**                        4.970**                   5.499**
Overidentification test                         0.064                          2.203                     0.073
Hausman test                                    4.744*                         1.896                     7.890**
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level

                                                          31
                                                      Table 3
                                             OLS and TSLS Estimates
                                     Drinking, Marijuana Use, and Cocaine Use

                                     Physical Fight                           Gun                Other Weapon
                                   OLS         TSLS                OLS               TSLS       OLS       TSLS
                                    (1)          (2)                (3)               (4)        (5)       (6)
PANEL A
   Drink                           0.014          0.062             0.011            -0.020      0.004      -0.049
                                 (26.56)**       (2.35)*          (39.06)**         (-1.19)    (10.36)**   (-2.11)*
    R-squared                      0.12          0.09              0.12              0.07       0.07        0.04
    F on instruments                             5.834**                             4.585**                5.208**
    Overidentification test                      0.233                               1.559                  0.247
    Hausman test                                 4.048*                              4.674*                 7.930**
    Observations                  34,302         34,302            34,419            34,419     34,230      34,230

PANEL B
   Marijuana                       0.004          0.029            0.004             -0.009     0.001       -0.022
                                 (15.02)**       (2.15)*           (26.50)**        (-1.31)     (6.12)**   (-2.09)*
    R-squared                      0.11          0.08              0.10              0.07       0.07        0.045
    F on instruments                             5.321**                             5.463**                5.571**
    Overidentification test                      0.295                               1.458                  0.403
    Hausman test                                 4.478*                              4.149*                 6.838**
    Observations                  35,498         35,498            35,639            35,639     35,434      35,434

PANEL C
   Cocaine                         0.005          0.028             0.008            0.021       0.0003     -0.016
                                  (8.18)**       (1.14)           (23.08)**         (1.54)      (0.61)     (-0.83)
     R-squared                       0.11          0.10            0.10              0.08       0.06        0.06
     F on instruments                              7.711**                           7.264**                7.055**
     Overidentification test                       2.666                             1.354                  3.189*
     Hausman test                                  0.914                             1.012                  0.746
     Observations                   35,730         35,730          35,880            35,880     35,665      35,665
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                             32
                                                       Table 4
                                              OLS and TSLS estimates
                              Binge Drinking, Drinking, Marijuana Use, and Cocaine Use
                                                  Regions Included

                                     Physical Fight                          Gun                Other Weapon
                                   OLS         TSLS               OLS              TSLS        OLS       TSLS
                                    (1)          (2)               (3)              (4)         (5)       (6)
PANEL A
  Binge                             0.019          0.062           0.017            -0.025      0.004      -0.078
                                  (21.78)**       (1.18)         (34.23)**         (-0.74)     (6.31)**   (-1.65)
    R-squared                      0.12           0.10            0.12              0.07       0.07        0.05
    F on instruments                              3.571*                            2.944*                 3.343*
    Overidentification test                       2.454                             0.207                  0.042
    Hausman test                                  0.704                             1.828                  4.331*
    Observations                   35,276         35,276          35,408            35,408     35,201      35,201

PANEL B
  Drink                             0.014          0.025           0.011            -0.022      0.004      -0.042
                                  (26.58)**       (0.96)         (39.10)**         (-1.15)    (10.51)**   (-1.66)
    R-squared                      0.12           0.11            0.12              0.07       0.07        0.05
    F on instruments                              5.009**                           3.743*                 4.085**
    Overidentification test                       3.138*                            0.117                  0.201
    Hausman test                                  0.166                             4.252*                 4.631*
    Observations                   34,302         34,302          34,419            34,419     34,230      34,230

PANEL C
  Marijuana                         0.004         -0.003           0.004            -0.003      0.001      -0.008
                                  (14.95)**      (-0.40)         (26.58)**         (-0.83)     (6.24)**   (-1.40)
    R-squared                      0.11           0.10            0.10              0.08       0.07        0.06
    F on instruments                             12.802**                          13.746**               13.425**
    Overidentification test                       3.002*                            0.137                  0.878
    Hausman test                                  0.81                              3.105                  2.762
    Observations                   35,498         35,498          35,639            35,639     35,434      35,434

PANEL D
  Cocaine                           0.005          0.063           0.008            0.013       0.0003     -0.023
                                   (8.22)**       (1.04)         (23.03)**         (0.44)      (0.71)     (-0.55)
     R-squared                       0.11          0.09           0.10              0.09       0.06        0.06
     F on instruments                              1.509                            1.602                  1.550
     Overidentification test                       2.001                            0.364                  1.712
     Hausman test                                  1.145                            0.032                  0.329
     Observations                   35,730         35,730         35,880            35,880     35,665      35,665
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                            33
                                     Table 5
                              Reduced Form Estimates

                                  Physical Fight         Gun         Other Weapon
                                        (1)               (2)              (3)
Beer tax                               -0.019             0.007            0.014
                                      (-2.27)*           (1.57)           (2.29)*
Marijuana decriminalization             0.005             0.005           -0.000001
                                       (0.87)            (1.63)          (-0.0002)
Cocaine price                           -0.0001           -0.00004        0.0002
                                       (-0.59)           (-0.44)         (1.18)
Age                                    -0.038             0.0004          -0.012
                                     (-18.79)**          (0.36)          (-8.24)**
Female                                 -0.151             -0.109          -0.140
                                     (-29.17)**         (-37.90)**      (-36.27)**
Black                                   0.101             0.050           0.003
                                      (14.49)**         (13.01)**        (0.62)
Hispanic                                0.035              0.029          -0.010
                                       (4.93)**          (-7.41)**       (-1.83)
Other race                              0.013             0.034           -0.031
                                       (1.29)            (5.91)**        (-4.03)**
Smokes                                  0.009             0.004           0.003
                                      (32.38)**         (24.16)**       (13.13)**
Seatbelt                               -0.042             -0.020          -0.018
                                     (-20.28)**         (-17.01)**      (-11.27)**
Suicide                                 0.126             0.026           0.069
                                      (21.39)**          (8.06)**       (15.67)**
Sports                                  0.023             0.009           -0.004
                                      (13.64)**          (9.48)**        (-3.09)**
Income                                  0.00001           -0.0001         0.001
                                       (0.06)            (-0.88)         (5.63)**
Unemployment                            0.009             0.002           0.010
                                       (4.14)**          (1.89)          (5.76)**
Protestant                              -0.0004           0.0001          0.001
                                       (-1.40)           (0.32)          (2.49)*
Catholic                                -0.0001          -0.001           0.001
                                       (-0.23)           (3.20)**        (2.31)*
Southern Baptist                        -0.001            -0.0001         0.001
                                       (-1.09)           (-0.34)         (3.34)**
Mormon                                  -0.0002           0.0003          0.008
                                       (-0.05)           (0.15)          (2.57)*
1993                                    -0.010            0.035           -0.060
                                       (-1.51)           (9.72)**       (-12.52)**
1995                                    -0.027            0.022           -0.069
                                       (-3.20)**         (4.73)**       (-10.99)**
 Observations                           35,820          35,972          35,756
 R-squared                               0.10            0.09            0.06
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level

                                          34
                                                 Appendix Table 1
                                              OLS and TSLS estimates
                                       Binge Drinking, Drinking, Marijuana Use
                                                  1991-1997 Data

                                      Physical Fight                           Gun               Other Weapon
                                    OLS         TSLS                 OLS             TSLS       OLS       TSLS
                                     (1)          (2)                 (3)             (4)        (5)       (6)
PANEL A
  Binge                             0.019          0.134             0.016            -0.021     0.004      -0.093
                                  (25.39)**       (1.98)*          (41.40)**         (-0.59)    (7.14)**   (-1.71)†
    R-squared                       0.121         0.077              0.118            0.078     0.062       0.038
    F on instruments                              4.412*                              3.597*                4.095*
    Overidentification test                       0.696                               1.852                 2.989
    Hausman test                                  4.310*                              1.300                 5.153*
    Observations                   49,675         49,675                                        49,531      49,531

PANEL B
  Drink                             0.014          0.112             0.011            -0.022     0.004      -0.064
                                  (31.19)**       (1.79)†          (47.22)**         (-0.65)   (12.85)**   (-1.34)
    R-squared                       0.127         0.059              0.128            0.066     0.0652      0.034
    F on instruments                              2.458                               1.626                 2.161
    Overidentification test                       0.211                               1.886                 2.962
    Hausman test                                  4.911*                              1.343                 3.838*
    Observations                   48,261         48,261             48,403           48,403    48,121      48,121

PANEL C
  Marijuana                         0.004          0.054             0.003            -0.006     0.001      -0.037
                                  (19.20)**       (1.58)           (29.53)**         (-0.48)    (9.42)**   (-1.49)
    R-squared                        0.116         0.052              0.103           0.077     0.063       0.027
    F on instruments                               1.935                              1.895                 2.091
    Overidentification test                        0.402                              2.375                 2.042
    Hausman test                                   4.862*                             0.604                 5.584*
    Observations                    49,934         49,934             50,109          50,109    49,803      49,803
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
†
 significant at 10% level; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                              35
                                           Appendix Table 2
                                           First Stage Results

                                        Binge             Drink        Marijuana    Cocaine
Beer tax                                -0.169**           -0.333**      -0.685**     0.020
                                       (-3.42)            (-3.96)       (-3.93)      (0.28)
Decriminalization                         0.031             0.015         0.044       0.184**
                                         (0.88)            (0.25)        (0.35)      (3.65)
Cocaine price                            -0.002            -0.001         0.00001    -0.004**
                                        (-1.47)           (-0.81)        (0.003)    (-2.80)
Age                                       0.185**           0.296**       0.241**     0.041**
                                       (15.26)           (14.36)         (5.63)      (2.34)
Female                                   -0.607**           -0.936**     -1.594**    -0.338**
                                      (-19.53)           (-17.72)      (-14.52)     (-7.50)
Black                                    -0.408**           -0.295**      1.728**     0.090
                                        (-9.74)            (-4.14)      (11.67)      (1.48)
Hispanic                                  0.024              0.195**      0.175       0.543**
                                         (0.56)             (2.70)       (1.17)      (8.84)
Other race                               -0.349**           -0.514**      0.101        0.450**
                                        (-5.67)            (-4.91)       (0.47)       (5.04)
Smokes                                    0.119**            0.215**      0.437**      0.072**
                                       (68.90)            (73.79)       (72.24)     (28.94)
Seatbelt                                 -0.308**           -0.578**     -0.885**     -0.162**
                                      (-24.65)           (-27.10)      (-20.05)      (-8.97)
Suicide                                   0.450**           0.944**       0.988**     0.458**
                                       (12.71)           (15.69)         (7.91)      (8.94)
Sports                                    0.114**           0.227**      -0.015       0.045**
                                       (11.08)           (12.97)        (-0.42)      (3.04)
Income                                   -0.007**          -0.008**       0.018**    -0.001
                                        (-5.94)           (-3.92)        (4.22)     (-0.47)
Unemployment                             0.061**            0.106**       0.337**     0.110**
                                        (4.47)             (4.61)        (7.05)      (5.61)
Protestant                               0.0002            -0.007*       -0.055**    -0.004
                                        (0.11)            (-2.21)       (-8.67)     (-1.61)
Catholic                                 0.004              0.002        -0.037**    -0.006
                                        (1.54)             (0.55)       (-4.57)     (-1.69)
Southern Baptist                         0.015**            0.031**      -0.030**    -0.00001
                                        (5.03)             (6.12)       (-2.78)     (-0.001)
Mormon                                   0.065**            0.067         0.328**     0.110**
                                        (2.73)             (1.67)        (3.92)      (3.21)
1993                                    -0.068             -0.081         0.920**     0.035
                                       (-1.77)            (-1.23)        (6.76)      (0.62)
1995                                        0.035          0.214*         2.733**     0.247**
                                           (0.69)         (2.49)        (15.34)      (3.38)
Observations                              35,276          34,302         35,498      35,730
R-squared                                   0.20           0.22           0.19        0.04
T-statistics in parentheses and intercept not shown.
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level




                                                    36
