                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    WAGE-SETTING INSTITUTIONS
                                      AS INDUSTRIAL POLICY


                                              Steven J. Davis
                                             Magnus Henrekson


                                             Working Paper 7502
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7502


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        January 2000




The authors gratefully acknowledge generous research support from the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg
Foundation and valuable research assistance from Min-Hwa Chang, Chad Coffman, Dan Johansson, Pavlos
Petroulas, Nina Steinberg and especially Per Thulin. We thank Nils Elvander, Hans De Geer, Svante
Nycander and Bo Sundén for many helpful conversations on Swedish wage-setting arrangements. Per Anders
Edin kindly supplied data on Swedish wage inequality. We have also benefited from the comments of Ulf
Jakobsson and seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, the University of Chicago, the University of
Pennsylvania and the NBER Labor Studies group. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Steven J. Davis and Magnus Henrekson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Wage-Setting Institutions as Industrial Policy
Steven J. Davis and Magnus Henrekson
NBER Working Paper No. 7502
January 2000
JEL No. J23, J51, L50, P52

                                                 ABSTRACT

        Centralized wage-setting institutions compress relative wages. Motivated by this fact, we
investigate the effects of centralized wage setting on the industry distribution of employment. We examine
Sweden’s industry distribution from 1960 to 1994 and compare it to the U.S. distribution over the same
period. We also relate U.S.-Swedish differences in the industry distribution and their evolution over time
to the structure of relative wages between and within industries. The empirical results identify the rise and
fall of centralized wage-setting arrangements as a major factor in the evolution of Sweden’s industry
distribution.
        The compression associated with centralized wage-setting shifted the industry distribution of
Swedish employment in three respects: away from industries with high wage dispersion among workers,
away from industries with a high mean wage, and, most powerfully, away from industries with a low mean
wage. By the middle 1980s, these wage structure effects accounted for about 40 percent of U.S.-Swedish
differences in the industry distribution. The dissolution of Sweden’s centralized wage-setting arrangements
beginning in 1983 led to widening wage differentials and a reversal in the evolution of U.S.-Swedish
differences in industry structure.


Steven J. Davis                                           Magnus Henrekson
The Graduate School of Business                                 Stockholm School of Economics
The University of Chicago                                       and the Research Institute of
1101 E. 58th Street                                             Industrial Economics (IUI)
Chicago, IL 60637                                               Box 6501, SE 11383
and NBER                                                        Stockholm, SWEDEN
sjd@gsbsjd.uchicago.edu                                         magnus.henrekson@hhs.se
