NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF URBAN CONCENTRATION
ON ECONOMIC GROWTH

Vernon Henderson

Working Paper 7503
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2000

Support of the World Bank through a research grant is gratefully acknowledged , as well as support of the
National Science Foundation. The opinions and conclusions in this paper are those of the author and do not
necessarily represent those of the World Bank, the National Bureau of Economic Research or NSF. I thank
Zmarak Shalizi for many helpful discussions. James Davis excelled as a RA on the project. I benefited from
advice from Andrew Foster and David Weil on various aspects of the paper and I benefited in
conceptualizing the problem from early discussions with Shahid Yusuf. I benefited from comments on the
paper by Duncan Black, Jim Davis, Yannis Ioannides, and Will Strange.
© 2000 by Vernon Henderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Urban Concentration on Economic Growth
Vernon Henderson
NBER Working Paper No. 7503
January 2000
JEL No. O1, O4, O57, R1
ABSTRACT
The paper examines whether there is a significant relationship between economic growth and
the degree of urban concentration, as measured by primacy, or the share of the largest metro area in
national urban population. Is there reason to believe many countries have excessive primacy and how
costly is excessive (or insufficient) primacy? Using GMM methods, the paper estimates growth
effects, using a panel of 80-100 countries from 1960 to 1995. It also looks at the determinants of
primacy and policy instruments that might be effective in reducing excessive primacy. The paper
finds that there is a best degree of national urban primacy, which increases sharply up to a per capita
income of about $5000 (PPP 1987 income), before declining modestly. The best degree of primacy
declines with country scale. Error bands about estimated best degrees of primacy are generally tight.
Growth losses from significantly non-optimal concentration are large and rise with income. Results
are very robust. In a group of 72 countries in 1990, it appears that at least 24 have satisfactory
primacy; at least 24 have significantly excessive primacy; and at least 5 countries have too little.
What determines urban concentration? Econometric models show that urban concentration
initially rises with income and then peaks around an income of $2400, before declining. Openness,
or trade effects are modest. Similarly, the effects of a greater degree of political decentralization
while significantly reducing urban concentration are quite modest. The key policy type variable
affecting concentration is investment in inter-regional transport infrastructure. In particular, increases
in the density of road networks significantly reduce primacy, with the effect rising with income. As
a policy consideration, this takes heightened importance because growth losses from excessive
primacy tend to rise with income. The effect on growth rates of investment in roads, through its
effect on primacy, is highest in middle income countries.
J. Vernon Henderson
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
j_henderson@brown.edu

Urbanization and economic growth in developing countries go hand-in-hand. The
simple correlation coefficient across countries between the percent urbanized in a country and
GDP per capita (in logs) is about 0.85. The reason is clear. Economic development involves
the transformation of a country from an agricultural based economy to an industrial-service
based economy. Production of manufacturing and services is much more efficient when
concentrated in dense business-industrial districts in cities. Close spatial proximity, or high
density, promotes information spillovers amongst producers, more efficiently functioning
labor markets, and savings in the transport costs of parts and components exchange among
producers and of sales to local residents. The existence and considerable magnitude of
localized scale externalities is well documented empirically (Henderson (1988), Ciccone and
Hall (1995), Glaeser et al. (1992)). The transport savings component of high density is
central to the new economic geography literature (Fujita, Krugman, and Venables (1999)) and
is starting to be documented, especially for face-to-face transactions costs in services (Kolko
(1999)).
While national policies can retard or accelerate urbanization rates, the concern in this
paper is not with urbanization per se, but rather with the form urbanization takes. By form, I
mean the degree of urban concentration. At any point in time, given a country's level of
urbanization, resources may be spread too thinly/evenly across cities with
insufficient concentration in certain cities to exploit the economies of scale in production
which were cited above. Alternatively, resources may be over-concentrated in one or two
excessively large cities, raising commuting, congestion, and living costs to excessive levels,
raising costs of production of goods and lowering the quality of urban service provision. The
implication is that there is an optimal degree of urban concentration, achieved by trading-off
the social marginal benefits and costs of increasing urban concentration. Either over or underconcentration, as we will see, is very costly in terms of economic efficiency and national
growth rates.
There is also a dynamic component to this discussion of optimal urban concentration.
In the development literature (Williamson (1965)), as adapted to an urban context in Hansen
(1990)), a high degree of urban concentration in the early stages of economic development is
viewed as essential to efficiency. By spatially concentrating industrialization, often in coastal
cities, the economy conserves on “economic infrastructure” – physical infrastructure capital
(transport and telecommunications) and managerial resources. Such spatial concentration also
1

enhances information spillovers at a time when the economy is "information deficient" and it
may similarly enhance knowledge accumulation (Lucas (1988), Black and Henderson
(1999)). As development proceeds, eventually deconcentration becomes efficient for two
reasons. The economy can afford to spread economic infrastructure and knowledge resources
to hinterland areas. Second, the cities of initial high concentration become high cost,
congested locations that are less efficient locations for producers and consumers.1 On the
positive, empirical side, Wheaton and Shishido (1981) find the pattern of first increasing and
then decreasing urban concentration across countries as income rises, a result consistent with
findings of regional convergence within countries over time.
Whatever the best degree of urban concentration at any point in time, there is a
presumption in the literature, both that countries have a tendency to urban over-concentration,
and that urban over-concentration is costly to economic growth. The Williamson initial
concentration process proceeds too far and deconcentration is delayed too long. There are
three strands to the literature. The theoretical urban literature argues that, at any point in time,
the various city sizes across the economy will only be efficient if national land development
markets work perfectly (Henderson (1974), Becker and Henderson (1999)). That perfect
working requires new cities to be able to form freely, usually through the initiative of largescale land developers and local governments, in a context where there are strong institutions
governing land markets and contracts and there is complete local fiscal autonomy. If these
conditions are not in place, cities will be oversized, resulting in excessive urban concentration
(as in a self-organized world (Fujita et al. (1999)) where no developers/local governments act
to aid the development of cities). In all models, having under-sized cities does not constitute
a stable equilibrium; cities are either efficient-sized or over-sized.2 Caveats are that efficient
city size is defined for a given level of technology and amenities and cities are assumed to
efficiently subsidize industrial location so as to internalize local scale externalities. If

1

Deconcentration occurs by manufacturing moving first from the core cities of large metro areas to nearby
satellite cities, and then into hinterland cities, where wage and land costs are much lower. The initial large metro
areas typically switch into more service-oriented production (financial, business, engineering and management,
education, and health services). As the satellite cities and hinterlands industrialize, they increasingly become the
locations of choice for migrants. Growth rates of the very largest cities tend to slow, while those of medium and
large size cities continue unabated. Indeed in developing countries worldwide, the population growth rate of
metro areas over 5m is a half that of metro areas in the 0.5m range (WDR 2000, Table 6.3).

2

Any city of the same type which is a little larger than an under-sized one will attract resources from the undersized city, since it is not exploiting scale economies sufficiently.
2

technology is relatively deficient in a city or local externalities are not fully internalized, a
city can be too small relative to its efficient size in a better equilibrium.
The second strand of the literature tries to assess the costs and benefits of increasing
city sizes (Tolley, Gardner, and Graves (1979) and Richardson (1987)). Tolley et al.’s
empirical work tends to suggest that in large cities the social marginal costs of increasing city
population exceed the marginal benefits and such cities are over-sized. Richardson (1987)
focuses on the investment cost side. Based on work on Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, and
Pakistan, he argues that the social investment costs of absorbing an extra family in typical
large urban areas are threefold that of rural areas, and even more for the largest city in a
country. As related evidence on private costs, UN data for 1996 on metro area rents and
commuting costs for a sample of 80-100 cities across 15-20 countries world-wide suggest
that, if urban area sizes increase from 25,000 to 2.5 million, commuting and rent costs each
rise by 115% (Henderson (1999b)). This literature tends to presume that the social marginal
benefits of moving a family to large urban areas don’t justify the various costs, implying these
cities are over-sized.
The final strand of literature (Renaud (1981), Henderson (1988), Ades and Glaeser
(1995)) argues that often the political institutions in countries encourage over-concentration.
The idea is that, in many countries, there is a lack of a level playing field across cities. The
national government can choose to favor one (or two) cities over others. Typically such cities
are national capitals (Bangkok, Mexico City, Jakarta, or Seoul, not to mention Paris); but they
may also be a Sao Paulo, the seat of national elites. Such favoritism can involve the
allocation of local public services in favor of national capitals, where decision-makers live.
That problem can be exacerbated if hinterland cities do not have the power to determine their
own public service levels, either because of a unitary national constitution or because local
autonomy has been suspended (as in Korea from 1961 to the 1990’s).
Favoritism can take the form of the national government choosing not to invest
sufficiently in interregional transport and telecommunications, so that hinterland cities are less
competitive locations for private producers. That favors producers and investors (who may
include national politicians) in the national capital. Favoritism, as in Indonesia (Henderson
and Kuncoro (1996) and Kaiser (1999)), can also take the form of restrictions in capital
markets, export/import markets, and licensing of production rights, all favoring firms which
locate in the national capital. This allows central bureaucrats and politicians to extract rents in
3

the allocation of loans and licenses, without competition from lower ranked bureaucrats in
other locations. Finally, there may be an “innocent” bias towards locating production in the
city that national decision- makers are most informed about – perhaps they believe such
constraints are efficient.
All analyses tell us favored cities are oversized with attendant efficiency losses for the
country. Migrants and firms flow to a favored city, until it becomes so congested and costly
to live in, that these costs offset the advantages of the favoritism. Moreover, the excessive
resources devoted to one or two favored cities detract from the quality of life in the rest of the
urban system. In Henderson (1999b), based on the UN data set for 80-100 cities in 1996
worldwide, I show that high urban concentration in a nation increases child mortality, pupilteacher ratios, use of non-potable water and other poor quality of life dimensions in typical
medium size metro areas, after accounting for size, income, and growth differences among
cities. For example, a one-standard deviation increase in the national urban concentration
measure raises child mortality in typical cities by 1/3 of a standard deviation of the child
mortality rate across cities in the sample. So the costs of excessive urban concentration are
felt throughout the whole urban system, not just in very large cities.
Apart from analyses and empirical work in economics, international agencies also take
the view that many of the world’s mega-cities are over-populated, at considerable cost to
those economies. The UN (1993) asks how bad “the negative factors associated with very
large cities” need to get “before [it is in the] self-interest of those in control to encourage
development of alternative centers.” The same report warns of “unbalanced urban
hierarchies” and the crime, congestion, and social inequality in mega-cities. Some World
Bank work (Renaud (1981)) echoes these concerns and articulates the over-size bias. Even in
the US, the popular press has noted the competitiveness of medium-size metro areas for most
economic activity, compared to the very largest metro areas (1-5-99 N.Y. Times, Business
section, p. 1).
This paper has three objectives:
1) Using data on economic growth and urban-concentration in five-year intervals from 19601995 for samples of 80-100 countries, the paper will examine the relationship between
urban concentration and economic growth, at different stages of economic development in
different size countries. If urban concentration really is an issue, then it ought to
affect economic growth rates in a robust, consistent fashion. The basic notions are:
4

a) In any economy there are initial gains in economic growth rates from increasing
concentration from low levels, but these gains peak, and further increases in urban
concentration bring losses. That is, there is, hypothetically, a best degree of urban
concentration.
b) Following Williamson-Hansen, the best degree of urban concentration initially
increases as a country starts to grow from very low income levels. But, then, with
further growth the desired degree of urban concentration declines.
c) The desired degree of urban concentration in general declines with country size.
d) While many countries seem to operate beyond the point of desired concentration,
some do not.
2) The paper will examine the determinants of urban concentration in a country. The degree
of urban concentration is determined by the stage of development and the country’s size,
as well as by institutions and national political processes. I will explore the role of
institutions, in particular the degree of federation, or political decentralization in the
country. The political economy literature suggests that increased regional representation
and autonomy decreases centralization (WDR 2000). I will also explore the effect of
policy outcomes, such as degree of openness to trade, investment in inter-regional
infrastructure, and the role of national capitals. Investment in interregional infrastructure
may decrease urban concentration, because hinterland areas become more competitive.
3) If urban concentration in many countries appears excessive and, for those countries, a
deterrent to growth, what is the policy prescription? Of course, there are simple economic
reforms that level the playing field across firms, people, and space, which would directly
and indirectly (through reducing urban concentration) help growth. Quite apart from
general economic liberalization, the paper will argue that investment in inter-regional
transport infrastructure is a key policy instrument which, at the appropriate stage of
economic development, would directly reduce concentration and thus indirectly
substantially help spur economic growth.
In implementing this study, a key issue concerns how to measure urban concentration.
While it would be desirable to use a Hirschman-Herfindahl type index based on the sum of
squared shares of every city in a country in national urban population, such data are not
available over the time period. What is available and what is utilized (e.g., Ades and Glaeser
(1995)) is urban primacy – measured here as the share of the largest city in national urban
5

population. While this could be a crude measure, because such shares are typically very
large, primary measures tend to be closely correlated with Hirschman-Herfindahl indices
(Henderson (1999a)). Since Hirschman-Herfindahl indices contain squared shares, they tend
to be dominated by the largest share if that is a high number (e.g., 0.25). Average primacy in
our sample, over countries and years is .30. This idea of close correlation is also supported by
evidence on Zipf's Law (Gabaix (1999)). Within countries when we rank cities from largest
(rank 1) to smallest, rank times population size is approximately the same constant for all
cities. Thus the size of the largest city in the country defines all other city sizes and is
sufficient information to calculate any comparative index of national urban concentration.
The issue I see in using urban primacy is not one of measurement, but rather, that the
growth results in this paper could be used to proscribe city sizes. There is no question that,
later in the paper, when I talk about a best degree of urban primacy (i.e., concentration) in a
country of a given size and income level, that such a number could be translated into a
population number for the largest city. However, that is not the point of this paper, per se.
The paper is using primacy just as a general concentration index. But in thinking about
specific primate city sizes, there will be error bands on the best size, which give a range of
acceptable city sizes. These error bands reflect the fact that optimal city size depends on both
measured and unmeasured specifics of a particular city and country– its industrial
composition (or “type” in a national or international hierarchy), its location, and its level of
knowledge or technology. Rather than proscribing city sizes, I identify outliers, or countries
where primate cities lie outside the error bands. And the preferred solution in problem
countries is to free markets and to establish institutional frameworks, so that market city sizes
can approach efficient ones, rather than trying to set city sizes per se. In distorted situations
with poor institutions, unless these distortions and institutions are improved to what might
reasonably be expected for a country's level of economic development, the econometrics don't
really tell us what is the best primate city size. They just tell us something is wrong in the
operation of urban development markets, causing excessive concentration and growth losses.

1. Urban Concentration and Economic Growth
To incorporate considerations of urban concentration into an economic growth
framework, I first review the derivation of a standard empirical growth model (see Durlauf
and Quah (1998) for a nice synthesis of various theoretical and empirical approaches). Output
6

in an economy is usually specified as produced according to an aggregate Cobb-Douglas
function of the form
Y = (K(t))α (A(t) N(t))1-α

(1)

where K(t) is capital, N(t) is labor (proportional to population, with the factor of
proportionality normalized to 1), and A(t) the level of technology. Labor and technology
grow at rates n and g, so N! /N = n, A! /A = g. Capital depreciates at the rate δ, and s is
the fraction of output saved and invested in a Solow model. Finally, output and capital per
effective unit of labor are defined respectively as ŷ = Y/AN and k̂ = K/AN. The steady state
value of k̂ is k̂ * (= (s/(n+g+δ)1/(1-α)), where ŷ * = k̂ *α.
To derive an estimating equation, we can do a linear expansion in natural logs of the
equation of motion (d k̂ /dt = s k̂ α - (n+g+δ) k̂ ) about its steady state value, or we can solve
the equation of motion for ŷ as a function of ŷ * and time and do a linear expansion in
logarithms of that expression for two time periods. Then combining for these two time
periods, t2 and t1, we get
log ŷ (t2) – log ŷ (t1) = (1-e-βτ) log ŷ * – (1-e-βτ) log ŷ (t1)

(2)

where β = (1-α) (n+g+δ) and τ = t2 – t1 > 0.
β is the rate of convergence to the steady state. To convert (2) to observable magnitudes, we
substitute in for ŷ * and for ŷ (t) = y(t)/A(t). The result is

log y(t2) – log y(t1) = - (1-e-βτ) log y(t1) + (1-e-βτ) (α/1-α)
log (s/(δ+n+g)) + (1-e-βτ) log A(t1) + g τ .

(3)

A(t1) is the level of technology. It is more common to write the last two terms as (1-e-βτ) A(0)
+ g (t2 - e-βτ t1). The expression (α/1-α) log (s/(δ+n+g)) can be replaced by a function
f(s/(δ+n+g)) if s is determined in a Cass (1965) optimization framework, rather than set
exogenously.
7

Early empirical work calculated or assumed values of s, δ, n, and g for each
country and estimated equation (3) directly, usually subsuming g τ [g(t2 – e-βτ t1)] into the
constant term and allowing logA(t1) [logA(0)] to be part of the error structure. Later work
acknowledges that (a) RHS variables may not be exogenous to A(t1), (b) magnitudes such as
n or s may only be able to be proxied, (c) δ or g may vary across countries, and (d) the
exact representation in equation (3) assumes Solow savings behavior and approximations
about steady-state values. Later work also incorporates the idea that internal country
institutions and government policies may affect efficiency of the production process. So Barro
(1991, 1997) allows inflation rates and government consumption to inhibit growth. Others
have considered a variety of additional control variables such as civil liberties, exchange rate
distortions, and availability of domestic credit. How to incorporate such considerations into
(3) is not explicitly modeled. They are viewed generally as affecting A(t1) the base
technology and level of efficiency, or g the rate of effective technological advance.
Based on these considerations, in more recent empirical approaches, formulations
typically reduce for country i to
log yi(t2) – log yi(t1) = - (1-e-βτ) log yi(t1) + Xi (t1) γ
+ fi + ηt2 + εit2

(4)

The Xi(t1) are a vector of determinants of country growth rates. My basic growth equation
will specify the Xi(t1) to include the basics in Barro (1991) or Mankiw, Romer and Weil
(1992), including the average investment rate from t1 to t2, the average fertility rate from t1
to t2, and a measure of human capital in t1 -- the average number of years of high school and
college education of the adult population (male and female). In addition, there will be an
expanded model with the average rate of inflation and government consumption from t1 to
t2. Note each five-year time interval in our data for each country will use the investment,
fertility, and other rates for that five years (in essence, ŷ * is a shifting target).
To incorporate urban concentration, I assume that the form which urbanization takes
affects efficiency of the country’s production process. Inefficient urbanization reduces
income levels and growth rates. Attempting to derive explicit growth equations to model
inefficient urbanization in a Black and Henderson (1999) urban-growth framework where
urbanization itself is efficient is an impossible task. Its impossible because (a) to model the
determinants of why there is inefficiency (due to institutional arrangements and government
8

restrictions) appears for now to be impossibly complex and (b) to capture the exact impacts of
these determinants would involve very arbitrary specifications. However, we can use the
framework in (4) to assess in reduced form the effect of certain characteristics of the
urbanization process on growth itself. In modeling the effect of the urban process on growth,
I will use primacy as the only available measure of concentration in the urban system. I tried
a variety of experiments, based on preliminary results that increases in urban concentration
alone are harmful to growth. These experiments are detailed below but they have the general
form

p (primacyi(t1), log yi(t1), scalei(t1))

(5)

where the arguments in p(.) are respectively primacy, income, and country scale.
Equation (4) has an error structure of unmeasured attributes affecting growth. ηt2 are
time dummies representing global shocks, such as global technological advances. fi are time
invariant country characteristics representing geography and culture, and the εit2 are
contemporaneous shocks. Since the data are panel in nature we will be able to deal with the
fact that the fi affect the Xi (t1) and that the εit2 may affect some of the Xi (t1) in the
contemporaneous time period as well as in future time periods. Generally, we will present
OLS, fixed effect, and instrumental variable (GMM) estimates, as detailed below.

Data
The data cover 1960-95 in five-year intervals (i.e., τ = 5). Data on constant dollar
income per capita (Chain index), investment share of GDP, and government consumption
share of GDP (without national defense and education netted out) are from the Penn World
Tables Mark 5.6. Data on inflation rates and total fertility rate (children per women) are from
the World Bank’s World Development Indicators [WDI]. Data on average years of high
school and college education of the adult (over 25) population are from Barro and Lee (1996).
Population data on total population, urban population and primacy (population of the largest
metro area/national urban population) are from the UN World Urbanization Prospects, Tables
A12, A.5 and A3. Other data sources will be cited as data are introduced and I footnote all

9

relevant sources here.3 Means and standard deviations of all variables are given in Table A3
in the Appendix.
For growth between t1 and t2 (e.g., 1990 and 1995), for investment share, fertility
rate, inflation, and government consumption, the Xit1 are the annual average rates over t2-1
to t1 (e.g., 1990-94). The Penn World Tables only go to 1992. Missing data to 1994 or 1995
(including 1995 income) are filled in using the WDI numbers. For example, 1995 income per
capita is projected by growing the Penn World Tables constant 1992 income by WDI numbers
on annual income growth from 1992-1995. Amongst missing observations are data on
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, USSR, and West Germany for 1995, with 1960-90 data defined
for these country entities as they existed in 1990.

Econometric Implementation
OLS estimation of equation (4) (augmented by 5 when appropriate) pools all countryyears and allows for time fixed effects (ηt2). Country fixed effect estimates control for the fi.
The remaining problem is that the contemporaneous error term εit2 affecting growth from t1
to t2 may be correlated with investment and fertility rates from t1 to t2, although all other
base period variables in equation (4) are considered exogenous to that growth period (i.e.,
predetermined). However there may be cross period correlation so that base period variables
such as income, education, primacy or scale may be correlated with the εit1 from the prior
growth period. To deal with these problems I instrument in GMM estimation of differenced
level equations (4).
Specifically, the estimating equation for any year, assuming a sequence of periods t0,
t1, t3, … is

3

Barro, R.J., and J.W.Lee, International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling Quality online data, World
Bank Economic Growth Research Group, Washington D.C.: World Bank, 1996;
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), World Factbook, Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office, various
years;
Freedom House, Freedom in the World, New York: Freedom House, various years.;
International Road Federation (IRF), World Road Statistics, Washington D.C.: International Road Federation,
various years;
Summers, R., and A. Heston, Penn World Table Mark 5.6 revision of Summers and Heston (1991) online data,
Computing in the Humanities and Social Sciences (CHASS), Toronto: University of Toronto, 1995;
United Nations, World Urbanization Prospects: The 1996 Revision, United Nations Population Division,
Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis, New York, 1996;
and
World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI) on CD-Rom, Washington D.C.: World Bank, 1998.
10

(log yi (t3) – log yi (t2)) – (log yi (t2) – log yi (t1)) = - (1-e-βτ)(log yi (t2) – log yi (t1))
+ (Xi (t2) – Xi (t 1)) γ + (ηt3 - ηt2) + (εit3 - εit2)

(6)

The fixed effects are differenced out. For X’s which are in the form of rate variables going
from t2 to t3-1 for example, εit3 may be correlated with Xi (t2). For base period variables,
given differencing, εit2 should be correlated with Xi (t2). We instrument with predetermined
values of variables (e.g., for rate variables, the average rate from t0 to t1 –1, t-1 to t0 –1 and
so on and for base period variables, values for t1, t0, t-1 and so on back). I also experimented
with other instrumenting strategies and specifications, getting similar results.4 The εit are
assumed to be serially uncorrelated, although by differencing, the error terms in (6) are
serially correlated between any two adjacent time periods.
In estimation, the number of equation-years is Ti-2, where Ti is the length of the
panel (which may vary by country). One year is lost in differencing and one in instrumenting.
Equation years are pooled constraining slope coefficients across years to be the same,
accounting for year-to-year serial correlation. Unbalanced panels estimated in DPD98
(Arellano and Bond (1991)) are utilized. The two-step estimation procedure utilizes a (within
year) heteroskedastic consistent estimate of the covariance matrix of moments. Instruments
are all predetermined values of right-hand side variables, when DPD will accommodate them.
In models with many right-hand side variables, sometimes I trim the instrument list, but the
minimum is two periods of predetermined values. The assumptions on serial correlation are
tested and hold (strongly) in all estimations (there is first-order serial correlation in
differences, but none in levels, so there is no second-order correlation in differences). Sargan

4

Why should predetermined values as instruments tell us about current changes in variables, outside the error
structure of the estimating equation? There must be other processes in the economy not directly affecting growth
that drive both predetermined variables and their current changes. Here for example, specifics of demographic
structures and schooling enrollment rates of females and males help determine levels and changes in savings and
fertility rates. Similarly items that affect primacy but not directly growth (see next section), such as the degree of
political decentralization or specific infrastructure configurations help determine both changes in and past levels
of primacy. I experimented with instrumenting with determinants of education levels, investment and primacy
(see next section of the paper). These included growth in the young and old populations, growth in female and
male high school and higher education enrollment rates, change in labor force participation, population growth,
change in openness, and change in road density, while restricting other instruments to be only the exogenous
(predetermined) variables in eq. (6), for just that equation year. Results are very similar to what I obtain below.
Finally I estimated the equations in level form, using predetermined changes in RHS variables as instruments.
Results with this approach are weaker, but the sign patterns of coefficients in the complex expressions below are
the same, with similar implications. Estimation results are extremely robust.
11

tests on overidentifying restrictions are conducted, in part to assess the validity (exogeneity to
the equation year) of the instrument lists.

Results for Basic Growth Formulation
I first examine the basic growth model without primacy consideration. I have a
stripped down version consistent with Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992), Islam (1995) and
Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort (1996). Mankiw, Romer and Weil and then a more expanded
version such as Barro (1997) utilizes. Since the data set is very extensive, and since the
estimation technique accounts for endogeneity problems that are often ignored or poorly
accounted for in the literature, I comment on fundamental growth issues. Results for the two
specifications are given in Table 1, for the three estimation methods.
Results are given in Table 1. I start with a discussion of column 1 results, which don't
include the Barro variables. My discussion focuses on the OLS and GMM results, with fixed
effect results reported for those who are interested. Note the dependent variable is in fiveyear intervals. The coefficients on base period GDP per capita give the usual pattern (see
Caselli et al. (1996)), with slow speeds of convergence (1.4%) for OLS, but much faster
speeds under GMM (5.7%), or fixed effects. For other variables and coefficients, I follow the
typical procedure of assessing the effect on growth rates of changes in variables. These effects
could be more strictly interpreted as effects on steady state income levels with respect to
changes in the associated variables. This is done by dividing by the convergence factor, the
coefficient on base period income.
The annual average rate of investment raises growth. A one-standard deviation (8)
increase in the investment rate for a coefficient of .007 raises average annual growth rates by
about 1% point. Fertility has a negative effect but its magnitude and significance is sensitive
to specification. But again, a one-standard deviation (.5) increase in its magnitude lowers
growth rates by 1% also, for a coefficient of 0.1. For average years of schooling, OLS results
(and fixed effect ones) are insignificant. But under GMM, results are significant and very
strong. A one-standard deviation (1.1) increase in average years of schooling raises annual
growth rates by 1.5%, for a coefficient of .07.
It appears GMM and OLS results are different for key variables. Speeds of
convergence are much higher under GMM and knowledge accumulation effects are made

12

stronger. Given the difference GMM makes and the strong case for using it, I tend to rely on
those results. Below I report OLS and fixed effect results only for "best" specifications.
For Barro’s policy variables, in column 2 results government consumption rates and
inflation hurt growth, as he finds. A one-standard deviation (7) increase in the government
consumption rate lowers annual growth by 1.4% under GMM but only 0.3% under OLS. For
inflation, a one-standard deviation increase reduces growth by .2%, for a coefficient of
.00007. The standard results are sensitive to inclusion of Barro’s variables – convergence
speed rises noticeably. Inclusion of these variables also reduces sample sizes (missing
observations). Sometimes people insert the degree of openness of the economy, treating it as a
policy rather than outcome variable. Here, openness (see later) produces a significant positive
and large effect (with little impact on other coefficients and none on the primacy specification
below). A one standard deviation increase in the degree of openness raises annual growth
rates by over 3 %. In the primacy results to follow, which have complex interactions, to
conserve sample size, I report results without these variables. However, I will note the basic
effect of including these extra variables.

Effects of Urban Concentration on Growth
In estimation urban concentration has a complex relationship to growth, as anticipated
in the more conceptual literature. As expected from the urban agglomeration literature, too
little urban concentration is bad, as is too much concentration, so there is a best degree of
urban concentration. However, as Williamson-Hansen anticipate, what is too little or too
much changes with income. Initially, the best urban concentration point rises from low
income. But then at some higher income level, the best degree peaks and then starts to
decline with further income increases. Finally, we expect the best degree of urban
concentration to decline with country size, other things being equal.
In terms of functional representation of the effect of urban concentration, or primacy
interacted with income and country size, this is beyond a second-order Taylor series
expansion. To limit terms and yet to capture what the literature suggests, I include only
essential terms. I do three versions of equation (5), in increasing degree of complexity. The
results for all these versions are robust to precise choice of instrumental variables, other
independent variables, measures of national scale, sample of countries, etc. This robustness

13

and the precision of results took me by surprise. They convinced me that these results are
"very real": the form of urbanization has profound effects on economic growth rates.
First is to show that the effects of urban concentration vary with economic
development, to (4) I add terms
+ primacyi(t1) [δ0 + δ1 log yi(t1) + δ2 (log yi(t1))2].

(5a)

In (5a), I expect δ1 > 0 and δ2 < 0, so that the positive effects of primacy initially increase
with income, up to a certain income level. Then with further increases in income, primacy
becomes increasingly harmful. This is the basic Williamson hypothesis. A more
sophisticated version recognizes the basic urban economics result that there can be too little or
too much urban concentration at any income level. Then in (5b) we have
+ primacyi (ti) [δ0 + δ1 log yi (t1) + δ2 (log yi (t1))2]
(5b)
+ (primacyi (t1))2 [δ4 + δ5 log yi (t1) + δ6 (log yi (t1))2]

In (5b), I anticipate the first bracketed expression will be positive and the second negative.
This captures the initial urban concentration benefits as scale economies are exploited, which
then peak and are followed by losses from further concentration. While (5b) is a complex
relationship and a simpler specification (e.g., δ5, δ6 = 0 ) might capture essentials, the more
complex relationship is strongly significant. Finally, we can recognize that the effects of
urban concentration may also vary with country scale. To do that, inside either the first or
both square brackets in (5b), I add a log(scalei (t1)) term, with other δ coefficients.
Results are given in Table 2. I discuss just the GMM results (where coefficients are
more precisely estimated). OLS and fixed effect results are reported in columns 5-6, for the
specification on which I focus most of the discussion. In the first specification in column 1,
from equation (5a), the effects of primacy vary with income. In this expression, in estimation
in Table 2, as expected δ1 > 0 and δ2 < 0, so as income rises initially that works to make
increases in urban concentration either helpful or, at least, less harmful. In the GMM
estimates in column 1 the (log) income point which maximizes any positive effect of primacy
on growth (- δ1/(2δ2)) equals 6.8, which is a GDP per capita (1987 PPP$) of about $1000.
14

However at this point the whole expression in square brackets in equation (5a) is still
negative. That means increases in concentration are always harmful, just less so around a
GDP per capita of $1000. But this specification doesn't allow there to be too much or too
little urban concentration. Column 2 captures that. In column 2, I estimate equation (5b),
when there is a quadratic primacy specification, where both terms are interacted with income
(in quadratics). In the results, as anticipated initial increases in primacy are good, but there is
a peak, or best point. Second, that point changes with income. Results for the column 2
specification are given in Table A1 of the Appendix. They are very similar to our primary
results in column 4.
For the column 4 results, I lastly account for country size effects, where we expect the
optimal degree of primacy to decline as country scale increases. I estimate equation (5b)
adding in a country scale term, as measured by log (national urban population). Column 3
shows results with scale interacted with both primacy and primacy squared. Since the term
with primacy squared is not significant at the 5% level, in column 4, I report results when
scale is only interacted with primacy. Results discussed in the text are based on column 4
coefficients and that is the specification for which I report OLS and fixed effect results.
Results on best primacy points for column 3 coefficients in Table 2 are in Table A2 of the
Appendix. These results, with the strong quadratic form to scale effects, produce noticeable
regions of low income-scale space where we have no identifiable best concentration level.
However, they may give a better sense of best primacy for larger countries. I also
experimented with adding to the primacy terms the interaction between income and scale, but
it is not significant.

Excessive Urban Concentration and Its Costs.
There are two sets of outcomes from the estimates in column 4 of Table 2. First, for
the point estimates, in Table 3, I calculate (1) what the best primacy value is at different
income and country scale levels, (2) what the standard error is for that point calculated
applying the delta method to the best primacy point function, and (3) what the gain in annual
growth rate is in moving from one standard deviation above (or, below) the best point, to the
best point. In the second set of results later on, I examine which countries tend to have
excessive concentration levels.
15

In Table 3 the best primacy points, standard errors, and growth losses of excessive
urban concentration are calculated for different income values and different national urban
scales (8 million urban population, 22 million and 100 million). For these calculations, I use a
standard deviation of primacy of 0.11, (lower than the overall standard deviation of 0.15, but
more consistent with the sub-groups being identified (by income and below by population and
income)). Note that income is purchasing power parity, so countries like India and
Bangladesh both have incomes in excess of $1400 in 1995. Examples of countries at each
income level in the 1990's are given in the table.
Table 3 indicates that the best primacy value does increase with income up to about
$4900 and then it declines. But, for a wide interval ($1800 - $8100+), the best value changes
little. The loss from excessive primacy is distinctly lower up to about $3000 and then peaks in
the middle income ranges of $5000 - $10000, before declining modestly. In Table 3, these
growth losses at a given income level don't vary with country scale. From the calculations
based on Table 2 column 3 coefficients, Table A2 results in the Appendix suggest they do
vary with country scale, declining modestly as country scale rises.
A key result is that the income losses, at any income level, of excessive concentration
are substantial. The point estimates suggest losses in annual (percentage) growth rates of
income of up to 1.5. With annual percentage growth rates over the time period across
countries averaging a little over two, these are very large losses. Alternatively viewed, they
are of similar magnitude to the effect on growth of a one standard deviation increase in human
capital or in the investment rate. They suggest that the concerns in the literature concerning
the national resources potentially squandered due to excessive urban concentration are valid.
In Figure 1, I graph this primacy, growth, and income relationship, showing the
marginal effect on 5-year growth rates of different income-primacy pairs, for a small-medium
size country. The size is 13400 urban residents, the anti-log of the mean log(scale) (which is
considerably less than the mean of scale itself). Part A shows the three dimensional
relationship, indicating the quadratic effect of primacy on growth and its quadratic
relationship to income. The latter implies, although it is visually hard to read, that the best
primacy point varies with income. In part B, to clarify, I graph the growth-primacy quadratic
relationship, showing how the best primacy point first shifts out as income rises and then
modestly shifts back.

16

In terms of other results in Table 3, for any income level, as expected, the best
concentration level falls with country size. Second, the error bands on best primacy values
once income rises above $1400 are quite tight, which will allow us to better next identify
countries with significantly too little or too much primacy.
To further illustrate the point, in Part B of Table 3 for hypothetical low, medium, and
high income countries, I examine growth losses from excessive primacy for a medium-size
country (22 million urban residents) from Table 2, column 4 estimates. I assign average
realized growth rates over 1960-1995 to the group with excessive primacy (best primacy
levels plus 1 (within group) standard deviation of primacy: 0.11). Note this value of
excessive primacy falls outside the 95% error bands on best primacy values for the reported
size-income pairs. For best primacy countries I add in the differential growth, attributable to
improved primacy. Growth losses both absolutely (in annual growth rate points) and
relatively (between poor and best primacy countries) rise with income levels. For a low
income country over or under concentration reduces growth rates by 0.9 from 5.8, while in a
high income country the reduction is 1.6 from 3.6.
The quantitative, but not qualitative results in Tables 2 and 3 can vary somewhat with
choice of covariates. An obvious question, given the quadratic form to income we use to
interact with primacy variables, concerns whether a quadratic income term alone is itself
significant. Such a variable has a zero coefficient, with no influence on any other results. If I
replace national urban population with national population as the scale measure, results on
best primacy points are very similar to those in Table 2. However the region of income-scale
pairs where increases in primacy are always harmful enlarges considerably. Similarly, the
fixed effect results in column 6 of Table 2 relative to those in columns 3 or 4 suggest larger
regions of parameter space where primacy is always harmful and even lower best primacy
points. If I add in Barro’s inflation and government consumption variables or I add in the
degree of openness to trade, the sign patterns and magnitudes of primacy and all its
interaction effects are unchanged. I don't rely on a Barro specification because the variable list
is so long that the GMM procedure in DPD98 can only utilize instrument lists for one period
(versus at least two prior periods of values), reducing the efficiency of estimation. Finally, as
footnoted earlier, substantially altering the instrument list has no pronounced effect on results.
Other general comments on the results in Table 2 are that with primacy under GMM,
speeds of convergence are even higher than in Table 1. For average income and primacy,
17

annual speeds of convergence are 10-15%! Most other variables maintain similar results to
those in Table 1, with fertility and schooling displaying some sensitivity to specification. I
also note that variables considered in the analysis of primacy below such as the degree of
federalism, or political decentralization, and the density of transport infrastructure have no
significant direct effects on growth.

Who Has Excessive Urban Concentration?
Which and how many countries operate with substantially excessive urban
concentration? I have 79 countries and examine their situation in 1990. In 1990, seven of
these countries have missing data, so we looking at 72 countries. I calculate from column 4 in
Table 2 the best primacy level for each country, given country income and urban population
in 1990. Then, I compare it with actual 1990 primacy. In Table 4, I define a country as
having too much or too little primacy if it is more than two standard deviations above or
below the best primacy point for that country. If it is within two standard deviations, I say it
has satisfactory primacy. I then list the countries which fall into each category, if they meet an
additional criterion which is that they do not contradict results from Table 2, column 3 (see
the footnote in the table). Also, countries in Table 4 in parentheses are those for which Table
2 column 3 results suggest increases in primacy are always harmful. In naming the names, I
want to restrict consideration to countries that meet multiple criteria for the category to which
they are assigned!
There are 30 countries with satisfactory urban concentration. Examples of countries
with satisfactory urban concentration in 1990, include federal countries such as USA, Canada,
Australia, and New Zealand. Six of the countries with satisfactory primacy appear to have
more excessive primacy (at least .08 above the best primacy point) under column 3 results
(Ghana, Honduras, Indonesia, Mexico, Philippines, and Zimbabwe). There are 24 countries
under the basic column 4 results with excessive urban concentration, which is 34% of the
countries with best identifiable primacy points in 1990. The list with highly excessive
primacy includes the usual suspects – Latin American countries such as Argentina, Panama,
Costa Rica, and Chile, Asian countries such as Korea and Thailand, African countries such as
Congo, and European countries like Greece, Portugal and Ireland. Many are countries with
more explicitly unitary governments, or where federal structures have been severely
constrained traditionally.
18

Finally, based on Table 2 column 4 coefficients, there are also a substantial number of
countries--16-- with too little primacy and two where there is no identified best primacy level.
However Table 2 column 3 results contradict this finding of too little primacy in eleven cases,
suggesting primacy is satisfactory (or, even potentially excessive--Brazil) in those cases
(Brazil, Bulgaria, W. Germany, Italy, Poland, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
U.K., Venezuela). So I list examples of five countries with too little primacy. These include
Belgium (a small, split country) and special cases such as the former Yugoslavia and
Czechoslovakia or such as Malaysia with Singapore carved off.

2. Determinants of Urban Concentration
What are the determinants of urban concentration? Urban concentration is not a growth
process converging to some steady-state value. Rather it is expected to differ across time and
countries with country size and level of economic development. In particular, given the
growth results on “best primacy” and the literature which suggests those results, I expect
urban concentration to initially increase as income rises, to peak, and then to decline with
further increases in income. I also expect urban concentration to decline with country scale –
national urban population. One would also expect urban concentration might be lower in
countries with large land areas, where resources are spread out. Or it may be higher if the
primate city is a port, benefiting from international trade.
Apart from these natural market, scale, and geographic features, urban concentration will
be influenced by policy/institutional variables. For example, urban concentration would be
expected to decrease as the degree of federalism in a country increases. Federalism tends to
level the playing field for competition across cities. Hinterland states and cities have more
autonomy to provide their own services and infrastructure investments so as to attract firms
and workers from primate cities. Similarly, if the primate city is a national capital, that may
increase urban concentration, given tendencies of national governments to favor their national
capitals with special services and infrastructure investments.
Alternatively, or in addition to institutional measures such as federalism, we can look
at measures of interregional transport infrastructure investments that open up coastal markets
to hinterland producers. We have measures of the density of national navigable waterways
(which don’t really change over the time period) and measures of the density of the national
road system. Such investments are expected to lower urban concentration.
19

Finally, as a reflection of policies, there is the degree of imports plus exports in GDP.
The expected impact of increased openness on urban concentration is ambiguous. On the one
hand, given primate cities may be coastal ports and/or centers of international commerce,
increases in openness may favor the primate city. On the other hand, following the new
economic geography literature (Fujita, et al. (1999)), increases in openness may open up
international markets to hinterland producers and allow them to compete more effectively
with primate cities. We will see what the empirical evidence suggests.

Specification and Data
Urban concentration in country i in time t is specified as
Primacyi (t) = a + Xi (t) B + f i + ηt + εit

(10)

The Xi (t) are covariates suggested in the above discussion, fi a country fixed effect, ηt a
time dummy and εit a contemporaneous error term. In final specifications, I use a mix of
lagged covariates Xi (t-1), and contemporaneous ones, as explained below. In estimating
(10), I start with OLS. But under OLS the Xi (t) are not likely to be exogenous to the fixed
fi, or even the εit. Accordingly, following the growth econometric implementation, I first
difference (10) to get
Primacyi (t) – Primacyi (t-1) = (Xi (t) – Xi (t-1)) B + (ηt - ηt-1) + (εit εit-1) (11)

Equation (11) is estimated by GMM, where each differenced time period is a separate
equation – year, with the β coefficients constrained to be equal across time periods. Xi (t-2),
Xi (t-3) and so on backwards in time are used as instruments (along with national land area).
Estimated equations pass Sargan test with flying colors, but there is some evidence of second
degree serial correlation implying level error terms (e.g., εit and εit-1) are correlated. I
presume any such correlation is moving average serial correlation, but there could be a
problem that the underlying stochastic process may be more complicated. Also, in general, the
results on the primacy equation estimation are much less robust, than those for the growth
equation; and this section should be read with that in mind.

20

To recover the effects of time invariant variables in (10) from GMM estimations, I
regress the residuals (Primacyi (t) – Xi (t) B̂ ) on a constant term, time dummies, and the
variables. I treat national land area, kilometers of navigable waterways, and whether the
primate city is a port or national capital as time invariant and exogenous. Enough countries
have each permutation of national capital or not and port or not to identify separate port and
capital effects. In the sample estimating period, no country changes whether the primate city
is a port or not and only two countries have the primate city change whether it is a national
capital or not. The assumption that these time-invariant variables are exogenous is of course a
stretch. A variety of unmeasured time invariant country characteristics may influence choice
of capital or historical determination of waterways. So the results from the residuals
regressions are only suggestive.
In terms of data, for the additional variables to the previous section, openness
((exports plus imports)/GNP) is from the Penn World Tables. For transport, I have (time
invariant) kilometers of navigable waterways from the CIA World Factbook and time varying
kilometers of roads (motorways, autobahns, highways, and main national, secondary and
regional roads) from the International Road Federation supplemented by CIA data, for 1967
and 1970-1995. Both measures are divided by national land area. Given I control for national
urban population and given per person road investments are much higher in rural areas, I am
presuming the variation in national road densities should capture investments in interregional
road systems. I also measured transport infrastructure by highway density, but the definition
of this variable is much less consistent across countries. Results are quite similar and I
footnote them.
Finally, a federalism variable was constructed for all countries over 10 million
population in 1990, with the variable having values for 1960-1995. The index increases from
zero to four representing increasing degrees of local autonomy. The index is based on nine
categories. For the first four, countries get a value of either zero or four if (1) the government
structure is officially unitary or federal (2) the regional executive is not elected or elected (3)
the municipal government is not elected or elected and (4) the national government can
suspend local or regional governments or not. Categories 5 [and 6] take values zero, two, or
four if provincial and local governments have no revenue raising [expenditure] authority,
limited authority, or more complete authority. Categories 7, 8, and 9 for primary education,
infrastructure provision and policy give values from 0-4 depending on whether provision is
21

entirely central, mixes of central, regional, and local, or all local. These values are averaged
for each country across the nine [or fewer where relevant] categories. A second index was
constructed on just the first six categories. I report results for the second index, since
information on categories 7-9 is noisy. But results for the two are very similar.

Results
I present the urban concentration results in Table 5 in subsections: (a) results with
economic-geography variables (b) results for institutional/political variables and (c) results
on policy variables such as openness and transport infrastructure. All specifications control
for time dummies, but in GMM estimation those tend to be of inconsistent sign over time and
generally insignificant. There is no evidence of changing world trends towards increasing or
decreasing urban concentration. Second, in deciding whether to use contemporaneous or
lagged covariates, in experiments contemporaneous values of income and national scale (the
non-policy variables) always dominate lagged values. However for policy and institutional
variables, this is not the case and lagged values offer more consistent results. The obvious
reason may be that institutional and policy changes affect primacy with a lag. In results, for
economic-geography variables I use X(t)’s and for institutional-policy ones, X(t-1)’s.
In Table 5, I focus on the GMM results in columns 1-4, with OLS results reported in
column 5 for the GMM specification in column 4. Fixed effect results for this last
specification do not have significant coefficients for the basic covariates and are not reported.
Column 1 is the simplest (and robust) specification, with income, scale and openness
determining primacy, along with the time “invariant” variables national land area, density of
national waterways, and port and capital status. Coefficients for these latter variables in
GMM are determined from residuals regressions and are in italics. Columns 2 and 3
experiment with the federalism and road density variables. Column 4 turns to my preferred
specification, with fairly robust interactive effects. These allow for openness effects to
interact with port status and, most critically, for road effects to interact with income.

Economic-Geography
In Table 5 urban concentration declines with country urban scale, although the
magnitudes under GMM can be small. But for the column 4 results, with a coefficient of .027, a one-standard deviation (2) increase in country scale decreases primacy by .05, about
22

1/3 standard deviation (.15) of primacy, a noticeable effect. Primacy increases as income
rises from low income levels but then peaks and decreases. The peak varies but in column 4 it
is about $2400, almost the same as that in Wheaton and Shishido (1981). This supports the
Williamson hypothesis, from a positive perspective.
For geographic variables, national land area reduces urban concentration, as a
country's resources are spread spatially. Under GMM, the residuals regressions suggest a
large effect, .06, or about 40% of a standard deviation of primacy, again a noticeable effect.
Until column 4, primacy increases by about 33% of a standard deviation if the primate city is
a port – the benefits of being a port and "international city". In column 4 when port is
interacted with openness of the economy, as discussed below, the raw effect of port is more
than halved.

Political-Institutional Variables
If the capital city is the primate city that enhances primacy as anticipated, by about
40% of one-standard deviation of primacy in all specifications. This may suggest that national
capitals are the beneficiary of special treatment. Federalism, as anticipated reduces urban
concentration, but the effect is surprisingly small. Moreover, in the OLS version of column
(2) (not reported) which exploits cross-country (not just time) variation in the data, federalism
effects are even weaker! In column 2, a one-standard deviation (1) increase in the index
reduces primacy by about 4% of a standard deviation of primacy. Since only 40 countries in
estimating samples have federalism data (countries over 10m population in 1990), I don’t
include the variable in other specifications. When it is included in a specification with, say,
road density, while still significant, its coefficient is halved. Since the direct effects of
federalism seem very small, it might appear that federalism plays a more indirect role,
through determination of whether national capitals are primate cities or the extent of historical
investment in inter-regional transport infrastructure, and through federalism’s relationship to
national land area. However in OLS and GMM, exclusion of other such variables only raises
the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the degree of federalism to, at most, a
reduction in primacy equal to 7% of a standard deviation of primacy. Recall also that
federalism has no direct effect on economic growth rates. Finally I note (cf. Ades and Glaeser
(1995)) that Freedom House indices of the degree of democratization have no consistent
effect on primacy.
23

Policy Variables
Countries which invested historically in navigable waterways have reduced urban
concentration. A one-standard deviation (.018) increase in waterway density reduces primacy
by about 20% of a standard deviation of primacy. Similarly higher road density appears to
reduce primacy. A one-standard deviation increase in roads (1.5) reduces primacy by about
10% of one-standard deviation in column 3. The effect of openness in columns 1-3 is
generally negative – the economic geography hypothesis – but not always (e.g., column 1). It
became apparent that road infrastructure, openness, geography and income interacted in more
complex fashions and that to tease out the effect of openness and infrastructure investments
required more thought. Column 4 is the result of a variety of experiments.
First, it seems that the effect of openness should depend on whether the primate city is
a port and, hence, already tilted towards international markets. Otherwise, increased trade is
more likely to have the hypothesized effect from the economic geography literature-- to help
hinterlands by opening up international markets to them. In column 4, a one-standard
deviation (37) increase in openness decreases primacy by 8% of a standard deviation of
primacy. But if the primate city is a port, a one-standard deviation increase in openness
increases primacy modestly (4% of a primacy standard deviation). These results critically
control for road density. Perhaps the key result is that the effects of changes in openness on
primacy are fairly modest, especially when the primate city is a port. Attempts to interact
openness with road density or income produced non-robust results.
The most compelling new result in examining interactions turned out again to be
related, in some sense, to the Williamson hypothesis. While investment in road infrastructure
reduces urban concentration, the magnitude of the effect depends on income. Also accounting
for the income interaction is critical to assessing any magnitudes of the effects of interregional investment in roads on primacy. For example, from the column 4 coefficients, a one
standard deviation increase in road density (1.5) reduces primacy at incomes of $850, 4900,
13,400, and 17,500 by respectively 13, 18, 19 and 18 percent of a standard deviation of
primacy. The peak is at $13,500, where the reductions are significantly larger than at low
income levels.5 How is this related to Williamson? At low income levels when there are
5

Using highway density instead of road density, the coefficients corresponding to those in column 4 for
transport density and then that interacted with income and income squared are (all significant) .411, -.103 and
.0063. Here the greatest impact of highway density in reducing density is at an income of $3500 where a one
24

forces promoting spatial concentration in the economy, the effect of increasing road density is
lower than at higher income levels when there are forces promoting dispersion. As a policy
consideration, this takes heightened importance once we consider the fact that the growth
losses from excessive urban concentration tend to rise with income. I expand on this notion
now, conducting a simple policy experiment that ties together the growth and primacy results.

A Policy Experiment.
What is the indirect effect then on national growth rates of investment in roads
through its effect on urban concentration, at different income levels? In growth regressions,
after accounting for national investment rates and primacy effects, there is no direct effect of
road investments on economic growth. I pick income levels of $1100, 4900, and 13400 for a
medium-size, national urban population. I start primacy at a high level-- one standard
deviation above its best value for the given income and scale, as in Table 3, Part B. I then ask
what is the effect on annual growth rates of a one standard deviation increase in national road
density. Such investment will reduce urban concentration towards its best level.
Working through the calculations in Tables 2 and 5, the results are in Table 6. At the
lower income level, the effect of expanded roads in reducing primacy is to add .23 of a
percentage point to the national annual economic growth rate. But at higher income levels, the
effect is tripled, adding .68 of a percentage point to the annual national growth rate. That is a
very large indirect effect of road expansion. Of the variables we have considered including
the degree of federalism and openness of the economy, the clearest policy instrument in
reducing urban concentration is expansion of interregional transport systems opening up
hinterland markets. But I haven't represented the cost side of such a policy.

3. Conclusions
This paper argues that, if urban over-concentration is really the problem much of the
literature suggests that it is, it ought to show up as affecting economic growth rates. This
paper explores this issue econometrically, using a panel of 80-100 countries every 5 years
from 1960 to 1995. There are three main sets of findings.
At any level of development there is indeed a best degree of national urban
concentration. The best degree increases sharply as income rises up to a per capita income of
standard deviation increase in density reduces primacy by about 8% of a standard deviation of primacy-- a
25

about $5000 (Penn World Table purchasing parity income), before declining modestly. The
best degree of concentration declines with country scale. Growth losses from significantly
non-optimal concentration are large. These losses tend to rise with level of development,
peaking at a very high level of about 1.5 annual percent points of economic growth. Results
are very robust.
In a group of 72 countries in 1990, approximately 30 have satisfactory concentration,
24 have noticeably excessive concentration, and 5-16 countries have too little. The list with
highly excessive includes the usual suspects – Latin American countries such as Argentina,
Panama, Costa Rica, and Chile, Asian countries such as Korea and Thailand, African
countries such as Congo, and European countries like Greece, Portugal and Ireland. Many
are countries with more explicitly unitary governments, or where federal structures have been
severely constrained traditionally. Countries with too little urban concentration include
Belgium (a small, split country) and special cases such as the former Yugoslavia and
Czechoslovakia.
In terms of the determinants of urban concentration, it declines with national scale;
and, in a positive version of Williamson, it initially rises with income and then peaks around
an income of $3000, before declining. If the primate city is a port, increased trade leads to
increased urban concentration; otherwise increased trade leads to deconcentration as
hinterland markets open up with trade. However trade effects are modest. Similarly, the
effects of a greater degree of political decentralization, or increased federalism, while
significantly reducing urban concentration, are quite modest.
The key policy variable here affecting concentration is investment in inter-regional
transport infrastructure. In particular, increases in the density of road networks significantly
reduce concentration, with the effect rising with income. That is, at low income levels when
there are Williamson forces promoting spatial concentration in the economy, the effect of
increasing road density is lower than at higher income levels, when there are forces promoting
dispersion. This fact assumes heightened importance because the growth losses from
excessive concentration tend to rise with income. To illustrate, I consider the effect on
national growth rates of investment in roads, through its effect on concentration. I start
concentration at one standard deviation above its best value and ask what is the effect on
annual growth rates of a one standard deviation increase in national road density. At the
smaller effect than with road density.
26

higher income levels, the effect of expanded roads in reducing concentration is to add .68 of a
percentage point to the growth rate, about three times the effect at low income levels.

References
Ades, A.F. and E.L. Glaeser (1995), “Trade and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 195-227.
Arellano, M. and S.R. Bond (1991), "Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations," Review of Economic
Studies, 58, 277-297.
Barro, R. (1991), “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 407-443.
Barro, R. (1997), Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Becker, R. and J.V. Henderson (1999), “Intra-industry Specialization and Urban
Development” in Economics of Cities, Huriot and J.-F. Thisse (eds.), Cambridge
University Press.
Black, D. and J.V. Henderson (1999), “A Theory of Urban Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 107, 252-284.
Caselli, F., E. Esquire, and F. Lefort (1996), “Re-opening the Convergence Debate: A New
Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 363-389.
Cass, D. (1965), “Optimal Growth in an Aggregate Model of Capital Accumulation,” Review
of Economic Studies, 32, 233-240.
Ciccone, P. and R. Hall (1995), “Productivity and Density of Economic Activity,” American
Economic Review, 86, 54-70.
27

Durlauf, S. and D. Quah (1998), “The New Empirics of Economic Growth,” NBER Working
Paper No. 6422.
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. Venables (1999), The Spatial Economy, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Gabiax, X. (1999), "Zipf's Law for Cities: An Explanation," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Glaeser, E., H.D. Kallal, J. Scheinkman and A. Shleifer (1992), “Growth in Cities,” Journal of
Political Economy, 100, 1126-52.
Hansen, N. (1990), “Impacts of Small and Intermediate-Sized Cities on Population
Distribution: Issues and Responses,” Regional Development Dialogue, Spring, 11,
60-76.
Henderson, J.V. (1974), “The Sizes and Types of Cities,” American Economic Review, 64,
640-56.
Henderson, J.V. (1988), Urban Development: Theory, Fact and Illusion, Oxford University
Press.
Henderson, J.V. (1999a), “Marshall’s Scale Economies,” NBER Working Paper #7358.
Henderson, J.V. (1999b), "Notes on the Costs of Urban Primacy" Brown University mimeo
(10-24-99).
Henderson, J.V. and A. Kuncoro (1996), “Industrial Centralization in Indonesia,” World Bank
Economic Review, 10, 513-540.
Islam, N. (1995), “Growth Empirics: A Panel Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110, 1127-1170.
Kaiser, K. (1999), “Pre- and Post-Liberalization Manufacturing Location in Indonesia (197596),” 5-27-99 mimeo, LSE.
Kolko, J. (1999), “Can I Get Some Service Here: Transport Costs, Cities, and the Geography
of Service Industries,” Harvard University mimeo. (March).
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, 3-42.
Mankiw, G., D. Romer and D. Weil (1992), “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 407-437.
Renaud, B. (1981), National Urbanization Policy in Developing Countries, Oxford University
Press.

28

Richardson, H. (1987), “The Costs of Urbanization: A Four-Country Comparison,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 33, 561-580.
Tolley, G., J. Gardner and P. Graves (1979), Urban Growth Policy in a Market Economy,
New York: Academic Press.
UN (1993), World Urbanization Prospects: The 1992 Revision, New York: United
Nations.
Wheaton, W. and H. Shishido (1981), "Urban Concentration, Agglomeration Economies, and
the Level of Economic Development," Economic Development and Cultural Change,
30, 17-30.
Williamson, J. (1965), “Regional Inequality and the Process of National Development,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, June, 3-45.
World Bank (2000), Entering the 21st Century World Development Report 1999/2000,
Oxford University Press.

29

