                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MEDICARE REFORM: THE LARGER PICTURE


                                             Victor R. Fuchs


                                           Working Paper 7504
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7504


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2000




I am grateful to Antonio Rangel and the editors of the Journal of Economic Perspectives for many helpful
comments, and to Deborah K. Kerwin-Peck for excellent research assistance. I thank Charles Nelson, Gary
Olin, and Jessica Vistnes for assistance with the data. Special thanks to the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for financial support through grants to the National Bureau
of Economic Research. This manuscript was prepared by Claire Gilchrist, just prior to her retirement after
26 years of extraordinary service to me and the National Bureau of Economic Research. My gratitude to
her is unbounded. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Victor R. Fuchs All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicare Reform: The Larger Picture
Victor R. Fuchs
NBER Working Paper No. 7504
January 2000
JEL No. I18

                                               ABSTRACT

        The “Medicare problem” is examined as part of the larger problem of providing for the overall
financial needs of the elderly. Several myths about Medicare are discussed, and sources and uses of the
elderly’s “full income” are estimated. The paper explores policy options to deal with technology-induced
increases in health care expenditures and excessive dependence of the elderly on transfers from the young.
The paper concludes that if Americans wish to continue to enjoy the benefits of medical advances, they will
have to work more before and after age 65 and will have to increase substantially their rate of saving.


Victor R. Fuchs
NBER
30 Alta Road
Stanford, CA 94305-8006
and Henry J. Kaiser, Jr. Professor Emeritus,
Stanford University
fuchs@newage3.stanford.edu
        Attempts to reform Medicare reflect pressures from diverse groups: The elderly complain about

Medicare’s failure to cover drugs; budget-balancers fear escalating expenditures; hospitals and

physicians deplore inadequate reimbursement that forces them to skimp on services; and stake-holders

in education, housing, child-care, and defense see Medicare as an 800-pound gorilla that crowds out

everything else. At the most fundamental level, the “Medicare problem” is best understood as the

interaction of two larger problems: 1) providing for the overall financial needs of the elderly; and 2)

developing a more efficient, equitable medical care system for Americans of all ages. Unless there is

progress on these larger problems, Medicare reform is likely to be ineffective and ephemeral. If the

political climate blocks such progress in the short term, those seeking to change Medicare should at

least take cognizance of the larger picture, and, following the first rule of good medical practice, “do no

harm.” This paper discusses several current myths about Medicare, presents a framework for thinking

about the larger problems, and offers a policy approach for the long run.

        The crucial economic facts about old age are diminished earning power and increased utilization

of medical care. Physiological changes are the primary cause of both lower earnings and increased use

of medical care. Earnings are also affected adversely by obsolescence of skills and knowledge and by

public and private policies that reduce the incentives of older persons to continue working and that

increase the costs to employers of employing older workers. Economists could help future elderly pay

for health care and other goods and services by focusing attention on artificial barriers to the

employment of older workers and on policies that would increase saving before age 65.




                                                    -1-
                                         Myths About Medicare

        Understanding of the “Medicare problem” would be enhanced if the many myths about it could

be dispelled. A discussion of three of the most misleading myths follows.

        Myth 1. The rapid growth in Medicare expenditures results primarily from demographic

change. It is true that the population over 65 is growing rapidly. Since 1980 the rate of increase has

been 1.5 percent per annum, and it is expected to accelerate to 2.3 percent between 2000 and 2020.

But the rate of growth of real per capita health care expenditures for each age-sex group over 65 has

been much more rapid—over 4.0 percent per annum (Fuchs, forthcoming). Most of this growth

reflects increases in the quantity and quality of medical care, increases largely associated with the

introduction and diffusion of new medical technology (Fuchs, 1996). For example, a study of changes

in the age-specific utilization of seven major surgical procedures between 1987 and 1995 revealed an

average rate of increase of well over 10 percent per annum (Fuchs, 1999).1

        Medical innovations have undoubtedly contributed to longer and/or better quality lives for many

elderly patients; some innovations actually reduce expenditures. Even when the initial expectation is

cost reduction, however, the long run effect is usually an increase in expenditures for several reasons.

First, new applications are found for the technology, applications that were not contemplated when the

technology was first developed and introduced into practice (e.g., lasers). Second, as physicians gain

experience with the new technology, it becomes medically appropriate for older and sicker patients

(e.g., open-heart surgery). Third, in the case of screening and diagnostic technologies, false positives

can induce extensive expenditures on patients who receive no benefit from the interventions. Even true

        1
         The procedures were: angioplasty, coronary artery bypass grafts, cardiac catheterization,
carotid endarterectomy, hip replacement, knee replacement, and laminectomy.

                                                    -2-
positives can lead to greater expenditures as the tests become more sensitive and identify more patients

to treat (e.g., PSA tests for prostate cancer). Finally, widespread diffusion of the technology can result

in a higher incidence of expensive complications than was experienced in clinical trials carried out on

selected patients in selected settings by selected physicians (e.g., carotid endarterectomy).

        Myth 2. The rate of increase of Medicare spending over the long run can be

significantly slowed without reducing services to the elderly. Health care expenditures, like those

of any commodity, are identically equal to the product of price and quantity. This is equally true

whether one looks at output (Ps C Qs) or at the resources used to produce the output (Pr C Qr).

Because it is usually difficult to measure changes in the content of a physician visit or a hospital day over

time, it is very difficult to distinguish between changes in the price or quantity of output. A more useful

approach to the expenditures identity is to define it as the product of three terms




                EXP / P r C Q r / Q sC Q s.


This formulation makes it clear that there are only three possible ways to reduce expenditures: (1)

reduce the prices paid to the labor, capital, and intermediate goods and services used in the production

of medical care (Pr); (2) increase production efficiency (i.e., reduce Qr/Q s); or (3) reduce services

(Q s). Medicare has already used its monopsony power to cut payments to providers of care and could

go farther in that direction, but elimination of any monopoly rents currently enjoyed by physicians, drug

companies, or other suppliers can have only relatively small, one-time effects. For instance, the net

income (after expenses) of physicians accounts for about 10 percent of total health care expenditures.

Thus, a one-time reduction of 20 percent would reduce the growth rate of expenditures by only 0.1

                                                     -3-
percent per annum over the next 20 years. Cutting drug company profits in half would have an even

smaller direct effect. The indirect effect on expenditures of lower drug profits would probably be

much larger, by slowing the pace of medical advances (i.e., reducing Qs).

        Improving efficiency (i.e., using fewer resources to produce the same quantity of services) is

always desirable, but Medicare already sets reimbursement rates for hospitals and physicians (the

principal providers), thus providing considerable incentive for them to produce any given level of

services with as few resources as possible. A broader definition of efficiency that includes elimination

of unnecessary services and of services with low benefit/cost ratios would have a large effect on

expenditures—but that is the point: a reduction in expenditures requires a reduction in services. It is

relevant to note that while managed care for patients under age 65 achieved some short-term success in

the early 1990's by squeezing providers and eliminating obvious inefficiencies, expenditure growth in the

late 1990's resumed its upward trajectory.

        If reducing prices paid to resources or cutting the quantity of resources offers little promise, the

only way to cut expenditures over the long run is through reducing services. This could be a reasonable

goal for policy; a great deal depends on which services are cut. For example, critics of American

medical care assert that the fee-for-service system results in some patients getting care with negative

expected benefits. The potential harm outweighs the potential good. For this to happen, patient

ignorance is a necessary but not sufficient explanation. The physician must also be ignorant, or if not

ignorant, must be venal and insulated from external constraints such as peer condemnation or

malpractice suits. Even if such care exists, however, it is unlikely that its proportion of total care has

increased over time, and therefore could not be an explanation for the rapid growth of health care



                                                     -4-
expenditures. If fee-for-service medicine is judged to be a serious problem, Medicare could change its

method of reimbursement, as it already has for hospital care.

        Much more problematic are services that have positive expected benefits, but the value of the

benefit is less than its expected cost. Many services fall into this category; indeed, given widespread

third-party payment unaccompanied by controls on supply, economic theory predicts exactly that

outcome. Proposals to provide more generous benefits under Medicare would probably increase

services in this category, and thus increase expenditures. Furthermore, because changes in medical

technology are partly endogenous, increased insurance coverage fuels the development and diffusion of

new drugs and procedures.2

        Economists find it easy to say that the socially optimal amount of care is where marginal benefit

equals marginal cost. Practicing physicians, however, find it much more difficult to determine where

that optimum lies. Most medical interventions have never been rigorously evaluated from that

perspective. Not only is it difficult to determine the optimal level for the average patient, but the

marginal benefit as valued by patients with identical medical conditions may vary, depending upon their

incomes and other factors. This poses an additional problem for analysis and policy.




        2
         Countries with national health insurance typically rely on supply side constraints to keep
expenditures under control. They limit construction of new facilities and modernization of old ones.
They restrict the diffusion of new high-cost technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging devices
and open-heart surgery teams. And many countries limit the number of specialists, who typically
generate more expenditures than do primary care physicians.

                                                     -5-
Myth 3. Means-testing Medicare benefits will not have adverse effects on incentives to work or

save because most Medicare beneficiaries are out of the work force and are not savers. This is a

popular but short-sighted view. It ignores the likely effect of means testing of those over age 65 on the

work and saving behavior of those under age 65. Any one measure, such as means-testing Medicare

benefits, may not have a large effect, but when combined with means-tested tax rules for Social

Security benefits, means testing for nursing home use, as well as income-related subsidies for food,

housing, and other goods and services, many elderly will find that they face extremely high implicit

marginal tax rates. It may be too late for them to make big changes in behavior,3 but many younger

Americans will anticipate the incentives and constraints that they will face after age 65 and will react in

an individually reasonable4 but socially undesirable manner. Rather than lose benefits and subsidies and

pay extra taxes, many will work less and especially save less. It hardly seems prudent to create a

“welfare” system for the elderly when the nation has recently decided to dismantle a system of welfare

for younger adults which has had similar adverse consequences. Evidence that an implicit tax at time t

can significantly affect saving in years prior to t can be found in studies of the relation between college

financial aid and saving (see Edlin, 1993, Feldstein, 1995; Kim, 1995).




        3
         Although there is allegedly substantial “dis-savings” to qualify for Medicaid-paid nursing home
care.
        4
         Eric Engen, William Gale, and Cori Uccello (1999) argue that current savings patterns are
consistent with optimal behavior from the individual perspective.

                                                     -6-
                                         Who? What? How?

        A useful way to think about the larger picture, including the “Medicare problem”, is to measure

the “full income” (or “full consumption”) of the elderly and address three questions: 1) Who provides

the money to finance their medical care and other consumption? 2) What is the money used for? 3)

How is the money provided? I define “full income” as the sum of personal income and health care

expenditures not paid from personal income. I apportion the latter equally to each individual $65,

treating government expenditures as if they were an insurance policy. Data sources, adjustments, and

assumptions are described in Appendix A. To simplify the calculations, I do not include in-kind

transfers or other subsidies received by the elderly for items such as food, housing, and transportation,

and I do not exclude taxes paid by the elderly.

        Who provides for the financial needs of the elderly? The only possibilities are the population

under age 65 or the elderly themselves. To determine how dependent are today’s elderly on those

under 65, I estimate the elderly’s “full income” and decompose it into the share provided by those

under 65 and the share attributable to self-provision by the elderly. For 1997, about half of the

elderly’s “full income” was provided by those under 65 and about half by the elderly themselves.

Because the underlying data on personal income and health care expenditures are far from precise, and

because numerous assumptions are required in order to allocate by source, these figures should be

considered only approximations. They are valuable, nevertheless, because the most important policy

questions concern changes in these shares over the next two or three decades.

        The most critical decision about “what” is the allocation between health care and other goods

and services. Public policy influences this allocation by the extent to which the transfers from those



                                                    -7-
under 65 are tied to health care, as under the Medicare and Medicaid programs. (Allocations within

health care among different services are also influenced by the source of payment.) Using the data

sources and assumptions described in Appendix A, I estimate that about 35 percent of the elderly’s

“full income” was allocated to health care in 1997, with Medicare paying only slightly more than one-

half of that bill. Again, I emphasize that these are approximations, but I also again emphasize the

importance of likely changes in these proportions, changes that are not particularly sensitive to possible

errors in the estimated levels for 1997.

        The key “how” decision concerns how much of the financing of “full income” is done

collectively and how much individually (including family). This decision is related to but conceptually

distinct from the question of the extent of inter-generational transfers. In theory, each generation could

arrange collectively to provide for its own financial needs in retirement; the premium paid by the elderly

to cover a portion of Medicare’s Part B is an example of such an arrangement. Conversely, transfers

to the elderly from those under 65 could be made individually, within families; throughout history that

has been the usual arrangement. In recent times, however, most transfers from those under 65 have

been provided collectively; the balance of “full income” has been arranged for by the elderly

themselves. Collective provision almost always involves some compulsion (or heavy subsidies), and

usually results in a more egalitarian distribution after age 65 than would result from purely individual

provision.

        The choice between collective and individual arrangements has implications for efficiency

(discussed below) and for redistribution, both inter-generational and intra-generational. The redistributive

objectives, however, could mostly be pursued through an appropriate combination of taxes and subsidies,



                                                      -8-
rather than being allowed to dominate the “how” question at the expense of efficiency.5 Economists have

a huge comparative advantage in analyzing the efficiency aspects of “how” and should, to the extent

possible, try to separate their conclusions regarding efficiency from policy recommendations that

incorporate their personal preferences regarding redistribution.

        Consider, for instance, the problem of annuitization. Many older persons worry about outliving

their wealth and would like to have at least some of it converted to an annuity. Similarly, most elderly

want insurance to pay for health care. Indeed, the demand for insurance is so strong that many elderly

buy “first dollar” supplemental insurance policies with their own after-tax dollars. Free markets for

annuities and health insurance, however, suffer from the problem of adverse selection. The ability of

individuals to predict both their longevity and their health care utilization is significantly greater than

could be expected from chance, and this is true even after controlling for other predictors such as

socioeconomic status and disease conditions (Hurd and McGarry, 1997). Thus, if the sellers of health

insurance or annuities set prices based on the experience of the entire population, they are likely to find

that the health insurance buyers have above-average utilization and the annuity buyers have above-

average life expectancy. This potential adverse selection is an important reason why free markets for

annuities or for health insurance are not likely to function as efficiently as they do for other commodities

that do not share this characteristic.

        Asymmetrical information, however, is only one of the factors affecting efficiency. The costs



        5
         The situation is similar to that explored by Antonio Rangel (1999), who has shown that every
plan to improve Social Security by having the federal government or individual participants reduce
holdings of U.S. bonds and increase holdings of equities is primarily a method of redistribution that can
be achieved by a combination of taxes and subsidies. See also Kotlikoff (1993) and Geanakoplos,
Mitchell and Zeldes (1998).

                                                      -9-
imposed by moral hazard also need to be considered. The connection between insurance and

overutilization of medical care is well understood and well documented (Newhouse, 1992). The moral

hazard associated with means-testing benefits and subsidies for the elderly is less widely appreciated,

but both theory and experience suggest that high (implicit) marginal tax rates on income after age 65

affect incentives to work and save prior to that age. Moral hazard problems may also arise if

individuals are allowed to control their own retirement investments with an implicit or explicit

government guarantee for those with poor results. If the government offered such a guarantee, more

individuals would likely pursue investments with high risk (and high potential return), much as the

insured depositors in savings and loan institutions did in the 1970s and 1980s. Despite regulation, the

S&L institutions in turn pursued ever riskier loans in order to offer depositors higher returns. The

results were disastrous. Similarly, without compulsory annuitization, some elderly may lose their wealth

in risky investments, or consume it prematurely, thus placing an additional burden on transfers from the

young.

         In addition to considering problems of adverse selection and moral hazard, economic analyses

of efficiency need to estimate the administrative costs associated with alternative approaches to

providing annuity, health insurance, and investment opportunities for the elderly.




                                 Sources and Uses of “Full Income”

         My estimates of the sources and uses of the elderly’s “full income” in 1997 are summarized in

Table 1. The details of the estimation procedures are in Appendix A. Table 1 shows that transfers

from the young to the elderly play a much larger relative role for health care than for other goods and



                                                   -10-
services. This fact, combined with the tendency for health care expenditures to grow more rapidly than

other expenditures, will pose major problems for policy makers and for the elderly within two decades.

For instance, suppose that the elderly’s health care expenditures grow 3 percent per annum more

rapidly than the balance of their “full income” (roughly the experience of recent decades). By 2020,

health care’s share of “full income” would jump from 35 to 52 percent. If the generations under age 65

continue to bear the same share of health care and “other” as in 1997, their total share of “full income”

must rise.6 If on the other hand, their share of the total remains constant, the elderly must assume a

larger share of both health care and other expenditures.

        There are three possible responses to the crisis implicit in the projections for 2020. First, some

policy analysts think that the solution is to slow the rate of growth of health care expenditures, but that

may not be desirable or feasible. It may not be desirable because many medical advances help the

elderly live longer, better quality lives, and some health economists assert that the benefits exceed the

costs. It may not be feasible because the insured elderly want all the care that might do them some

good and an army of drug companies, equipment and device manufacturers, hospitals, and physicians

are eager to supply that care.

        Second, the problem could be solved by higher taxes on the young. But such tax hikes seem

highly unlikely. They will have to come on top of new taxes required to support a projected increase of

25 percent in the ratio of elderly to the under-65 population. Thus, there will be little prospect of

levying still additional taxes to pay for technology-induced increases in age-specific health care

expenditures.

        6
         Laurence Kotlikoff (1992) explored how growth in Medicare expenditures will differentially
affect each generation already alive and generations not yet born.

                                                    -11-
         The third possible response is for the elderly to provide more of their own income by increases

in work and saving. If they do not, future elderly will be under great financial pressure. Many already

are. Consider the situation of the one-third of the elderly in 1997 with the lowest incomes. Estimates of

their sources and uses of “full income,” shown in Table 2, reveal that they are dependent on transfers

from the young for over 90 percent of their “full income” and that more than half is spent on health

care.7

         Thus, while eligible for MRIs, angiograms, by-pass surgery, and other high-tech diagnostic and

surgical interventions, many low-income elderly must make hard choices between uncovered health

care (such as drugs) and an adequate diet. Two out of three elderly have two or more chronic health

problems such as arthritis, diabetes, heart disease, and dementia. Many individuals do not have the

resources to purchase a comfortable mattress, a warmer house in winter, a taxi ride to the doctor, or

other goods and services that would make life more bearable. To prevent more and more elderly

becoming “health care poor,” they must have additional personal income. This will require more work

both before and after age 65 and more income from savings (i.e., pensions and investments). But an

increase in dependence on employment and savings income is likely to result in greater inequality among

the elderly, especially if saving is purely voluntary. To avoid real hardship for millions of elderly, some

of the increase in saving would probably have to be compulsory because so many do little or no

voluntary saving now.

         Why do millions of Americans reach age 65 so heavily dependent on transfers from succeeding

generations? One possibility is that their income over the life cycle was so low that they could barely

         7
       Sources and methods are the same as for Table 1, with the additional assumption that non-
government expenditures for health care are proportional to personal income.

                                                    -12-
meet everyday expenses, let alone save for retirement. This explanation is undoubtedly correct for

some low income elderly, but analyses of longitudinal data by S. F. Venti and D. A. Wise (1998) show

that inequality in savings for retirement varies greatly even among those with the same earnings prior to

retirement. This conclusion holds after adjustment for special factors that affect the ability to save and

for differences in investment returns. I reached a similar conclusion by observing that inequality in

income from pensions and investments at ages 65-69 in 1995 was many times larger than the inequality

in employment income of the same cohort in 1985 (ages 55-59) and 1975 (ages 45-49) (Fuchs, 1999).

Judging by the behavior of their peers, it seems that most low income elderly could have saved more

prior to age 65.

        Additional support for this view comes from my analysis of the relation between social security

income and savings income (pensions, interest, dividends, and rent). I first sorted the elderly into

deciles based on their social security income, an ordering which is probably similar to one based on life-

time earnings. Within each decile I sorted by savings income and identified the 25th, 50th, and 75th

percentiles. The results, shown in Figure 1, reveal that while savings income tends to be positively

correlated with social security income, there is great variation in savings income within each decile.

There are large numbers of elderly in the lower deciles with substantial savings income (e.g., in the

second decile 25 percent have more than $3,000 of savings income), while in the higher deciles many

elderly have very little savings income (e.g., in the ninth decile 25 percent have less than $1250).8

        When the procedure is reversed—that is, when the elderly are sorted into deciles by savings



        8
         I did not adjust the CPS data for under reporting in this case because only a single estimate of
under reporting is available for each source of income. Such an adjustment would widen absolute
differences within and across deciles but leave relative differences unchanged.

                                                   -13-
income and within each decile by social security income—the picture is entirely different, but the

conclusion is the same. Figure 2 shows that individuals in the higher savings income deciles do not

have social security income markedly different from those in the lower deciles. Indeed, even in the

lowest savings income decile, at least half of the elderly had social security income which is higher than

the lowest 25 percent in all the savings income deciles.

        Policy makers concerned about the financial well-being of the elderly should consider the

implications of these results. It is clearly possible for most elderly to save a modest percentage of their

earnings during their lifetime, but many do not. This suggests that a compulsory savings program could

reduce the extreme dependence of millions of elderly on succeeding generations and put them in a

better position to pay for their own health care and other consumption.




                                               Conclusion

        The rapid growth of per capita health care expenditures is the driving force behind the financial

problems of the elderly and a fortiori behind the “Medicare problem.” Most of the expenditure growth

results from medical innovations, many of which help the elderly lead longer, better quality lives. If the

pace of medical innovation does not slow, the elderly will become increasingly dependent on transfers

from the young unless there are major legislative and behavioral changes.

        If the generations under age 65 are unwilling or unable to provide for an ever- greater

proportion of the elderly’s financial needs, the elderly will have to provide more for themselves by

working more both before and after age 65 and by saving a larger fraction of their pre-retirement

income. To increase work, public policies that currently discourage employment of older workers



                                                    -14-
would have to be changed. To increase pre-retirement saving, some compulsion would be necessary,

especially to prevent mounting income inequality after age 65.

        Financing health care (including Medicare) is an inextricable part of the overall financial problem

of the elderly. To achieve an efficient, equitable solution, I suggest a two-pronged approach that

encompasses income and medical care. Income would be derived from three layers: First, every older

person would receive the same basic pension, financed by general revenue. This pension would be

approximately equal to the social security benefit currently available to a low-wage worker. The

second layer would be annuity income coming from an individual savings-investment account created by

compulsory contribution of a percentage of earnings. For the average worker, a contribution of as little

as two or three percent of earnings over a period of 35 or more years would result in a significant

addition to the basic pension at retirement. Voluntary, unsubsidized, individually controlled savings and

investment would provide the third layer of income.

        Medical care finance would be based on two layers: First, every individual would be covered

by an egalitarian basic plan financed by a broad-based earmarked tax. This plan would not be a

“safety net” for the poor, but one that would provide most people with most of their care, most of the

time. Second, there would be multiple options for those willing and able to buy more care with their

own after-tax dollars (Fuchs, 1994). This approach would assure a minimum standard of living and

basic medical care to every older person while maintaining the incentives to work and save that are

essential for the economy to grow and prosper.




                                                   -15-
References


1.    CPS Utilities. 1999. March CPS Utilities, 1962-1998, Version 3.3.2. (Current Population

      Surveys, March 1962-1998 [machine-readable data files]/conducted by the Bureau of the

      Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Washington: Bureau of the Census [producer and

      distributor]). Or: Unicon Research Corporation, 1640 Fifth Street, Santa Monica, CA

      90401; 1-310/393-4636 for distribution of CPS Utilities.

2.    Edlin, Aaron S. 1993. “Is College Financial Aid Equitable and Efficient?” Journal of

      Economic Perspectives, 12:1 (Spring), pp. 143-158.

3.    Engen, Eric, Gale, William, and Vecello, Cori E. 1999. “The Adequacy of Household

      Saving,” presented at the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, September 2-3, 1999.

4.    Feldstein, Martin. 1995. “College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving,” American

      Economic Review, 85(3), 552-566.

5.    Fuchs, Victor R. Forthcoming. “Provide, Provide: The Economics of Aging,” in Thomas R.

      Saving and Andrew Rattenmaier (eds.), Medicare Reform: Issues and Answers (Chicago:

      University of Chicago Press). Available as NBER Working Paper No. 6642.

6.    Fuchs, Victor R. 1999. “Health Care for the Elderly: How Much? Who Will Pay for It?”

      Health Affairs, 18:1, pp. 11-21.

7.    Fuchs, Victor R. 1996. “Economics, Values, and Health Care Reform,” The American

      Economic Review, 86:1, pp. 11-24.

8.    Fuchs, Victor R. 1994. “Health System Reform: A Different Approach,” Journal of the

      American Medical Association 272:7, pp. 560-63.

9.    Geanakoplos, John, Mitchell, Olivia S., and Zeldes, Stephen P. 1998. “Social Security



                                              -17-
      Money’s Worth.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 6722.

10.   Hurd, Michael D., and McCarry, Kathleen. 1997. “The Predictive Validity of Subjective

      Probabilities of Survival.” Mimeo.

11.   Kim, Taejong. 1995. “Implicit Taxes in College Financial Aid and Family Saving.” M.I.T.

      mimeo.

12.   Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 1993. “From Deficit Delusion to the Fiscal Balance Rule: Looking for a

      Sensible Way to Measure Fiscal Policy,” Journal of Economics (suppl.) 7, pp. 17-41.

13.   Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 1992. Generational Accounting. New York: The Free Press

      (paperback edition 1993, pp. 206-14).

14.   Newhouse, Joseph P., and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons

      from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

15.   Olin, Gary L. 1999 (unpublished). Health & Health Care of the Medicare Population:

      Data from the 1996 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. Rockville, MD: Westat.

16.   Rangel, Antonio. 1999. “Transfers and Equity Investments by Governments: A Fundamental

      Equivalence Result.” Mimeo. Stanford University.

17.   Roemer, Marc I. 1999. “Reconciling March CPS Money Income with The National Income

      and Product Accounts: An Evaluation of CPS Quality.” Bureau of the Census, paper

      presented at the American Statistical Association’s Joint Statistical Meetings, Baltimore,

      Maryland, August 10, 1999.

18.   Venti, S. F., and Wise, David A. 1998. “The Cause of Wealth Dispersion at Retirement:

      Choice or Chance?” American Economic Review, May, pp. 185-91.




                                                -18-
                                                 Table 1

               Americans 65 and Over in 1997, Sources and Uses of Their “Full Income”*

                                           (percent distribution)



                                                           Sources

               Uses                      Under age 65               Age 65 and over        Total

 Health care                                   27                         8                 35

 Other                                         29                         36                65

 Total                                         56                         44              100**



*“Full Income” is the sum of money income plus the dollar value of health care expenditures (excluding

the portion paid for by the elderly). For details of estimation, see Appendix A.


**“Full income” is approximately $28,800 per person.




                                                    -19-
                                                 Table 2

 One-third of Americans 65 and Over with the Lowest Personal Income in 1997, Sources and Uses of

                                          Their “Full Income”*

                                           (percent distribution)



                                                           Sources
               Uses                      Under age 65               Age 65 and over        Total

 Health care                                  51                          3                 54

 Other                                         41                         5                 46

 Total                                         92                         8               100**



*“Full Income” is the sum of money income plus the dollar value of health care expenditures (excluding

the portion paid for by the elderly). For details of estimation, see Appendix A.


**“Full income” is approximately $14,250 per person.




                                                    -20-
                                          Appendix A.

                  Estimation of sources and uses of “full income”

       “Full income” is defined as the sum of personal income and health care expenditures not paid for

out of personal income. Per capita personal income of the population 65 and over is estimated from the

Current Population Survey, March 1998, covering the calendar year 1997 (CPS Utilities, 1999).

Income estimates are based on persons 65 and over living alone or in households with no one under age

65. (Inclusion of such households would not significantly change average per capita income, but would

complicate the problem of identifying the sources of income by age.) Within each household, total

personal income is divided equally among all members of the household. Because the CPS income

understates personal income and the understatement is disproportionate by source of income, I adjust

each source of income using the latest (1996) unpublished Census Bureau estimates (for all ages) of the

percent under-reported by source (Roemer, 1999). Average income for those 65 and over is increased

by 21 percent as a result of the under-reporting adjustments. The distribution of income by source also

changes because the adjustment for under-reporting increases the incomes from pensions and

investments by 31 and 38 percent, respectively, while incomes from Social Security retirement and

employment increase by 9 and 4 percent, respectively.

       Personal health care expenditures of the elderly are estimated from unpublished data of the

Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) for 1996 (Olin, 1999); I updated to 1997 based on

extrapolation of trends in Medicare reimbursement. Estimates of the source of payment for the elderly’s

medical care also come from the MCBS for 1996. I increase the MCBS data by 5 percent to adjust for


                                                 -23-
under-reporting by households of health care expenditures not paid for by Medicare, Medicaid, or other

government programs. I treat government health care expenditures as if they were an insurance policy

provided to each individual over 65 with a value equal to average expenditures.

        Income from employment, pensions, and investments is assumed to be provided by the elderly

themselves. Other income, such as Social Security retirement and other cash transfers, is assumed to be

provided by those under age 65, as are government health care expenditures.

        The estimates of sources and uses of full income for the one-third of the over-65 population with

the lowest personal income follow the same methods as for all over-65, with the additional assumption

that spending for health care out of personal income is proportional to personal income. Health care

expenditures covered by employer-provided insurance are reduced by 55 percent under the assumption

that the low-income elderly are much less likely to have such coverage.




                                                  -24-
                        The key variables for the population $ 65 are:

P=   personal income = T + S

T=   cash transfers from those < 65

S=   income from employment, pensions, and investments

H=   health care expenditures = G + F + E

G=   government health care expenditures

F=   health care expenditures from personal income

E=   health care expenditures from employer-provided insurance

C=   “full income” = P + (H - F)

O=   “other expenditures” = C - H = P - F

Y=   total transfers from < 65 = G + T

A=   portion of full income from $ 65 = C - Y

B=   # 65 as source of health care expenditures from personal income (assumed to be) F(T/P)

D=   $ 65 as source of health care expenditures from personal income (assumed to be) F(S/P)

K=   < 65 as source of other expenditures = T - B

L=   $ 65 as source of other expenditures = S - D




                                                -25-
           Estimated dollar values of the key variables for 1997 are:


Variable                    All                     Lowest third of personal income
   P                      21,985                                7,738

   T                      9,789                                 6,866

   S                      12,195                                 872

   H                      9,941                                 7,615

   G                      6,268                                 6,268

   F                      3,118                                 1,097
   E                       555                                   250

   C                      28,808                                14,256

   O                      18,867                                6,641

   Y                      16,057                                13,134

   A                      12,751                                1,122

   B                      1,388                                  973

   D                      1,730                                  124
   K                      8,401                                 5,893

   L                      10,466                                 748




                                     -26-
