                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               UNDERSTANDING YOUNG WOMEN’S MARRIAGE DECISIONS:
               THE ROLE OF LABOR AND MARRIAGE MARKET CONDITIONS


                                            Francine D. Blau
                                           Lawrence M. Kahn
                                             Jane Waldfogel


                                           Working Paper 7510
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7510

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2000



This research was supported by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation. We have benefited from the
helpful comments of Orley Ashenfelter, Kristin Butcher and participants at the Cornell-Princeton Conference
on “Social and Labor Market Outcomes of Youth,” Ithaca, May 1998; and the Future of Work Advisory
Committee Meeting, Russell Sage Foundation, New York, December 1999. Brian Levine, Deborah
Anderson, John Cheslock, Wen-Jui Han, Joan Moriarty and Andre Portela de Souza provided excellent
research assistance. We are also grateful to Al Anderson for help with the Census extracts, and to Robert
Moffitt and Hilary Hoynes for providing us with data on welfare benefits. Special thanks are due to John
Bound and Harry Holzer for their considerable help in making some key data on matching MSAs across
Censuses available to us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, and Jane Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Young Women’s Marriage Decisions: The Role of
Labor and Marriage Market Conditions
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, and Jane Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 7510
January 2000
JEL No. J1

                                              ABSTRACT

        Using the 1970, 1980 and 1990 Censuses, we investigate the impact of labor and marriage market
conditions on the incidence of marriage of young women (age 16-24). We employ a two-stage
methodology. First, across individuals, marriage is regressed on personal characteristics and MSA
indicators, separately by race and education group. Second, the first-stage MSA effects are regressed on
MSA-level labor and marriage market conditions and welfare benefits using cross-section and fixed effects
models, including both first and second difference equations. Better female labor markets, worse female
marriage markets and worse male labor markets are found to lower marriage rates for whites in all
education groups. Results for these variables for blacks are sensitive to estimation technique, although
stronger results are obtained for an older age group (25-34). While welfare benefits have a negative effect
in cross-sectional analyses, the association becomes considerably weaker in fixed effects specifications.


Francine D. Blau                                         Lawrence M. Kahn
Russell Sage Foundation                          Russell Sage Foundation
112 East 64th Street                                     112 East 64th Street
New York, NY 10021                                       New York, NY 10021
and NBER                                                 larry@rsage.org
fran@rsage.org                                           lmk12@cornell.edu
fdb4@cornell.edu


Jane Waldfogel
School of Social Work
Columbia University
622 West 113th Street
New York, NY 10025
jw205@columbia.edu
I. Introduction
         The decline in marriage rates in the United States in the last 30 years has been part of a

remarkable set of social changes affecting gender roles in the post World War II era. For example, the

fraction of women age 20-24 who were ever married fell from 64.2 percent in 1970 to 34 percent in

1994, and a similar though muted trend was evident for women in their 30s and 40s (Blau, Ferber and

Winkler 1998, p. 273). What was once typical behavior for young women has now become the

exception. At the same time that marriage has been on the decline, women's education levels and labor

force attachment have been increasing steadily.1 And the incidence of female-headed families among all

families has risen from 10.7 percent in 1970 to 17.6 percent in 1995 (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 1998,

p. 292). While it may be hard to determine causality among such trends, there is no doubt that, on

average, women were both better prepared to support themselves economically and more likely to have

to do so by the 1990s than they had been in the 1960s.

         The juxtaposition of these trends in marriage, family structure, education and labor force

participation illustrates the two faces of the decline in marriage. On the one hand, an important part of

the decline in marriage, particularly for young people, is associated with women's longer periods of

schooling and increased labor force attachment. The educational and career opportunities that have

become available since the 1960s have led many women to delay marriage and childbearing. If the

entire decline in marriage for young people were simply an outcome of this delay, most would not view

the phenomenon as a social problem.

         However, falling marriage rates also have a downside, one that is of increasing concern for

public policy—the rising incidence of children growing up in single parent homes, often falling below the

poverty line. While overall teen birth rates have actually declined since 1970, the share of those births

that are out-of-wedlock has risen dramatically (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 1998). The importance of

trends in marriage rates for this development is underscored by the fact that the rising incidence of

children among young, single women is explained (in an accounting sense) primarily by the rising pool of

1
  For example, labor force participation rates of married women in the US rose from 35.4 percent in 1966 to 60.6
percent in 1994, while the fraction of new female high school graduates who enrolled in college increased from 48.5
percent in 1970 to 65.4 percent in 1994 (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 1998, p. 95; Ehrenberg and Smith 1997, p. 297).
single women in the “at risk” group rather than by an increase in childbearing among single women

(Blank, 1995). This second face of the decline in marriage implies that a large number of women and

children will live in poverty. This outcome is especially likely for nonwhite and less-educated women.

        In this paper, we seek to better understand the underlying determinants of marriage rates among

young women. Given particular concern about the effects of the deteriorating labor market for less

skilled workers on the marriage rates of less educated women, we focus especially on the impact of

labor market conditions for both young men and women, as well as "marriage market" conditions,

macroeconomic factors and welfare policy.2 We use Census data on individuals primarily from the

1980 and 1990 files, with additional data from 1970 in some of our analyses. While previous research

on the determinants of marriage has examined some of the same issues we do, our approach

disentangles labor market and marriage market effects in a way that earlier work does not. Moreover,

our measures of labor market influences capture the underlying demand and supply factors that affect

the labor market success of particular groups, in addition to the traditional macro-level wage and

unemployment measures used by other researchers. Given likely differences by education level in the

consequences of the decline in marriage for young women, as well as possible differences across

education categories in the relative importance of various causes, we disaggregate all of our analyses by

education group.



II. Prior Research on the Determinants of Marriage and Contributions of this Study

        Becker (1981) provides a basic framework linking labor market conditions and marriage

decisions which suggests that greater specialization by men in market work and women in nonmarket

work raises the gains to marriage. Thus, all else equal, better labor market opportunities for men are

expected to increase the incidence of marriage, while better labor market opportunities for women are

expected to lower it. An additional prediction from Becker's analysis is that, controlling for men's and

women's labor market opportunities, a larger relative supply of potential partners for women will raise

2
 For evidence on the deterioration in the labor market for less-skilled young men and women, see, e.g., Katz and
Murphy (1992); Burtless (1994).
their likelihood of marriage. The importance of the supply of “marriageable” men has been emphasized

by Wilson (1987), Ellwood and Crane (1990), and Darity and Myers (1995).

         Consistent with Becker's analysis, several studies have found that men's employment

opportunities have a positive effect on marriage for both blacks and whites, although their quantitative

effect may be small.3 Studies focusing on women's labor market prospects have tended to find that

improved employment opportunities are associated with declines in marriage for white women, but not

for blacks (White, 1981; Mare and Winship, 1991; Schultz, 1994; McLanahan and Casper, 1995;

Wood, 1995). One problem with previous work is that it has tended to focus simply on the wages of

women and their potential partners, without regard to marriage market availability. When marriage

market availability has been taken into account, the focus has been on the supply of marriageable men

only, not taking into account that the supply of women may also vary. Moreover, men’s labor market

success and marriage market availability are generally combined into one variable, e.g. the supply of

single men who are employed or earn more than a particular amount. In our work, we extend these

analyses by more carefully distinguishing labor market success from marriage market availability.

         This study also differs from previous work in using a richer set of measures of labor market

conditions some of which are disaggregated by education and race groups. Disaggregating by

education and race is particularly important given the increase in labor market inequality that has

occurred over the past few decades. In addition, rather than use actual earnings and employment of

women and their potential partners as explanatory variables, we use estimates of the underlying supply

and demand conditions which determine these wage and employment opportunities. Our approach is

less likely to be contaminated by reverse causality biases than much of the previous literature.4

Moreover, studies using area levels of family formation outcomes tend to use average marriage rates as

the dependent variable, raising the possibility that observed correlations between marriage rates and the


3
  See, e.g., Mare and Winship (1991); Lichter, McLaughlin, Kephart, and Landry (1992); South and Lloyd (1992);
Schultz (1994); McLanahan and Casper (1995); Ellwood and Crane (1990); Wood (1995).
4
  Schultz (1994) uses a woman's predicted wage and the predicted wage of her potential male partner as explanatory
variables in a marriage equation. While this approach does not suffer from the kind of reverse causality bias
discussed above, it does not include a measure the likelihood of employment or the overall availability of partners.
explanatory variables reflect compositional factors, e.g., a highly educated population. We account in a

very detailed way for composition differences across areas.

        Another distinctive feature of our research design is to focus on young women—those aged 16-

24. This means that we are measuring labor market conditions at roughly the time when these women

are making their family formation decisions. Including older age groups, as much of the existing work

does, brings in people who made their family formation decisions at widely-varying times, hence

possibly under widely differing labor market conditions. However, our focus on a young age group may

also be problematic, particularly for highly educated women. Given the low marriage rates of young

college-educated women, one may reasonably wonder whether the relevant decision "window," i.e., the

period of time during which marriage is under most active consideration, is indeed older than our 16-24

age range. In addition, young women currently enrolled in college may have moved to attend school

and thus may not be strongly influenced by the labor and marriage market conditions in the MSA where

they currently reside. To test the robustness of our findings, we perform a supplementary analysis of

women aged 25-34; such results should be of interest for all education groups but most especially for

college women.

        In analyzing the impact of labor and marriage market conditions on marriage decisions, we

follow a methodology similar to recent labor market studies that have exploited cross-sectional variation

among labor markets in changes in wages, wage inequality and employment over the 1970s and 1980s

to test hypotheses about their causes (e.g., Freeman 1991; Bound and Holzer 1993, 1996). As

discussed in greater detail below, cross-sectional estimates of these effects may be biased if MSA-level

variables are correlated with unobserved MSA fixed effects or an unobserved MSA-level time trend.

For this reason, we estimate first- and second-difference specifications that can eliminate these effects.

Our second-difference estimates constitute a particularly distinctive feature of this study. Another

methodological issue that has been identified in these types of studies is that migration between

metropolitan areas can complicate the interpretation of results based on these units of analysis (Bound

and Holzer 1996). In the work described below, we also consider this issue.

        There is also a considerable literature investigating the impact of welfare on women's family
formation decisions. In a recent review, Moffitt (1998) concludes that, more often than not, welfare

benefits are found to have a negative effect on marriage, although frequently these effects are small,

many studies find no significant effects at all, and others provide mixed results. As in the case of the

impact of labor market conditions, an important methodological issue is that there may be biases in

cross-sectional estimation caused by unobserved MSA-level fixed effects and time trends (e.g.,

Ellwood and Bane 1985; Hoynes 1997). Hoynes' (1997) study of single headship is one of the few to

take account of the latter by including individual as well as state fixed effects. However, the inclusion of

individual fixed effects means that the impact of welfare is identified from migrants only. An advantage

of our use of a second difference specification, as an alternative method of addressing this problem, is

that it does not place the entire burden of identification on migrants. An additional advantage of our

study is that our improved controls for labor market conditions provide a sharper test of the impact of

welfare on marriage decisions.



III. Analytical Framework, Data and Methodology

         This study exploits differences across metropolitan areas in labor and marriage market

conditions and welfare policy to estimate the impact of these factors on the incidence of marriage for

young women. The analytical framework is based on the assumption that substitution in the labor

market between groups such as high school dropouts or college graduates is imperfect. Thus, changes

in relative supply or demand for such groups will in general produce changes in relative wage offers

(Katz and Murphy, 1992) which will in turn affect family formation decisions in the ways discussed

above.

         We exploit variation across local labor markets in supply and demand to test this framework.

Our maintained hypothesis is that supply and demand adjustments across regions are partially limited by

mobility costs. These costs imply that the nature of local labor markets lies between two extremes. At

one extreme, if mobility were costless, all inter-area wage differences (not compensated for by amenities

or cost of living differences) would be quickly arbitraged by migration. At the other extreme, if mobility

costs were infinite, each local labor market could be treated as an island. The full effects of local labor
market demand and supply shifts would be reflected in area wages and employment-to-population

ratios. If, as is likely, local labor markets lie between these two extremes,5 we may reach some

qualitative conclusions about the relationship between findings based on inter-area differences in supply

or demand shifts and the ultimate goal of explaining young women’s marriage outcomes in the US in

general. However, due to migration, the effects of inter-area demand and supply changes on family

formation decisions are expected to be smaller than the effects of similar shifts in the nation as a whole.

Migration will also change the composition of an area’s population, if those moving to a new location

have different characteristics from those already there. Thus, we briefly examine the implications of

migration for our conclusions.

         We primarily use microdata on women age 16-24 from the 5 percent samples of the 1980 and

1990 Censuses, additionally using the 2 percent sample of the 1970 Census in some supplementary

analyses. These are the largest available samples in each year and contain sufficient observations to

stratify analyses by race-education group and to identify local labor market effects within each of these

categories. Since it is possible that the effects of area differences in the impact of labor market

conditions on marriage are sensitive to overall economic conditions, it is fortunate that macroeconomic

conditions were similar in 1980 and 1990. We distinguish two race groups: non-Hispanic whites and

non-Hispanic blacks.6 We also divide our samples of young women into three education groups based

on years of schooling completed: those with less than a high school education (ED < 12); those who

have completed high school but have no further education (ED = 12); and those who have completed

some education beyond high school (ED > 12); this latter category includes both those with some

college and those with a college degree.

         Our local labor markets are "metropolitan statistical areas" (MSAs). Where boundaries for

MSAs change over time, we use a consistent set of definitions so that comparable areas are defined in


5
  For a fuller consideration of these issues, see Topel (1986); Bound and Holzer (1993, 1996); and Bartik (1993).
6
  In the 1970 Census, it is not possible to reliably identify Hispanic origin, so analyses using 1970 data include all
blacks and all whites regardless of Hispanic ethnicity. Even when Hispanics are identified separately (in the 1980 and
1990 Census), samp le sizes in many MSAs are too small to allow us to analyze Hispanics separately for a large
number of cities.
1980 and 1990. When MSAs were consolidated in such a way that we could not uniquely assign an

individual to one MSA, we gave each affected individual the weight corresponding to his/her probability

of inclusion in each MSA; or within and outside our MSA subsample. Thus, in the computation of

means across individuals and in regression analyses based on individual data, affected individuals may

be fractionally included in more than one MSA and/or fractionally included in the MSA subsample.7

Our sample includes the 111 MSAs that had more than 20 young women in each race-education group.

 While any particular cut-off is arbitrary, this should provide sufficient observations to compute the levels

of the labor market variables (described below) for each MSA. Although the analysis necessarily

excludes people who do not live in MSAs, as well as those who live in MSAs with insufficient sample

sizes, our sample nevertheless includes the majority of young women: 52-64 percent of whites and 74-

81 percent of blacks.8

        The analysis proceeds in two stages. In stage 1, estimated across individuals, we estimate

MSA effects in linear probability models for the incidence of marriage within education-race groups in

the 1980 and 1990 Censuses. In stage two, estimated across MSAs, we use the first-stage MSA

effects as dependent variables in the analysis of the impact of the labor and marriage market conditions

and welfare variables.

        In the first stage linear probability models, we include as explanatory variables dummy variables

for: age (in individual years); level of schooling; whether the young woman is an immigrant and how well

she speaks English (measured as a dummy variable for speaking English not well or not at all); as well as

individual MSA. For the less than high school group, we include controls for the following educational


7
  In matching MSAs across the 1980 and 1990 metropolitan areas as defined by the Census, we were guided by
Bound and Holzer’s (1996) original breakdown of these areas. We departed from Bound and Holtzer in our treatment
of cases where MSAs were consolidated so that it was not possible to uniquely allocate an individual to one MSA.
As noted in the text, rather than arbitrarily allocate all affected individuals to one MSA (e.g., the one where the
majority of people in their area reside), we took advantage of published information on the proportion of the
population in the individual's "Public Use Microdata Area" (PUMA) or County Group residing in each MSA to
impute the probability that the individual resided within a particular MSA. A similar approach was used to ensure
comparability across the 1970, 1980 and 1990 Censuses when all three were used. A more complete explanation is
provided in a data appendix that is available from the authors upon request.
8
  A comparison of means indicates that the characteristics of our sample are very similar to those for the entire US
population.
categories: 1-4 years, 5-8 years, 9 years, 10 years, and 11 years. For those with exactly twelve years

completed, no control is needed, and, for those with some college, we include a dummy for completing

at least 16 years.9 We include those enrolled as well as those not enrolled in school because schooling

decisions are made in the same context as marriage decisions. Thus, in effect, we estimate reduced

form models for the marriage decision. Since our samples are young and include the enrolled, the

within-group control for age is important: the meaning of having less than a high school education, for

instance, is not the same for someone age 16 (who may be continuing on) as it is for someone age 22

(who has likely completed her education). Our inclusion of individual age dummy variables controls for

cross-MSA differences in the age composition of the population and thus allows for an appropriate

interpretation of the MSA effects.

         The first stage models thus have the following form:



(1)               Yit = Vitbt + Σ jCijtwjt + eit,



where for person i and year t (t = 1980 or 1990), Y is an indicator variable for marriage, V is a vector

of individual level variables including age dummies (in years), schooling dummies (where relevant), and

immigrant status and language ability, and C is a vector of n MSA indicator variables, indexed by j.10

Equation (1) was estimated separately for each of the six race-education groups for 1980 and 1990,

with Huber-White corrections for heteroskedasticity. 11

         This first stage analysis produces a set of estimated MSA effects for each education-race group

in 1980 and 1990. In specifying the second stage, we begin with the following MSA model for each

year t within schooling-race groups:



9
   In calculating years of education, we follow Jaeger (1997) to deal with the changes that were made to the education
questions beginning in the 1990 Census.
10
    As noted above, in some cases the MSA indicator variable is a fraction, denoting the probability that an individual
is in MSA j. Since some individuals have a positive probability of falling outside the MSA sample, we can include
n=111 MSA variables and a constant term even though there are 111 included MSAs.
11
    Selected results from these regressions are available from the authors upon request.
(2)                  wjt = MjtG + aj + dt + cjt+ vjt



where j refers to MSA; M is a vector of MSA-level variables (described in greater detail below)

including the adult male unemployment rate, the log adult male average wage level in the labor market,

an index of labor market net supply (supply relative to demand) for women in this race-education group,

the analogous index of labor market net supply for young men of the same race-education group, an

index of supply of women in the indicated group relative to supply of men in the same group, and a

measure of welfare generosity; G is a vector of coefficients; aj is an area fixed effect; dt is a time effect

common to all areas; cj is a time trend for area j and vjt is an error term. The variables in M are

measured in the same year as marriage is measured.

           Direct estimation of equation (2) could result in biased estimates of the coefficients on the

MSA-level variables if they are correlated with the unobserved MSA fixed effects (aj) or the

unobserved MSA time trends (cj). For example, community norms may be especially tolerant of

unmarried adults and value a strong safety net of public support for those living in poverty, producing a

spurious negative correlation between welfare benefit levels and marriage rates due to unobserved MSA

fixed effects. And, different MSAs may have different trends in these omitted variables (i.e. the cj). For

example, norms in one community may become more conservative at a more rapid pace than those in

another area. We might then observed a faster rise in marriage and fall in real welfare benefit levels in

the former area, but it would not be due to the effect of welfare.

           As may be seen in equation (3), first differencing of (2) can eliminate the bias due to the area-

specific fixed effects (aj) but will not eliminate all omitted variable biases if there are also area-specific

time trends (cj) that are correlated with the explanatory variables: 12



(3)                  wjt - wjt-1 = G(Mjt - Mjt-1) + (dt - dt-1 ) + cj + (vjt- vjt-1).




12
     The changes in the overall time effect (d t - d t-1 ) is included in the constant term of equation (3).
         However taking the second difference of (2) can eliminate biases due to area-specific time

trends as well area-specific fixed effects13 :



(4)      [(wjt-wjt-1)-(wjt-1-wjt-2)] = G[(Mjt - Mjt-1) - (Mjt-1 - Mjt-2)] + [(dt-dt-1)-(dt-1-dt-2)]

                                                                         + [(vjt- vjt-1)-(vjt-1- vjt-2)].



         Estimation of equation (4) requires us to employ the 1970 as well as the 1980 and 1990

Censuses. Because of the smaller sample size of the 1970 Census, for the second difference

specification we used a cut-off of 10 people in each race-education-gender group in an MSA, rather

than the 20 person cut-off which we employed in the analyses including 1980 and 1990 only. In

addition, English language ability was not available in the 1970 data and immigration status was not

available for the full sample, so these variables were omitted from the first stage regressions when 1970

was included. Our basic 1980-1990 results were unchanged when the 1980-90 analyses were

repeated on the 1980 and 1990 samples created for the matched 1970, 1980, and 1990 models.

         Each second stage levels equation was estimated using weighted least squares, with the weights

being the inverse of the estimated (heteroskedasticity-robust) variances of the first stage regression

coefficients. When (2) was estimated in first difference form, the weights were 1/(V80+V90), where V80

and V90 are respectively the variances for the 1980 and 1990 MSA coefficients. And when we

implemented second differences, the weights were 1/(V70+4V80+V90).

         The MSA-level variables are constructed as follows. First, the net labor market and marriage

market supply indices are defined as:



(5)      Net Female Labor Market Supplyktjf = ln (Sktjf) - ln (Dktjf)



13
   Again, including a constant term in (4) accounts for the second difference in the overall time effect. Borjas,
Freeman and Katz (1997) used such a second difference methodology to analyze the impact of immigration on local
labor markets. Of course biases could still remain if there were changes in area-specific time trends that differed
across areas and were correlated with the explanatory variables.
(6)      Net Male Labor Market Supplyktjm = ln (Sktjm) - ln (Dktjm)



(7)      Net Female Marriage Market Supplyktjf = ln (Sktjf) - ln (Sktjm),



where k stands for education-race group of 16-24 year olds, t for year, j for MSA, f for females, m for

males, Sktjf and Sktjm are the fractions of the total MSA population that are in the indicated race-

education-gender group and aged 16-24, and Dktjf and Dktjm are demand indexes for females and males

in the indicated race-education-gender group and aged 16-24. The demand indexes are similar to those

constructed by Katz and Murphy (1992) and are defined as follows (using female demand as an

illustration):



(8)      Dktjf = Σ o (sokt * Eotj/Etj),



where o indexes industry-occupation category (14 industries crossed with 3 occupations),14 k indexes

race-education group (females in this case), and t stands for year; sokt is the share which group k

comprises of total US employment in industry-occupation cell o in year t; and Eotj and Etj are

respectively total MSA employment in industry-occupation cell o and total MSA employment.

         The demand index is essentially a predicted MSA employment share for group k in area j,

where we weight the relative employment of industry-occupation group o in area j by the national

importance of group k in the industry-occupation cell. Since the same weights (sok) are used for each

MSA in a given year, the demand index is driven by area differences in overall industry-occupation

composition of employment. Net labor market supply, then, is the relative excess of actual supply (in

the population) over this predicted relative employment. As Katz and Murphy (1992) show in a simple

14
  The industry categories are: Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries; Mining; Construction; Manufacturing (Durable
Goods); Manufacturing (Nondurable Goods); Transportation, Communications and Other Public Utilities; Wholesale
Trade; Retail Trade; Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate; Business and Repair Services; Personal Services Including
Private Households; Entertainment and Recreation Services; Professional and Related Services; and Public
Administration. The three occupation groups are: Professional, Technical and Managerial; Clerical and Sales; Craft,
Operative, Laborer and Service.
equilibrium model, a group’s relative wage offers will be negatively related to its net labor market

supply.

          A difficulty in using such variables to understand changes in wage rates for various groups over

time is that they do not capture within industry-occupation shifts in demand. Such shifts, generally

attributed to technological change, appear to be an important component of recent changes in relative

wages for various skill groups. So, for example, Katz and Murphy (1992) find that relative wages have

been increasing for skilled (i.e., college educated) workers despite their rising measured net supply; they

attribute this to within industry-occupation increases in demand for this group which are not captured by

the demand variable as defined. Interestingly, our use of these measures in a cross-section context may

have more validity in that, at a point in time, technology is likely to be fairly fixed and measures like these

which are driven by MSA differences in employment composition may indeed capture much of the true

intercity difference in group demand.15 Similarly, while the overall 1980-90 change in the net supply

measure may not accurately capture the true temporal changes for a particular group due to unmeasured

changes in within industry-occupation demand, intercity differences in the magnitude of the measured

changes, which implicitly net out a fixed component due to technological change, may be quite

informative.

          These demand and supply indexes suffer from the well-known problem that they may be

affected by relative wages and therefore are not precisely the same as the desired notion of the

placement of the local relative demand and supply curves (Katz and Murphy 1992). But since the

demand index is based on national shares for the group and overall local employment in industry-

occupation cells, it is not likely to be greatly affected by changes in our focal groups’ local wage levels.

And the supply index refers to population rather than employment shares, again providing a more

convincing source of exogenous variation, although even the population of a given race-gender-

education group may be affected by relative wages through migration and schooling decisions. These



15
  Our measure may of course miss some heterogeneity across MSA's within our fairly broad industry-occupation
groupings.
issues of exogeneity will be considered further below.16

        Once we control for the underlying determinants of labor market prospects (net supply) for a

given race-education group of young women and the corresponding group of young men, our further

control for “Net Female Marriage Market Supply” is also expected to influence the marriage decisions

of young women. We measure marriage market prospects by comparing the relative representation of

the focal race-education group of young women to that of the corresponding race-education group of

young men. We thus implicitly assume marital sorting by race and education group, an empirically valid

assumption (e.g., Becker 1981; Tucker and Mitchell-Kernan 1990). Note that what has been identified

in the literature as the supply of “marriageable males,” is here incorporated into two variables Net

Male Labor Market Supply (also defined for the corresponding race-education group of young men)

and Net Female Marriage Market Supply—which taken together comprise exogenous indicators of this

concept. That is, they reflect both labor market conditions for and relative quantity of the young men

whom these women would be likely to marry.

        The other explanatory variables in equation (2) include the log of the sum of the maximum

AFDC plus food stamp benefits available for a family of four in the state in which the MSA is located in

1980 dollars; the log of the average hourly wage for men age 25-54 in the MSA in 1980 dollars; and

the MSA unemployment rate for men age 25-54. Wages were computed as annual earnings last year

divided by the product of weeks worked and average weekly work hours among the non-self

employed.17 The interpretation of welfare benefits is straightforward. Adult male average hourly wages

and unemployment serve as overall labor market indicators. Moreover, controlling for wage levels puts

a sharper interpretation on the welfare variable, since average hourly wages are likely to be closely

correlated with local living costs.


16
   The demand index as defined above uses employment shares and current year national employment share weights.
 Our results were the same when we used shares of work hours or 1980 national employment share weights for both
years.
17
   Actual values for the AFDC levels are reduced by 30% in light of the fact that food stamps were reduced by 30%
of the AFDC benefit level; see Moffitt (1990). In some cases, an MSA spanned more than one state. In such cases,
the welfare variable was a population-weighted average of the benefit levels in each state. Those with computed
hourly wages less than $1 or greater than $250 in 1980 dollars were excluded from the calculations.
           As noted above, the rationale for the estimation of fixed effects models, either in first or second

difference form, is to eliminate the omitted variables biases caused by unobserved MSA effects. While

these procedures can indeed eliminate these biases under some circumstances, it must be acknowledged

that there are also some reasons to be guarded in evaluating fixed effects results, here and elsewhere.

           First, there may be reverse causation such that changes in the explanatory variable influence

changes in the dependent variable (Besley and Case 1994). For example, in states with rapidly

declining marriage rates and growing welfare caseloads, benefit levels may be changed in response,

although the expected direction of such a change is uncertain. On the one hand, a larger welfare

constituency may be able to lobby for higher benefit levels. On the other hand, greater strains on the

state treasury may limit increases in welfare benefit generosity. In either case, we may observe a

correlation between changes in welfare benefits and changes in family formation decisions that does not

reflect a true impact of welfare benefits on behavior. Even a second difference equation may not

eliminate this bias if the acceleration of caseloads varies by MSA. Of course a similar objection applies

to cross-sectional models, and they moreover do not remove any truly fixed unobserved MSA effects

(or trends) that could bias the estimated coefficients on the observed explanatory variables.

           A second difficulty with fixed effects estimation, noted by Hamermesh (forthcoming), is that the

effect of interest is identified solely through changes in the key explanatory variables within units, in our

case MSAs. As Hamermesh points out, fixed effects methods may lose their ability to detect true

effects if most of the variance in the explanatory variables is cross-sectional. For example, pooling the

1980 and 1990 samples of MSAs in our data, we find that about 94 percent of the total variance

(unweighted by MSA size) in the log of real welfare benefits is due to variation between MSAs, while

the other 6 percent is due to differential changes in welfare benefits within MSAs.18 And, in fixed effects

models, our estimates of the impact of welfare are based on this 6 percent. A similar pattern

characterizes our labor market net supply variables: 82-97 percent of the total variance in female and

male net labor market supply occurs between MSAs. Only in the case of the female marriage market

18
     Hoynes (1997) also notes that “a permanent state component is by far the largest contributor to the variance of
net supply variable does an appreciable portion of the total variance occur within MSAs (20-56

percent). Thus, while fixed effects models solve some problems, they may also reduce the power

associated with statistical tests.

          The upshot of this discussion of the econometric issues involved in fixed effects estimation is that

one should put more faith in results that hold up under a variety of statistical techniques than in results

that are empirically fragile.



IV. Results

A. Overall Trends

          Table 1 shows mean values for our subsample of 111 MSAs in 1980 and 1990.19 The means

are shown separately for the entire population (Panel A) and for the nonenrolled (Panel B). For the

purposes of describing overall trends by education group, the figures for the nonenrolled may be more

informative, since years of schooling eventually completed will likely exceed the current level among the

enrolled. Among those who have completed less than 12 years of schooling, 60-74 percent are

currently enrolled.20 Thus, we focus much of our discussion here on the nonenrolled. However, for the

reasons discussed above, in our regression analyses, we use the full sample including those enrolled in

school.

          Consider first the patterns of marriage and fertility by education level among the nonenrolled.

The relationship between marriage and education differs by race. Among whites, marriage was

modestly negatively related to education level in 1980 but not strongly related to education in 1990;

among blacks, there is a positive relationship between marriage and education level in both years. In

contrast, the incidence of children is strongly negatively related to education for both whites and blacks,

a finding which together with the marriage patterns by education is consistent with the well-known

negative relationship between single-parenthood and education (Blau 1998).

19
   In addition to the MSA weights (described above), for 1990, observations are weighted by the sampling weights
provided by the Census; no weights are provided for other years.
20
   Of course even the nonenrolled can return to school later. But educational attainment among those currently not
in school must surely be closer to eventual completed levels than among those currently in school.
         A final pattern related to education is recent migration. Those with some college are

substantially more likely to have migrated from another state or country in the last five years. This may

be due to the fact that the labor market for the college educated is wider geographically than for the less

educated (Bound and Holzer 1996) and may also reflect a decision to attend college in a different state

from where one attended high school. In light of the concern raised earlier that migration to attend

college could dilute the estimated effect of MSA labor and marriage market conditions for this group, it

is interesting to note that the vast majority of young women with some college (i.e., about 80 percent of

whites and over 80 percent of blacks) have not moved, at least from a different state, in the last five

years.

         There are also important racial differences in demographic outcomes. Within each educational

category, black women are considerably less likely to be married than white women but are more likely

to have children present. Since, due to their lower income levels, black women are more likely to be

eligible for welfare benefits, these differences in marriage rates are consistent with an effect of welfare

benefits on these decisions. Our regression analyses presented below will shed light on this issue.

However, we may note here that the considerable race differences in marriage that exist among more

highly educated women strongly suggest that welfare is not the only explanation. A further racial

difference in demographic behavior is whites’ substantially higher migration rates; this implies that local

labor market conditions have a potentially greater effect on black outcomes.

         Our descriptive statistics also shed some light on changes in young women’s behavior over time.

The most striking trend in Table 1 is the sharp decline in marriage rates for all race-education groups.

Focusing on the nonenrolled, we see that marriage rates fell 19.2-31.0 percent (7.4-14.7 percentage

points) among whites and 27.8-50.9 percent (7.6-10.1 percentage points) among blacks. Further, the

absolute and relative declines in marriage tend to decrease as education level rises. These educational

patterns could be due to a deteriorating labor market for less-skilled men, and we will investigate this

possibility in more detail below. Despite the sharp drop in marriage rates, the incidence of children

within race-education groups did not change dramatically between 1980 and 1990. This trend is

consistent with a rise in female-headed families.
B. Regression Results

     1. Basic Specification

         The weighted regression results for the second stage models explaining the MSA marriage

coefficients from a first stage linear probability model are presented in Table to 2.21 We consider first

the findings for the three net supply variables. These variables generally have the expected effect on

marriage for whites in all education groups: all else equal, better labor markets for women and a less

favorable gender ratio in the population reduce marriage rates, while better male labor market prospects

raise them.22 Some evidence of these effects is also obtained for young black women, but the findings

are sensitive to estimation technique.

         Looking first at whites, we find that, in the cross-section, the coefficients on female and male

labor market net supply are substantial in magnitude and are always statistically significant. The results

for female marriage market net supply are somewhat weaker but are correctly signed in all but one case

(high school graduates in 1980 where the coefficient is small and insignificant) and statistically significant

in all but one of the remaining cases. These cross-sectional findings hold up strongly in the first

difference specification. Perhaps surprisingly in light of the greater likelihood of geographic mobility

among more educated women, the impact of these variables does not tend to be larger for the less

educated (who are less mobile) and indeed the largest estimated coefficients are for women with some

college. Finally, the effects of the net supply variables continue to be strong and statistically significant in

each education group when we implement the second difference specification.

         Among blacks, the labor and marriage market variables are correctly signed in the cross-section

21
   As explained above, the second stage regressions were weighted by the inverse of the estimated variance of the
first stage regression coefficient. The results were very similar when we did not use weights or when we weighted by
the MSA population of the indicated group.
22
   These three net supply variables are linear combinations of the four underlying supply and demand variables for
young women and young men of the indicated education-race group. Thus, the regressions in effect restrict the
impacts of these four variables to work through the three created net supply measures. We tested these restrictions
for each specification for each race-education group. There were 24 regressions in all: 4 time periods [1980, 1990,
1980-90 first differences, and ((80-90)-(70-80)) second differences] x 3 education groups x 2 race groups. Based on F-
tests, the restrictions on the four supply and demand variables were accepted at the 5 percent significance level in 14
out of 24 cases; the cases where the restrictions failed did not show a strong pattern.
and usually statistically significant for all education groups in 1980 and larger than their standard errors

for those with less than a high school degree (ED <12) in 1990.23 However, these variables perform

poorly in 1990 for the other two education groups. When area fixed effects are removed for blacks

(i.e. in the first difference specification), the coefficients on the three labor and marriage market variables

become small and insignificant for the ED<12 group, but substantial and significant effects are obtained

for high school graduates and the estimated coefficients are correctly signed for blacks with some

college. Finally, in the second difference specification for blacks, the labor and marriage market

variables are never statistically significant but are correctly signed for those with at least a high school

degree.

           Turning to the effect of welfare benefits on marriage, the results are sensitive to specification.

We see for 1980 strong, significant negative coefficients for each race-education group. And these

significant effects are also observed in 1990 for whites. However, in each of these cases (i.e., 1980

black and white cross sections and 1990 white cross sections), the absolute value of the estimated

effect is as at least as large for more highly educated groups as for those with less than a high school

degree, the group for whom we expect the largest negative welfare effect. While this pattern does not

suggest a welfare impact on marriage, the first difference results do point in this direction: they are

statistically significant or nearly so only in the case of the less educated and the largest negative effects

are for this group as well. But this pattern disappears when we perform second differences: none of the

welfare coefficients are significant and the less educated no longer have the largest estimated negative

effects. Only in the perhaps implausible instance in which omitted area-specific factors affecting

marriage and welfare benefits are truly fixed can we conclude that welfare benefits affect marriage

rates.24

           Finally, we consider results for the macro-level indicators of adult male average wages and

unemployment rates. Unlike the group-specific labor and marriage market variables, the aggregate


23
   Taken as a group, the three labor and marriage market variables were significant for blacks with ED<12 in 1990 at
better than the 2 percent level.
24
   We estimated supplementary models with a dummy variable for AFDC-UP coverage and obtained similar results.
indicators appear to have a more consistent effect for blacks than for whites. For example, in our four

specifications in Table 2, Part B, adult male unemployment rates are negatively associated with black

marriage rates 11 of 12 times, with a significant coefficient 3 of these 11 times. In the first and second

difference specifications, adult male unemployment has a negative effect in each case and is statistically

significant once. In the cross-sections, the coefficient on average adult male wages is inconsistently

signed for blacks. However, in the first and second difference specifications, average adult male wages

have positive effects on black marriage rates which are significant or nearly so in every case. In contrast

to the unemployment results for blacks, the impact of this variable is somewhat unstable for whites. The

unemployment rate is found to have a negative effect on marriage for all education groups in the cross

section, though these coefficients are generally insignificant; however, in the first and second difference

specifications, the estimated effects are negative for less educated women, but positive for the other

education groups. The estimated effect of average wages for whites is generally negative in the cross-

section, but positive 5 of 6 times in the first and second difference specifications, although generally not

statistically significant in the latter case.

         The effects of these aggregate economic indicators for blacks (positive for wages, at least in the

first and second difference specifications, and negative for unemployment) are consistent with the idea

that male market opportunities are more sensitive to aggregate conditions than are female opportunities.

 To the extent that males are in more layoff-prone industries (Blau and Kahn 1981), this conclusion

makes sense. The effects could be weaker for whites if the labor market opportunities of white males

are less cyclically sensitive relative to women's than are black male's.



         2.       Results for 25-34 Year Olds

         As a test of the robustness of these findings, Table 3 presents results for an older age group of

25-34 year olds.25 For whites, the findings are quite similar to those obtained for 16-24 year olds, and

25
   In order to produce an adequate sample of MSAs, we used cut-offs of 15 people in each race-education group per
MSA for 1980-90 analyses and 10 people per group for 1970-80-90 analyses. The resulting samples included 102 of
the original 111 1980-90 comparison MSAs and 56 of the original 67 1970-80-90 comparison MSAs used in Table 2's
analysis of 16-24 year olds. When the models for the 16-24 year olds were restricted to these subsets, the results
for blacks they are considerably stronger. For both blacks and whites, the labor and marriage market

variables have the correct sign in all but one case (i.e., the first difference specification for white women

with less than 12 years of education) and are frequently statistically significant. In particular, for women

of both races, the results are strong for the target group for this supplemental analysis: women with some

college education. For this group, the labor and marriage market variables are significant in all but one

case for whites and 8 of 12 cases for blacks; the coefficients are larger than their standard errors in all

the remaining cases. Moreover, the results for black women in this age group are stronger than those

obtained for younger black women in the other educational categories as well. Specifically, the market

variables are not only correctly signed in all specifications, they are large relative to their standard errors

in all but one case (the first difference specification for the ED=12 group). The stronger and more

consistent findings for blacks in the older age group suggest that their decisions may be more influenced

by labor and marriage market conditions than those of their younger counterparts.

         As in the case of our findings for younger women, the results for the welfare benefits variable in

the analyses for older women are considerably stronger in the cross-section where it is frequently found

to be significantly negatively related to marriage than in the difference specifications where it is not

generally found to be statistically significant. And, as in the case of the previous analysis, the strongest

evidence of the impact of the adult male unemployment rate on marriage is obtained for blacks where

this variable is negatively signed in 10 of 12 times, with a significant coefficient in 3 of these cases.



         3.       Assessing the Quantitative Importance of the Estimated Effects

         One issue that arises regarding these findings is their quantitative importance for the various

subgroups. The results in Table 4 for our focal group of 16-24 year olds address this issue. The first

two rows of the table show the 75-25 gap in the MSA marriage coefficients in 1980 and in 1990 (i.e.,

the difference between the value of the marriage coefficient at the 75th percentile and the 25th percentile

of the MSA distribution of marriage coefficients). The remainder of the table shows, for the first and



were very similar to those in Table 2.
second difference specifications, the effect on the incidence of marriage of the 75-25 gap in each

explanatory variable (i.e., the difference between the value of the explanatory variable at the 75th

percentile and the 25th percentile of the MSA distribution of that variable in 1990).26

        The results in the table indicate that the male and female net labor market supply variables tend

to have the largest effects and that these effects are substantial compared to the overall 75-25 gap in

marriage coefficients. For example, among less educated whites, the 75-25 difference in marriage

coefficients was 2.6 to 4.5 percentage points. The second difference specification implies that an

increase in the female net labor market supply variable between the 75th and the 25th percentile of the

MSA distribution would result in an 11.9 percentage point rise in the incidence of marriage, while a

comparable increase in male labor market net supply would result in a 6.8 percentage point decrease in

the marriage rate. A note of caution in evaluating the contribution of these two variables is that they are

highly positively correlated.27 Thus their effects tend to the offsetting. Though nonetheless often

substantial, the effect of a 75-25 percentile difference in female net marriage market supply is generally

estimated to be lower than the corresponding estimates for the male and female net labor market supply

variables for each specification and each group. For example, among less educated whites in the

second difference specification, a 75-25 difference in marriage market net supply is estimated to reduce

the incidence of marriage by less than 1 percentage point. Interestingly, in this specification, the impact

of this variable tends to increase in absolute value by level of education for both blacks and whites.

        The effects of the other variables also tend to be smaller than for male and female net labor

market supply. The impact of welfare benefits is generally found to be small in the second difference

specification, but some substantial effects are obtained for the least educated women in the first

difference specification, where an increase in welfare benefits corresponding to the 75-25 gap in this

variable is expected to decrease white marriage rates by 2.3 percentage points and black marriage rates

by 3.0 percentage points. The impact of average male wages is larger in the second difference


26
   The 75-25 gaps are computed using population-weighted data for each year.
27
   For example, among the least educated, the correlation between male and female net labor market supply was .54
for whites and .50 for blacks in the first-difference specification.
specification, especially for blacks, where an increase in average male wages corresponding to the 75-

25 gap would increase black marriage rates by 2.8 to 6.1 percentage points. For blacks, an increase in

the unemployment rate corresponding to the 75-25 gap is estimated to decrease black marriage rates

by .7-1.3 percentage points for women with 12 or more years of schooling (i.e., ED = 12 and ED >

12); the impact for whites is small and inconsistent in sign.



        4.       Implications for Trends in Marriage Rates

        It is also of interest to use these results to explain the trends in marriage rates over time. While,

as discussed above, the inability of the underlying demand indexes to detect within industry-occupation

shifts makes this problematic, a review of the estimated contribution of 1980-90 changes in the means

of our explanatory variables to the trends in marriage rates is nonetheless instructive. This

decomposition is shown in Table 5. We first present the unadjusted change in the marriage rate for

each group followed by two estimates of changes in marriage rates adjusted for shifts in the composition

of the population based on the estimated first stage regression coefficients and 1980 and 1990

composition weights, respectively. By comparing the unadjusted and adjusted changes in marriage rates

for each education group, it may be seen that changes in the composition of the population by age,

education (within broader educational categories), and immigrant status do not explain much of the trend

in marriage rates. The extent to which the variables included in our second-stage analysis can explain

the remaining trends is examined in Part III of the table using the first difference (Panel A) and second

difference (Panel B) regressions.

        To motivate our examination of these estimates, consider the changes in the means of the labor

and marriage market variables in our sample shown in Table A1. Based on our net supply variable, it

appears that the male labor market has deteriorated the most for less-skilled men, both relative to other

men and relative to women; these changes have been particularly pronounced among blacks.28 Taking

into account within industry-occupation demand shifts would likely reinforce this conclusion. What does

28
  Blau and Kahn (1997) also found that during the 1979-1988 period labor market supply and demand conditions
changed least favorably for men relative to women among those with low skill levels.
our decomposition suggest about the impact of these trends?

         Table 5 indicates that the changes over time in male net supply contributed to a decline in the

marriage rate for all race and education groups, with the exception of blacks with less than 12 years of

education.29 The negative effect of this variable on marriage rates was particularly large among black

high school graduates. However, with the exception of whites with some college education, the total

effect of the three net supply variables (i.e., the sum of the effects for female and male net labor market

supply and female net marriage market supply) is estimated to explain only a small portion of the decline

in the marriage rate or even to contribute to an increase. This finding is due to two factors that offset the

negative effect of adverse male labor market trends on marriage. First, and quantitatively of

considerable importance, results for the female marriage market net supply variable indicate that, for all

but whites with some college education, the relative availability of men actually rose, increasing

particularly sharply for high school graduates.30 This marriage market availability factor, which reflects

rising educational attainment among young women, contributes to an increase in marriage rates for all

but white college educated women. Second, Table A1 indicates that, by our measure, female net labor

market supply is estimated to have increased for all but white women with less than 12 years of

schooling. Thus, Table 5 shows a positive contribution to marriage rates of this variable for the other

race-education groups, with the exception of black women with less than high school education in the

second difference specification (the latter is due to a perverse result on the sign of this variable in the

regression). This result could very well reflect our inability to detect increases in the within industry-

occupation demand for women workers.31 Were we able to do so, we might have found that the labor

market for some or all of the education groups of women actually improved over the 1980s, or at least

did not deteriorate to the extent indicated by our measure.


29
   This finding for blacks reflects the weak results for blacks in the first and second difference specifications, rather
than trends in means which, as we have seen, were quite adverse for black men in this education category.
30
   The weighted changes in female marriage market net supply for blacks (Table A1) are negative for all education
groups. This is possible to the extent that there were movements in and out of the 111 MSAs upon which the table is
based.
31
   Increasing relative wages of women over the 1980s as well as the higher representation of women in white-collar
and service jobs suggest this may well have been the case (see Katz and Murphy 1992; Blau and Kahn 1997).
         Turning to results for the other variables, we see that changes in welfare benefits, a popular

alternative explanation for the rising incidence of single parenthood, are actually found to have a modest

positive effect on marriage trends. This is because welfare benefits have declined by about 9-10

percent in real terms on average in our sample during the 1980-1990 period. Similarly, since there was

little change in adult male unemployment rates, this factor was not found to have played a role in

explaining the trends. Adult male wages did fall somewhat. While the impact of changes in this variable

on trends was generally not found to be large, for black women in the ED = 12 and ED > 12 groups,

the second difference results indicate that real wage changes could explain a 1.0-1.2 percentage point

decline in marriage; this corresponds to 11.4-25.5 percent of the adjusted change in marriage rates for

women in these education groups using 1990 composition weights.

         While there appear to have been some offsetting changes in the impact of the explanatory

variables, our analysis suggests that trends in male labor market net supply and adult male real wages

would be the most likely factors to have contributed to the decline in marriage rates. Another factor

which could have played a role but which we could not measure would be an improvement in within

industry-occupation demand for female labor.



C.       Possible Endogeneity Biases

         We have found strong evidence, particularly for whites, that labor and marriage markets are

related to differences in the incidence of marriage in both cross section and fixed effects models.

Nonetheless, even accounting for MSA fixed effects (first difference regressions) and MSA specific

time trends (second difference regressions), there may be endogeneity biases. Decisions about marriage

may influence educational attainment or there may be omitted variables which cause changes in both

family formation decisions and educational attainment. For example, getting married as a teenager might

lead a young woman to drop out of school, thus raising our measure of female labor market supply for

the less educated and correspondingly lowering the measured supply of the more highly educated.32

32
   Our demand variable could also be affected by schooling decisions, but since the demand measure is based on
total MSA employment shares, it is not likely to be greatly influenced by the decisions of young people in our age
Moreover, changes in the labor market or welfare variables can influence migration. If migration is

affected, then observed changes in the incidence of marriage may reflect the pre-existing behavior of

migrants rather than changes in the behavior of the current population. We now consider these two

possible sources of biases.

        First, on the issue of reverse causality going from decisions about marriage to decisions about

schooling, note that in every case where the female labor and marriage market variables had statistically

significant effects, they had opposite signs. For example consider the results for less educated white

women. For this education group, as for the others, better female labor markets tended to lower

marriage while better female marriage markets tended to raise it. If reverse causality from marriage to

educational decisions were the only underlying behavior our results were measuring, we would expect

the coefficients on these two variables to have the same sign. The possible bias due to reverse causality

could help to account for the positive coefficient on the female labor market net supply variable for the

less educated: when a young woman drops out of school to marry, the net supply of the less educated

and their marriage rate are both increased. However, the reverse causality mechanism also implies an

upward bias on the female marriage market net supply variable for those with lower levels of schooling,

but we predict and find negative effects of this variable on marriage. Looking at women with some

college education leads to the opposite predictions about reverse causality bias to those for the less

educated, since marriage may lower the supply of college-educated women. But where the results are

statistically significant, we obtain the same signs on the labor market and marriage market variables for

college-educated women as for those with less education. If reverse causality were the only factor

driving our results, then we should have obtained opposite signs on a given supply variable for the high

and low education groups.

        Second, to what extent do our results reflect alterations in the composition of the population due

to migration rather than true behavioral effects? To examine this question, we estimated the impact of

our explanatory variables on migration based on second-stage regression equations similar to those



group who constitute a relatively small share of the total MSA population.
employed for marital status.33 We found that, for whites, better female labor markets, worse female

marriage markets and worse male labor markets in the past are significantly positively associated with

migration into the area. Similar findings are obtained for blacks in the cross sections, but these do not

hold up in the first difference models, where the signs on the net supply variables for blacks become

unstable and the coefficients are usually insignificant. While unemployment, wages, and welfare benefits

sometimes have significant migration effects in the cross-sections, they do not hold up in the first

difference equations. Inspection of the means of the variables for migrants and nonmigrants separately,

within race and education groups, indicates that migrants are more likely to be married than

nonmigrants. This pattern implies that, whatever the causes of the relationships between past labor and

marriage market conditions and migration, migrants are not driving the regression results in Table 2. If

this were the case for whites, we would expect better female labor markets, worse female marriage

markets and worse male labor markets to raise the incidence of marriage because each is positively

associated with migration and, within race and education groups, migrants are on average more likely to

be married. Of course, our findings for these variables are precisely the opposite.



V.       Conclusions

         This paper uses 1970, 1980 and 1990 Census data to estimate the impact of local labor and

marriage market conditions and welfare benefits on the incidence of marriage among young women (age

16-24). Our most robust findings are for the labor and marriage market variables which were found to

have a strong impact on the marriage incidence of whites in all education groups: better female labor

markets, worse female marriage markets and worse male labor markets were found to lower marriage


33
   Results available upon request. The dependent variable is the MSA coefficient from a 1990 (1980) first stage
regression similar to equation (1) for the determinants of migration from another state or country in the last 5 years.
This information is available only for a subset of our sample; when migration is analyzed our sample of microdata on
individuals is reduced by 50 percent. In the second stage cross-sections, we use 1980 (1970) levels of the
explanatory variables, and in the 1980-90 first difference analyses, we use 1970-80 changes in the explanatory
variables, so as to assure the causal ordering of the dependent variable. Since we do not have data to compute 1960-
70 changes in the MSA-level explanatory variables, we approximate the second difference analysis by re-estimating
the first difference migration equations and adding the 1965-70 MSA migration coefficient from the 1970 first stage
regression.
rates. We also found some evidence of these effects for young black women, but the findings were

sensitive to estimation technique. Interestingly, when the model is estimated for an older age group (25-

34 year olds), the results are similar for whites, but considerably stronger for blacks.

        We additionally found an impact of overall labor market conditions, particularly for blacks:

higher adult male unemployment rates and lower adult male average wage rates tended to reduce

marriage rates. The results for welfare benefits tended to be sensitive to specification. In cross-

sectional analyses, there is a negative association between welfare benefits and marriage. However, this

association becomes weaker when we control for fixed effects, a common theme in research on the

effects of welfare on family formation decisions.

        While our findings provide strong evidence that labor and marriage market conditions influence

marriage rates, the absence of a measure of within industry-occupation shifts in demand makes it difficult

for us to evaluate their quantitative impact on time trends. However, to the extent that economic

variables are important in explaining the decline in marriage for young women, our results suggest that

adverse trends in demand and supply conditions for young men and declining adult male real wages

would be the most likely factors contributing to this trend.

        Is the decline in marriage a cause for concern? While it is possible that falling marriage rates

among young women merely represent a delay in marriage, the incidence of children among this group

hardly changed over the 1980s. This has meant that a greater share of children is growing up in single

parent families. Among the nonenrolled, the rise in single parenthood has been particularly pronounced

among the least educated. The major forces that have produced a deterioration in the labor market for

less-skilled men—technological change and international trade—give no sign of abating in strength. Our

results imply that such forces will continue to inhibit marriage for white women with a high school degree

or less education (who would traditionally marry men in the affected groups) and perhaps for less

educated black women as well.
                                           References

Bartik, Timothy J. (1993). “Who Benefits from Local Job Growth: Migrants or the Original
        Residents?” Regional Studies, Vol. 27, No. 4: 297-311.

Becker, Gary S. (1981). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Besley, T. and A. Case. (1994). “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of Endogenous
        Policies.” NBER Working Paper 4956 (December).

Blank, Rebecca. (1995). “Teen Pregnancy: Government Programs Are Not the Cause.” Feminist
       Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2 (Summer): 47-58.

Blau, Francine D. (1998). “Trends in the Economic Well-Being of Women: 1970-1995.” Journal of
        Economic Literature, Vol. 36, No. 1 (March): 112-165.

Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber and Anne E. Winkler (1998). The Economics of Women,
        Men, and Work, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (1981). "Causes and Consequences of Layoffs." Economic
        Inquiry, Vol. 20, No. 2 (April): 270-296.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. (1997). "Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender
        Wage Differential in the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1 (January): 1-
        42.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. (1997). "How Much Do Immigration
        and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.
        1: 1-67.

Bound, John and Harry Holzer. (1993). "Industrial Shifts, Skills Levels, and the Labor Market for
       White and Black Males.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 75, No. 3 (August):
        387-396.

Bound, John and Harry Holzer. (1996). “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market
       Outcomes During the 1980s.” NBER Working Paper 5685 (July).

Burtless, Gary. (1994). "The Employment Prospects of Welfare Recipients." Working Paper,
        Brookings Institution (August).

Darity, William A., Jr. and Samuel L. Myers. (1995). "Family Structure and the Marginalization of
        Black Men: Policy Implications. In M. Belinda Tucker and Claudia Mitchell-Kernan, eds.
        The Decline in Marriage Among African Americans. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
        pp. 263-308.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Robert S. Smith. (1997). Modern Labor Economics: Theory and Public
       Policy, 6th ed. New York: Addison-Wesley.

Ellwood, David and Mary Jo Bane. (1985). "The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and Living
       Arrangements." In Ronald Ehrenberg, ed. Research in Labor Economics. Greenwich, Conn.:
       JAI Press, pp. 137-207.

Ellwood, David and Jonathan Crane. (1990). "Family Change among Black Americans: What Do We
       Know?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 4, No. 4 (Fall): 65-84.

Freeman, Richard B. (1991). "Employment and Earnings of Disadvantaged Young Men in a Labor
      Shortage Economy." In Christopher Jencks and Paul Peterson, eds. The Urban Underclass.
      Washington, D.C.: Brookings, pp. 103-121.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (forthcoming). “The Craft of Labormetrics.” Industrial and Labor Relations
      Review.

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson (1997). "Does Welfare Play Any Role in Female Headship Decisions?"
       Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 65, No. 2: 89-117.

Jaeger, David. (1997). "Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 15,
        No. 3 (July): 300-309.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. (1992). "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
       and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1 (February): 35-78.

Korenman, Sanders and David Neumark. (1991). "Does Marriage Really Make Men More
      Productive?" Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 2 (Spring): 282-307.

Lichter, Daniel T., Diane K. McLaughlin, George Kephart, and David J. Landry. (1992). "Race and
        the Retreat from Marriage: A Shortage of Marriageable Men?" American Sociological
        Review, Vol. 57, No. 6 (December): 781-799.

London, Rebecca. (1998). "Trends in Single Mothers' Living Arrangements From 1970 to 1995:
      Correcting the Current Population Survey." Demography, Vol. 35, No. 1 (February): 125-
      131.

Mare, Robert D. and Christopher Winship. (1991). "Socioeconomic Change and the Decline of
       Marriage for Blacks and Whites." In Christopher Jencks and Paul E. Peterson (eds.). The
       Urban Underclass. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, pp. 175-202.

McLanahan, Sara and Lynne Casper. (1995). "Growing Diversity and Inequality in the American
      Family." In Reynolds Farley (ed.). State of the Union: American in the       1990s, Volume
      2. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 1-45.
Moffitt, Robert. (1990). "The Effect of the U.S. Welfare System on Marital Status." Journal of
        Public Economics, Vol. 41, No. 1 (February): 101-124.

Moffitt, Robert. (1998). "The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility: What Do We Know and
        What Do We Need to Know?" In Robert Moffitt (ed.). The Effect of Welfare on the
        Family and Reproductive Behavior. Washington, D.C.: National Research Council, pp. 50-
        97.

Schultz, T. Paul (1994). "Marital Status and Fertility in the United States: Welfare and Labor and in
        the Market Effects." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 29, No. 2 (Spring): 636-669.

South, Scott J. and Kim M. Lloyd. (1992). "Marriage Markets and Nonmarital Fertility in the United
        States." Demography, Vol. 29, No. 2 (May): 247-264.

Topel, Robert. (1986). “Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No. 3
       (June, Part 2): S111-S143.

Tucker, Belinda and Claudia Mitchell-Kernan. (1990). “New Trends in Black American Interracial
        Marriage: The Social Structural Context.” Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol. 52,
        No. 1 (February): 209-218.

White, Lynn. (1981). "A Note on Racial Difference in the Effect of Female Economic Opportunity on
       Marriage Rates." Demography, Vol. 18, No. 3 (August): 349-354.

Wilson, William Julius. (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Wood, Robert G. (1995). "Marriage Rates and Marriageable Men: A Test of the Wilson Hypothesis."
       Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 30, No. 1 (Winter): 163-193.
