NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ELASTICITY OF TAXABLE INCOME:
EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS

Jon Gruber
Emmanuel Saez

Working Paper 7512
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7512
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2000

We are grateful to Gerald Auten, David Cutler, Esther Duflo, Gary Engelhardt, Dan Feenberg, Austan
Goolsbee, and Joel Slemrod for helpful comments, and in particular to Dan Feenberg for his patience and help
with the TAXSIM calculator. Gruber acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Jon Gruber and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Implications
Jon Gruber and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 7512
January 2000
JEL No. H21, H31, J22
ABSTRACT
A central tax policy parameter that has recently received much attention, but about which there is
substantial uncertainty, is the overall elasticity of taxable income. We provide new estimates of this
elasticity which address identification problems withprevious work, by exploiting a long panel of tax returns
to study a series of tax reforms throughout the 1980s. This identification strategy also allows us to provide
new evidence on both the income effects of tax changes on taxable income, and on variation in the elasticity
of taxable income by income group. We find that the overall elasticity of taxable income is approximately
0.4; the elasticity of real income, not including tax preferences, is much lower. We also estimate small
income effects on tax changes on reported income, implying that the compensated and uncompensated
elasticities of taxable income are very similar. We estimate that this overall elasticity is primarily due to a
very elastic response of taxable income for taxpayers who have incomes above $100,000 per year, who
have an elasticity of 0.57, while for those with incomes below $100,000 per year the elasticity is less than
one-third as large. Moreover, high income taxpayers who itemize are particularly responsive to taxation.
We then derive optimal income tax structures using these elasticities. Our estimates suggest that the optimal
system for most redistributional preferences consists of a large demogrant that is rapidly taxed away for
low income taxpayers, with lower marginal rates at higher income levels.

Jon Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
saez@fas.harvard.edu

One of the most important features of economic policy-making during the 1980s were
a series of tax reforms which dramatically lowered marginal income tax rates in the U.S.,
particularly for higher income families. The top marginal income tax rate at the federal
level fell from 70% in 1980 to 28% by 1988, as the income tax schedule was reduced from
fteen brackets to four. There were parallel changes in state income tax systems over this
decade as well; New York, for example, moved from a system in 1980 with 13 brackets
and a top marginal rate of 14% to one in 1989 with 5 brackets and a top marginal rate of
7.875%.
The intellectual weight behind this dramatic reduction in marginal tax rates was the
logic of supply side economics. A number of in uential articles, such as Hausman (1981)
and Boskin (1978), argued that behaviors such as labor supply and savings were very
elastic with respect to their prices, and as a result lower tax rates could generate important
increases in economic activity. A large body of subsequent literature, however, suggested
that these behavioral elasticities were actually rather modest (Slemrod, 1990). While this
subsequent literature may not be a driving factor, it is noticeable that the 1990s have
seen a reversal of the tax reductions of the 1980s, with marginal rates rising to 39.6% at
the top today.
Over the past few years, however, a new literature has emerged which has pointed
out that these standard behavioral responses are only one component of what drives
taxable income; other responses such as the form of compensation, unmeasured e ort,
and compliance also ultimately determine taxable income income, and these may be more
elastic with respect to taxation. Feldstein (1995) in particular observed that it is the
overall elasticity of taxable income which is relevant for assessing the implications of tax
changes for revenue raising. His seminal article found that this elasticity was very high
for the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86), in excess of one for his central estimates.
This striking conclusion has generated a substantial body of work on this central
parameter. Unfortunately, this subsequent work has generated a wide range of estimated
elasticities, ranging from Feldstein's estimate at the high end to close to zero at the
low end. This extreme variation re ects a variety of di erences between the approaches
in these papers, along dimensions such as the de nition of income (ranging from broad
Haig-Simons type de nitions to narrower taxable income de nitions), the samples used
(ranging from just focusing on high income taxpayers to using a full range of incomes),
3

and, perhaps most importantly, the source of identi cation. As emphasized by Slemrod
(1996) and Goolsbee (1997,2000), many of the studies have essentially shown that high
income taxpayers, whose marginal rates were falling in the 1980s, increased their taxable
income during this era. But there was a general widening of the income distribution
during the 1980s, and disentangling the role of taxation, as opposed to other factors such
as international trade and skill-biased demand shocks, is quite diÆcult.
Our paper makes four contributions to this empirical literature. First, we draw on the
entire set of state and federal tax reforms during the 1980s to estimate the elasticity of
taxable income. The use of multiple years of changes allows us to address the identi cation
problem faced by previous work by controlling in a rich way for the relationship between
income changes and lagged income levels. That is, since for every income group over this
time period there are di erent changes in tax policy in di erent years, we can control for
any general tendencies towards (for example) a widening income distribution over this
period while identifying the impact of tax policy changes. Second, while the previous
literature has focused only on uncompensated responses to tax changes, our empirical
framework allows us to decompose these responses into compensated substitution and
income e ects. Third, by using this broad set of reforms, which a ected not just taxpayers
at the top of the income distribution, we can extend the literature by exploring the
variation in this critical parameter along the income distribution. Since we have variation
not just at the top of the distribution but throughout, we can examine the heterogeneity
by income class in how taxpayers respond to tax changes. This allows us to advance
the literature in a fourth important direction: performing simulations of an optimal nonlinear income tax system. We draw on Saez (1998), who presents a framework for using
empirically estimable elasticities to calculate optimal income tax schedules. With our new
estimates of elasticities along the distribution, this framework can be used to illustrate
the optimal four bracket tax system under a variety of assumptions for distributional
preferences among policy makers.
These advances generate a number of important ndings. We nd that the overall
elasticity of taxable income is 0.4, well below the original estimates of Feldstein but
roughly at the mid-point of the subsequent literature. This response is much lower,
however, for a broader de nition of total income that does not exclude tax preferences
such as exemptions and itemized deductions; this partly arises from the mechanical e ect
4

that the base for calculating the elasticity is larger, and partly from responsiveness of tax
preferences to tax rates. We estimate small income e ects of tax changes on reported
income, implying that the compensated and uncompensated elasticities of taxable income
are very similar. We also nd that this response is driven largely by the behavior of high
income taxpayers; the elasticity of taxable income for those with incomes above $100,000
is 0.57, while it is less than one-third that for other income groups. High income taxpayers
who itemize appear to be particularly responsive to tax changes. Finally, our estimates
suggest that the optimal system for most redistributional preferences consists of a large
demogrant that is rapidly taxed away for low income taxpayers, with lower marginal rates
at higher income levels.
Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides a review of the literature on the
elasticity of taxable income, highlighting the variation in the estimates, and the di erences
in approach across these papers. Part II discusses our data and methodology. Part
III presents our basic results. Part IV considers heterogeneity by income and marital
status. Part V displays both revenue-maximizing and optimal income tax rates. Part VI
concludes.

1 Previous Work
As noted in the introduction, there is a long tradition of work on the behavioral elasticities of labor supply and savings which determine the responsiveness of real behavior
to taxation. The literature on labor supply has recently been reviewed in Blundell and
MaCurdy (1999), and they conclude that the responsiveness of male labor supply to aftertax wages is low, although it is higher (and perhaps much higher) for female/secondary
earner labor supply. There is less consensus on the responsiveness of savings to taxation,
but Hall (1988) concludes that there is little evidence from time series data to suggest an
important correlation between savings and rates of return. There is also a large literature
on the responsiveness of other elements of taxable income to taxation, such as charitable
giving and the form of compensation (as well as tax evasion), which suggests that these
elements are fairly sensitive to taxation (Slemrod, 1990). But these literatures had proceeded in piecemeal fashion, each paper considering the response of a particular real or
reporting behavior, but with little e ort to integrate the ndings.
5

The rst article to attempt such an integration was Lindsey's (1987) study of the
response of taxable income to the Economic Reform Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA 81), which
signi cantly reduced tax rates on high income earners. He used a series of cross-sections
of taxpayers to project what the distribution of earnings would have been like in 1982
had there been no change from 1979, other than uniform overall income growth. He then
interpreted a change in the distribution of incomes towards the wealthy as evidence of
a responsiveness to taxation, estimating an elasticity of taxable income with respect to
taxation of 1.6 to 1.8. But, as highlighted by Navratil (1995), a critical problem with this
approach is that the income distribution is not static, and if there is any growing skewness
of incomes for other reasons, then the use of a constant real income cuto will naturally
lead to a nding that tax cuts for the wealthy are leading to higher taxable incomes in
that group.
Feldstein's (1995) in uential article addressed this problem by turning to panel data,
allowing him to assess whether given individuals actually saw income changes, rather
than simply whether income changed on average in a given income group. He studied
the experience of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA 86), which further reduced tax
rates at the top of the income distribution. He examined groups of taxpayers based on
their pre-TRA income levels, and found that for those taxpayers for whom rates fell the
most, taxable income increased the most. He estimated elasticities of taxable income with
respect to taxation ranging from 1 to over 3, with a central estimate of 2.14.
Feldstein's article generated a signi cant amount of interest in this question, and led
to the series of additional studies reviewed in Table 1. As is immediately apparent, there
is signi cant disagreement among these studies about the appropriate elasticity estimate,
with results ranging from zero to 0.8. But as is also apparent, there is signi cant di erence across the studies in how the question is approached, along at least two important
dimensions.
The rst, and most important di erence, is whether the studies attempt to control for
mean reversion and, relatedly, for other trends in the income distribution which might
confound the results. While panel data reduces the problem noted above with the Lindsey (1987) study, it introduces a new problem: if there is a mean-reverting transitory
component to income in a given year, then it can cause high income taxpayers in one year
to appear low income in the next, aside from any true behavioral response. At the same
6

time, a countervailing factor is the fact that the distribution of income has been continually widening since the mid-1970s, with particularly large gains at the very top of the
income distribution in the 1980s and 1990s. This corresponds to a series of tax reforms
which have targeted their tax cuts (ERTA 81 and TRA 86) and increases (the 1993 tax
increases studied by Goolsbee (1997) and Carroll (1998)) at the top of the income distribution. It is possible that these tax policies are themselves causally related to this widening
of the pre-tax income distribution, but there are a variety of alternative explanations as
well, ranging from the impacts of international trade to skill-biased technological change
(see Katz and Murphy (1992)). While several of the studies reviewed here recognized
the mean reversion problem, only Auten and Carroll (forthcoming) and Saez (1999) dealt
with it in a manner that also potentially addressed concerns about omitted determinants
of the income distribution (by including explicit controls in the regression for base year
income group).
A second major issue is the de nition of income used. Most studies reviewed here use
taxable income as the income de nition, in many cases excluding capital gains income.
Whether this is the right de nition depends very much on the question being asked;
for local reforms, this is probably appropriate, but for thinking about larger reforms or
optimal tax systems, it would be more appropriate to use a more comprehensive income
de nition. There is some suggestion in the literature of sensitivity to the income de nition;
Feldstein's estimate is signi cantly lower (although still above most of the subsequent
literature) when a broader de nition of income is used.

2 Data and Methodology
2.1 Data
Our data source for this exercise is the NBER panel of tax returns over the 1979-1990
period. This panel, known as the Continuous Work History File, contains most of the
individual line items from form 1040, as well as numerous other items from the other
forms and schedules. The panel is constructed from all tax returns led in a given year
by selecting certain 4-digit endings of the social security number of the primary taxpayer
listed on the form. From 1979-1981, ve such endings were chosen, and the panel is quite
large, with roughly 46,000 observations. However, in 1982 and 1984, only one ending was
7

chosen, and in other years only two, so that the size of the panel was drastically reduced.
The empirical strategy is to relate changes in income between pairs of years to the
change in marginal rates between the same pairs of years. This pair of years are called
year 1 and year 2. The time length between year 1 and year 2 can be of one, two or three
years. In our basic speci cation, the time length is three years, following Feldstein (1995).
In that case, we relate year 1982 to year 1979, year 1983 to year 1980, ... and year 1990 to
year 1987. These nine di erences are stacked to obtain a single dataset of about 100,000
observations. We then exclude taxpayers whose marital status changes from year 1 to year
2, for whom we expect large reported taxable income changes unrelated to tax policy. It is
unlikely that tax changes a ected speci cally marriage strategies and therefore discarding
those observations should not bias the results.
We use two di erent types or de nitions of income: broad income and taxable income.
Broad income is an extensive de nition of gross income that is consistent across the
years 1979 to 1990. It includes most of the items that are summed to arrive at Total
Income on Form 1040: wage income, interest income, dividends, business income, etc.
The precise de nition of broad income is given in appendix. Broad income is a grosser
income de nition than Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) because Broad Income does not
incorporate the various adjustments such as IRA or retirement plans deductions that are
substracted from Total Income to obtain AGI. Capital gains are excluded because their
tax treatment is special. Before the TRA of 1986, only 40% of capital gains were included
in taxable income and thus the marginal rate on capital gains was much lower than on
other income. After the TRA, full capital gains were included in taxable income but the
top rate for capital gains was limited to 28%. Because of these special rules for capital
gains, most previous studies have also excluded capital gains from their analysis (see Table
1).
The Taxable Income de nition we use is close to the actual de nition of taxable
income. Our de nition is consistent over the years 1979-1990. It includes all the items
and adjustments that can be computed from the data for all the years 1979-1990. For
example, the secondary earner deduction that was in place from 1982 to 1986 is not
included because it cannot be computed for the other years. As for Broad Income, Capital
Gains have also been excluded from our Taxable Income de nition. See the appendix for
the precise de nition of Taxable Income; this de nition is very similar to what has been
8

used in previous work.1
As our de nition of taxable income is similar to the de nition in place in 1990, our
estimates can be viewed as the impact of taxes on a 1990-style taxable income de nition.
A limitation of this constant-de nition approach is that we potentially understate the
responsiveness of taxable income to taxation, even from the perspective of 1990. This
is because if the 1990 de nition were in place in earlier years, individuals may have
undertaken di erent activities to avoid taxes that would have shown up in this de nition;
that is, if the avoidance avenues available in earlier years were made unavailable, other
avenues might have been used instead that would have shown up in our data. Slemrod
(1998) describes this point in detail. O setting this, however, is the problem that, like
all other papers in this literature, we focus solely on the individual income tax base. A
growing wedge between the individual and corporate tax rate could lead some individuals
to shift their income generation from the non-corporate to corporate sectors; see Gordon
and Mackie-Mason (1994) and Gordon and Slemrod (2000) for evidence of this type of
shifting. Thus, we are overstating the total cost to the tax system from rising tax rates,
since some of the reduced individual income that we estimate will show up in rising
corporate sector income.
We also exclude taxpayers whose income is below $10,000 in year 1, to avoid very
serious mean reversion at the bottom of the income distribution. In fact, as our elasticity
results are weighted by income, including taxpayers with lower incomes does not significantly a ect the results. We select taxpayers according to their Broad Income in year
1, even when looking at Taxable Income. Therefore, potential di erences between Broad
Income and Taxable Income estimates do not come from selection.
In Table 2, we present the means of the data for the three year di erence case. The
Table shows that average Broad Income is equal to about $43,000 and average Taxable
Income equal to $25,000. 64% of our sample consist of married taxpayers and 28% of
singles. All our dollar gures are expressed in terms of 1992 dollars.
1 Contrary

to Feldstein and Auten-Caroll, we do not add back losses to our income de nitions because
we nd that adding back losses does not a ect the results.

9

2.2 Empirical Strategy
Our goal is to measure the impact of a change in the tax schedule faced by a given
individual on his income. To do so, we use the basic micro-economic framework with
two goods (consumption and income). From this basic model, we derive a regression
speci cation and we then discuss the identi cation assumptions.

 The Model
The budget constraint of a taxpayer on a linear part of the tax schedule is given by
c = z (1  ) + R, where z is before tax income,  is the marginal rate and R is virtual
income. Utility maximization leads to an income supply function which depends on the
slope of the budget line and on virtual income: z = z (1 ; R). For a given individual,
a tax change can be seen as a change in both virtual income R and marginal rate  .
Changes in R and  a ect income supply z as follows,

dz =

@z

@ (1  )

d +

@z
dR
@R

Introducing the (uncompensated) elasticity of income with respect to the net-of-tax rate
 u = [(1  )=z ]@z=@ (1  ) and the income e ect parameter  = @z=@R , we get,

dz =  u z

1

d



+  dR

Using the compensated elasticity of income  c = [(1  )=z ]@z=@ (1  )ju and the Slutsky
equation  c =  u (1  ) , we obtain nally,

d
dR zd
dz
= c
+
z
1 
z

(1)

dR z d is the change in after-tax income due to the tax change for a given before tax
income z . It is thus also equal to the change in tax liability for taxpayers with income z .
This is illustrated on Figure 1.

 Regression Speci cation
Using (1), a natural regression speci cation to estimate the elasticity parameters can
be written as follows,

10

log(z2 =z1 ) =  log[(1

T20 )=(1 T10 )] +  log[(z2

T2 (z2 ))=(z1

T1 (z1 ))] + 

(2)

where  is the compensated elasticity parameter and  is the income e ects parameter.
zi is real income in year i, Ti0 is the marginal tax rate in year i and Ti (zi ) is the tax
liability in year i. This speci cation resembles that used in previous studies, with an
important di erence: the inclusion of income e ects. Figure 1 illustrates empirically how
one can decompose a tax change into a tax rate e ect (change in the slope of the budget
constraint) and an income e ect (change in tax liability). Any tax change generates both
shifts in the slope of the income/tax relationship, as well as changes in after-tax income.
In principle, since the shift in the slope a ects equally all those on a segment of tax/income
relationship, but the income e ect varies by how far one is from a tax kink, and both
income and substitution e ects can be separately identi ed.
In order to simplify the discussion, let us assume rst that there are no income e ects
( = 0). The term capturing the tax rate change log[(1 T20 )=(1 T10 )] is correlated with
 because if there is a positive shock to income ( > 0) then, due to progressivity, the tax
rate increases mechanically. Therefore, an OLS regression of equation (2) would lead to
a biased estimate of the behavioral elasticity. The strategy to build instruments for this
variable is to compute Tp0 which is the marginal tax rate that the individual would face in
year 2 if his real income did not change from year 1 to year 2; that is, to just use changes
in tax laws to provide identi cation of the parameter of interest. The natural instrument
for log[(1 T20 )=(1 T10 )] is thus log[(1 Tp0 )=(1 T10 )] which is the predicted log net-of-tax
rate change if real income does not change from year 1 to year 2.
Running the IV regression of equation (2) might also lead to a biased estimate of the
elasticity if  is correlated with z1 . There are two di erent reasons why individuals at
di erent points in the income distribution might experience di erent income growth rates,
aside from tax changes. The rst is mean reversion: high incomes in year 1 tend to be
lower in the following years, producing a negative correlation between  and rst period
income. The second is a change in the distribution of income. For example, if the income
distribution widens, there will be a positive correlation between  and z1 . As noted in the
introduction, these opposing forces are both very likely to operate in the 1980s, and there
is no reason to expect that they will cancel.
11

If  depends on z1 , then the instrument (which is also a function of z1 ) will be correlated with the error term, producing biased estimates. It is for this reason that Auten
and Carroll (forthcoming) and Saez (1999) include lagged income as a control in their
regression models. Auten and Carroll show that there is a signi cant increase to their
coeÆcient when this control is added. But the problem with this solution is that the two
e ects do not necessarily operate linearly, particularly in combination with each other.
Thus, in principle, richer controls for period 1 income might be called for. But, in practice, with only two years of data (and therefore only one tax change), a much richer set of
controls for period 1 income may destroy identi cation. This problem is especially acute
when the size of the tax rate change is directly correlated with the income level as in the
TRA of 1986.2
As highlighted by Goolsbee (2000), what is required is a number of years of data,
where there are di erent changes in after-tax shares over time. In this framework, one
can control in a very rich way for lagged income and still identify tax e ects. As we
will demonstrate below, we use a variety of reforms that a ected di erent points in the
income distribution in di erent ways over time. As a result, we can add, in addition to
log income, a 10 piece spline in log rst period income (and our results are not sensitive
to even richer splines in rst period income). We also control for time (by including year
dummies) and marital status.
Of course, even in this richer framework, we still rely on an identifying assumption:
that mean reversion or changes in inequality are not changing year-to-year in a way that
is correlated with year-speci c changes in tax policy. In other words, we are allowing the
relationship between  and z1 to be non-linear, but we are imposing that it is constant over
time. Given the steadily widening income distribution over the time period we study, this
identi cation assumption is likely to be innocuous. We present speci cation tests below
that show that this assumption is robust to allowing in limited ways for year-speci c
variation in the relationship between  and z1 .
Following this same discussion, the term log[(z2 T2 (z2 ))=(z1 T1 (z1 ))] in equation
(2) which captures the income shock, is mechanically correlated with  and needs to be
instrumented. A natural instrument is the log change in real after-tax income if there
2 Note

that the Auten and Carroll results are in principle also identi ed by state tax changes around
TRA86, by the non-linearity introduced by the 33% \bubble rate" under TRA 86, and by changes in
deduction rules.

12

were no behavioral response: log[(z1 Tp ))=(z1 T1 (z1 ))] where Tp is the real tax liability
in year 2 that the taxpayer would face if his income did not change in real terms from
year 1 to year 2. Additional income controls also remove the residual correlation between
the error term  and the income e ect instrument.
Once again, for identifying the income e ect it is important to control for base year
income. In practice, rich controls for base year income make it very diÆcult to separately
identify income and substitution e ects with only one tax change. But since we are using
many tax reforms, the two e ects can be separately identi ed, as we show below.
The regression setting is thus the following,
log(z2 =z1 ) =
1

0

+  log[(1

X
log(z ) +
1

k

2k

T20 )=(1 T10 )] +  log[(z2

X
mars +
k

j

X
Y EAR + +

T2 (z2 ))=(z1

10

3j

j

i=1

4i

T1 (z1 ))]+

SP LINEi (z1 ) + 

(3)

Y EARj denote base year dummies and marsk dummies for marital status in base year.
This equation is estimated by 2SLS using log[(1 Tp0 )=(1 T10 )] and log[(z1 T2 (z1 ))=(z1
T1 (z1 ))] as instruments. The rst stage of this regression is very strong. The F-statistics
for the coeÆcient of the tax rate instrument in the rst stage regression are always above
20 and often around 100. The F-statistics for the coeÆcient of the income e ect instrument
in the rst stage regression are weaker but always above 6 and often around 20.
Since we stack observations from nine pairs of years to form our estimates, we are using
multiple observations on many of the same individuals. If there is individual-speci c
correlation in how income changes over time, then OLS will understate our associated
standard errors. We therefore present estimates that correct the standard errors for intrapersonal correlation.

 Computation Issues and Sources of Variations
All tax rate and tax liability variables are computed using the TAXSIM calculator
developed at the NBER.3 The tax computation includes federal and state tax rates. At
the federal level, the Earned Income Tax Credit and various other characteristics of the
tax rules are taken into account when computing the tax rates. In order to compute the
3 Feenberg

and Coutts (1993) provide an overview of the TAXSIM calculator.

13

predicted tax rate Tp0 and predicted tax liability Tp , all sources of incomes in year 1 are
rst in ated using a nominal growth de ator (see the appendix for more details). Then,
the TAXSIM calculator applies the income tax law of year 2 to this in ated observation.
All income levels are expressed in real terms in 1992 dollars.
During the decade there have been two major tax reforms, ERTA 1981 and TRA
1986. In 1981, the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) decreased marginal rates in
three years from 1982 to 1984. The top-rate was reduced from 70% to 50%. In 1986, the
Tax Reform Act (TRA) introduced the largest changes in the income tax since World War
II. The number of brackets was drastically reduced and the top-rate was further reduced
to 28%. The TRA also increased substantially the standard deduction and personal
exemption levels in order to be roughly redistributionnaly neutral (see Slemrod (1990)
for a more detailed description of the TRA). In 1987, the Earned Income Tax Credit was
also signi cantly expanded, producing signi cant changes in the tax rates faced by low
income households with children.
There have also been numerous state tax reforms during that decade, with many states
decreasing the number of brackets and reducing the top tax rates. At the same time, a
few states increased their income tax rates. And about half of the states have experienced
very little variation in their tax rules.4
Table 3 shows the extent of variation in our data. We provide information for each
year in our sample on the value of our instrument for the elasticity of taxable income,
the predicted log change in the net-of-tax rate, for the full sample and for three di erent
income groups, de ned by broad income: $10,000 to $50,000; $50,000 to $100,000; and
$100,000 and above. The instrument is negative for a tax rate increase and positive
for a tax rate cut. We show the results for a three year di erence between years; we
discuss further below the implications of di erent lengths of di erences. We show both
the average value of the instrument, and, in square brackets, the standard deviation in
this value.
As the results show, there is substantial variation in the mean values of this instrument,
over time, across income group, and within group over time. Over the 1979-82 period,
4 The

biggest tax cuts have been in Alaska (from a top rate equal to 14.5% to no taxation at all),
Delaware (top rate decreased from 16.7% to 7.7%), Minnesota (from 17% to 8%), New York (from
14% to 7.8%) and Wisconsin (from 10% to 6.9%). Ohio and North Dakota experienced the biggest tax
increases.

14

the values are negative (except for the top group), due to the bracket creep explored by
Saez (1999). Then, from 1980-83, the rst e ects of ERTA 1981 are felt, with a large
rise in the after-tax share at the very top of the income distribution, while it is close to
zero at the bottom due to continued bracket creep. By the next year, there are increases
in the after-tax share for most of the income distribution, and they persist to 1982-85.
Then, in 1983-86, the values become small again, before rising in 1984-87 and 1986-89 as
a result of TRA 1986. Once again, these increases are largest at the top of the income
distribution. By 1987-90, the instrument values are small once again (except at the very
top because of the phasing in of the TRA 86).
Clearly, the most sizeable variation in the means is at the top of the income distribution. But there are non-trivial movements in many years at the bottom and middle
income levels as well. Moreover, there is enormous heterogeneity within groups, as is
illustrated by the standard deviations. This heterogeneity arises from numerous federal
and state tax reforms during the period.

3 Overall Results
3.1 Basic Results
Since the focus of the previous literature has been solely on the elasticity of taxable
income, we rst estimate (3) without income e ect controls; we return to a discussion
of income e ects in the next section. We include in all models controls for base period
marital status, and dummies for each base year; the latter are not reported.
Our basic results from doing so are reported in Table 4. The table has six columns,
expressing three alternative methods for dealing with the issue of mean reversion/income
distribution changes, for our two income concepts. In the rst two columns, we do not
include any control. In the second two columns, we control for log income, as in Auten and
Carroll (forthcoming). Finally, in the third set of columns, we further include a 10 piece
spline in income, to allow for non-linearities in the widening of the income distribution;
our results are insensitive to higher order spline terms. We show the results for both
de nitions of income, broad and taxable. All estimates are weighted by income to re ect
the relative contribution to total revenues. However, to avoid the undue in uence of a few
very high income observations, we censor our weights at $1 million; this a ects only 13
15

observations. We also censor the change in log income at 7, so that the 11 observations
who report changes income ratios across the two years of more than 1000 or less than
1/1000 are censored at those endpoints. In practice, the results are fairly sensitive to the
rst restriction; our overall elasticity is only about three-quarters as large when we use
an uncapped weight, and the elasticity at the top of the income distribution is only about
60% as large. The results are not very sensitive to the second restriction.
Our ndings re ect substantial sensitivity to controlling for income, and to the form
of the controls. For the models in the rst column that exclude any control for mean
reversion and income distribution changes, we obtain large wrong-signed elasticities for
both broad and taxable income.
Once log income is included in the model, however, the results change quite radically.
For broad income, the elasticity becomes a positive 0.17, and for taxable income, the e ect
is dramatic, with the elasticity rising to 0.61. This estimate lies in the upper end of the
post-Feldstein literature discussed above. Log income itself has a highly signi cant negative coeÆcient, suggesting that on average mean reversion dominates income dispersion
in our sample period.
As noted earlier, the problem with this speci cation is that it assumes that any changes
in the income distribution are a (log) function of lagged income. It is diÆcult to e ectively
weaken this assumption with only one change, as in most previous work, since it destroys
identi cation of the tax e ects. But, since we have a number of tax changes over this
period, we can weaken this assumption in the third column, by including as well a ten-piece
spline in lagged income. In fact, we nd that adding this spline signi cantly decreases
our taxable income estimate, with the elasticity falling to 0.4, and lowers slightly our
broad income estimate, with the elasticity falling to 0.12. As noted earlier, this estimate
is robust to the inclusion of additional splines, cubics, or other forms of income controls.
The coeÆcients on the splines themselves support the contention that base period
income should not be entered in a simple log-linear fashion. For broad income, there is
a positive coeÆcient on the 1st spline, presumably re ecting mean reversion, and then
a sizeable negative coeÆcient on the second spline, perhaps re ecting worsening income
prospects for low income groups over this time period. The coeÆcients then demonstrate
signi cant non-linearities throughout the rest of the income distribution. For taxable
income, the splines are highly negative at the bottom of the income distribution, and
16

then once again vary non-linearly as income rises. In all speci cations except with no
controls, we nd positive coeÆcients on dummies for marrieds and negative coeÆcients
on dummies for single implying that married household experience increases in income
from year to year relative to single taxpayers.
The large di erence between our broad and taxable income elasticities is striking.
There are two sources of di erence here. The rst is mechanical; broad income has
a larger base, so that a given dollar response will result in a smaller elasticity.5 The
second is behavioral; taxable income includes itemized deductions, which might respond
to changes in taxes (as well as exemptions, which could respond if family size is endogenous
to taxation).
To decompose these e ects, we have estimated some models with \pseudo-taxable"
income, created by subtracting from both period 1 and period 2 incomes the period
1 level of exemptions and deductions. Doing so normalizes the income change for the
magnitude of the exemptions and deductions, but does not allow them to respond to
taxation, and thereby captures the mechanical but not the behavioral e ect of taxation.
We have estimated models using pseudo-taxable income, using splines in both broad and
taxable incomes as controls. Doing so, we nd that the pseudo-taxable income elasticity is
33-45% of the way between our broad and taxable income elasticities, depending on which
controls we use. This is sensible, given that, as shown in Table 3, the mean of taxable
income is only 60% as large as the mean of broad income. Thus, the mechanical e ect
appears to explain about two- fths of the gap between broad and taxable income. The
remainder is behavioral responses through changing itemization (and possibly exemption)
behavior.6
To summarize, our most complete speci cation suggests that there is a sizeable response of taxable income to tax changes, with an elasticity of 0.4. This is well below
Feldstein's estimates but is within the range of the subsequent literature, despite our
ability to include much richer controls for changes in the income distribution. On the
5 Another

form of mechanical e ect here is that with taxable income, higher state tax rates will result
in a larger deduction on federal income taxes, leading to an mechanical negative correlation between state
taxes and federal taxable income. We are grateful to Gary Engelhardt for pointing this out to us.
6 It is impossible to examine more directly itemization behavior using our methodology, since we would
only be able to include taxpayers with itemized deductions in both periods, leading to a substantial sample
selection bias.

17

other hand, we nd that the responsiveness of broad income is much lower than that
of taxable income. Roughly 40% of that gap is explained by the mechanical e ect that
broad income has a larger base so that elasticities will be calculated to be smaller for
a given dollar response to taxation; the remainder arises through changes in itemization
and exemption behavior.

3.2 Income E ects
As noted above, one advantage of our empirical framework is that we can separately
identify the income e ects of taxation on taxable income. To obtain income e ects,
we run the regression speci cation (3) including the income e ect term and all the full
set of control variables. In fact, it is theoretically unclear what sign to expect for the
income e ect estimates for constructs such as broad or taxable income. For the labor
component of total income, we might expect relatively small negative estimates, following
on the ndings of the labor supply literature (e.g. Pencavel (1986) and more recently
Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)). But it is feasible that capital income reacts positively to
a positive income shock if savings (and thus future capital income) increase. And it is
even more diÆcult to conceive of how activities such as tax evasion or shifts in the form
of compensation react to income increases.
In contrast to the estimates in Table 4, our estimates of this equation are unweighted.
This is because the income e ect coeÆcient  = @z=@R gives the direct (and not the
percentage) change in reported income due a change in tax liability. Therefore, the tax
revenue e ect due to income e ects should not be weighted by income.
Table 5 presents our results. We rst show our unweighted overall elasticities.7 The
unweighted taxable income elasticity is very similar to the weighted taxable income elasticity in Table 4, while the unweighted broad income elasticity is substantially lower than
the unweighted elasticity in Table 4. As we will discuss below, this re ects the fact that
7 It

is worth noting that the elasticities estimated in this model are not necessarily uncompensated
elasticities, since with a non-linear tax schedule the tax changes that we study may change both the
after-tax share and after-tax incomes. For example, when the tax schedule is a at tax with constant rate
and the tax reform is a simple change in the tax rate with no change in the intercept then the response is
given by the uncompensated elasticity. On the other hand, if the tax change changes tax rates without
changing the tax liability then the response is given by the compensated elasticity. Figure 1 illustrates
this point.

18

most of the response of income to taxation comes from those with high broad but not
necessarily high taxable incomes, due to the central role of itemization.
We then show substitution and income e ects from full estimation of equation (3).
The income e ects are negative, but they are highly insigni cant in both cases, and they
are quite small.
For interpretation, it is worth noting that the coeÆcient  estimated in equation
(2) does not correspond exactly to the theoretical parameter  of equation (1) because
after-tax income z T (z ) is smaller than before tax income z . The estimated  from
(2) is equal to the theoretical  from (1) multiplied by the average after-tax income
over income ratio [z T (z )]=z . At the same time, the Slutsky equation states that the
di erence between the compensated and uncompensated income elasticities is  (1  ),
which is thus approximately equal to our empirical estimate. Our empirical results show
therefore that the di erence between uncompensated and compensated elasticities is 0:135
for taxable income. This is small relative to the magnitude of the elasticities that are
presented in Table 4. These small income e ects are perhaps unsurprising, given that
income e ects on labor earnings are generally found to be small, at least for primary
earners, and income e ects on other forms of income could perhaps even be positive.
Therefore, we can safely assume that compensated and uncompensated elasticity are
identical and drop the income e ect variable (and instrument) in speci cation (3). We thus
present the remainder of our results, and our optimal tax simulations, without including
income e ects.

3.3 Variations in Timing
Following the previous literature, we have used a three year di erence in computing our
measures of both the change in taxable income and the change in after-tax shares. But
our framework allows us to explore the sensitivity of our nding to the length of this
di erencing \window". The implications of changing the window of observation are not
clear. If, on the one hand, individuals react slowly to tax changes, then using a longer
di erence might increase the estimated elasticity. If, however, as suggested by Goolsbee
(1997) and Sammartino and Weiner (1997), responses to tax changes are largely through
the timing of income reporting, then a longer di erence might reduce the elasticity.
We explore these issues of timing in Table 6. In this and all subsequent tables, we
19

use our richest speci cation from Table 4, including the splines in rst period income.
The Table proceeds by narrowing the window used rst to two and then to one year. In
fact, we nd that the estimate of the elasticity of taxable income to the window length
is fairly robust; the estimate falls signi cantly for a two year window but then rises for
a one year window almost back to its level in Table 4. The timing impacts on broad
income are similar, although the elasticity with a one year window is now higher than the
elasticity with a three year window. Thus, overall, the estimated impacts of taxation are
not particularly sensitive to the window over which the response is observed; the response
of real income is slightly lower, and the response of taxable income is virtually identical,
over a three year window relative to a one year window. Since a long run response seems
of most interest, and since this is the focus of most previous work, we continue to use a
three year window for the remainder of the paper.

3.4 Controlling for Time-Varying Income Distribution Changes
As noted earlier, our identifying assumption in these data is that there were no di erences
in the relationship between rst period income and the change in income over time that
are correlated with di erences in tax policy. While we believe that this is a reasonable
assumption, we can assess our sensitivity to alternatives which modestly weaken our
assumption.
We consider two such alternatives in Table 7. The rst is to allow for a linear time
trend in the splines in income that form our central controls. This allows for a general
trend in the widening of the income distribution over time. The second is to interact log
income with a full set of year dummies. This allows for year-speci c changes in the income
distribution, but only in a way that is linearly related to base-period income. Both of
these alternatives, and particularly the second, remove some of the variation from the
large federal reforms in our sample, much as including log income in a pre-post 1986
comparison (as in Auten and Carroll) removes much of the variation of that reform. But
if our results are robust to these controls, it suggests that changes in the relationship
between lagged income and income changes are not driving our results.
In fact, as Table 7 shows, our results are robust to these two sets of controls. Our
standard errors rise somewhat, but in both cases the key coeÆcients are similar to those in
Table 4. Thus, while we cannot rule out year-speci c non-linear changes in the relationship
20

between lagged income and income changes, it seems unlikely that these would occur in
precisely the same way as tax changes and therefore unlikely that they can explain our
results.

4 Heterogeneity
An important feature of the U.S. tax system is that taxes are not linear and do not apply
equally to all population subgroups. Tax rates di er both over the income range and
between groups such as married and single taxpayers. In the next two sub-sections, we
explore whether there is signi cant heterogeneity in the response to taxation among these
groups.

4.1 Income Group Heterogeneity
We rst consider heterogeneity across income groups. There is signi cant reason to believe
that the responsiveness of taxable income to taxes might be higher for higher income
groups, since more of their income comes in forms that are more readily manipulable for
tax purposes. That is, most of the income to lower income groups is labor income, which
is withheld for tax purposes, so the only way to manipulate income earning is to work
more or less. But with higher income families, capital income will be more prominent,
and this is more readily manipulated through, for example, asset allocation decisions.
A key advantage of our framework is that it allows us to explore heterogeneous responses by income groups. With only one change, as in most previous papers, most of
the variation comes across income groups, so it is very hard to identify group-speci c
responses. But, by exploiting the series of reforms that we have at our disposal, which
impacted di erent points in the distribution at di erent times, we are able to identify
group-speci c e ects.
In Table 8 we show the results by income group. An interesting question in this context
is which income concept to use when dividing the sample for analyzing the responsiveness
of taxable income. On the one hand, it seems natural to divide the sample by taxable
income, to replicate the tax bracket structure of the income tax. On the other hand, this
makes it quite diÆcult to compare the estimated elasticities of broad and taxable income.
Thus, we split the sample by income both ways in Table 8. In the second column,
21

we divide the sample into those with broad incomes from $10,000-50,000; incomes from
$50,000-100,000; and incomes above $100,000. In the third column, we cut the sample
by taxable incomes that correspond to roughly the same division of sample size: $10,000$32,000; $32,000-75,000; and above $75,000.
The results in the second column, where the sample is divided by base period broad
income, provide strong evidence that the responsiveness to taxable income that we have
seen is driven by the highest income taxpayers. There are modest elasticities of taxable
income of 0.18 for those in the $10,000-$50,000 income range, and of only 0.11 in the
$50,000-$100,000 range. But there is a much larger elasticity of 0.57 for those in the
very top income category. For broad income, the estimates are actually negative (but
smaller than their standard errors) for those below $100,000, but positive (although still
insigni cant) for those above $100,000.
This nding explains to some extent the di erence between our overall elasticity estimates and those of Feldstein and Auten and Carroll, which are higher. The TRA 1986
reform on which they focus almost provided tax variation mostly at the top of the income
scale, so that their overall estimates are identi ed primarily by reactions of high income
taxpayers. If this is the most responsive group, as our ndings suggest, then it is not
surprising that their estimates are higher.
The results in the third column, however, paint a somewhat di erent story. When
taxpayers are ordered by base period taxable income, there is a much atter response
along the income distribution. This interesting nding arises because the most responsive
taxpayers are those taxpayers with high real incomes, but lower taxable incomes, through
itemization. Indeed, while $75,000 of taxable income corresponds to roughly the same
cuto in the sample as does $100,000 of broad income, 15% of taxpayers with broad
incomes above $100,000 have taxable incomes below $75,000. These taxpayers have large
amounts itemized on their taxes, and they are the ones who appear particularly responsive
to taxation. As a result of large base period itemization, they are more equally distributed
in the base period taxable income distribution than in the base period broad income
distribution, and this results in a more equal distribution of responsiveness of taxable
income.
To illustrate this further, the next panel of Table 8 shows the responsiveness of taxable
income by itemizers and non-itemizers. The elasticity of both taxable and broad income
22

is much higher for itemizers, and they are in fact negative (but insigni cant) for nonitemizers. Moreover, we estimate that for itemizers, the elasticity of taxable income of
those with broad income above $100,000 in the base period is 0.66 (0.33). It is these
itemizers with very high real incomes, but not necessarily as high taxable incomes, who
are most responsive to taxation.
Given the imprecision of these estimates by income group, the patterns can only
be taken as suggestive. But the ndings do con rm the standard intuition that the
highest income taxpayers are the ones that are most responsive to taxation, as well as
further con rming the important role played by itemization in determining the elasticity
of taxable income.

4.2 Marital Status
Another relevant source of heterogeneity, in the context of current debates over the \marriage penalty" in the U.S. tax code, is heterogeneity by marital status in the base year.
Families of di erent marital status face di erent tax schedules, both in terms of exemptions and bracket cuto s. Thus, if either single or married lers are found to be particularly responsive to taxation, it would be straightforward (conceptually, if not politically)
to alter the parameters of the system to re ect this. Moreover, given that married taxpayers have more margins along which they can respond to taxation (e.g. the labor supply
of two earners), it is possible that they would be more responsive to tax changes.
In fact, as Table 8 shows, we nd no evidence that married taxpayers are more responsive than single taxpayers in terms of taxable income. Indeed, for broad income, we
nd a much higher elasticity for single taxpayers.
It is unclear why singles would be found to be more responsive than married couples,
particularly in light of Eissa's (1995) evidence of the responsiveness of high income wives
to the tax rates on their husband's income. We have obtained some suggestive evidence
that Eissa's results may not apply to the full income distribution: while the responsiveness
of singles is much higher in the $10,000-$100,000 income range, that of married taxpayers
is much higher in the $100,000 and upwards range. This would be consistent with the
notion that it is very high income wives that are the most elastic; but the comparison is
imprecise because there are very few high income single taxpayers.

23

5 Optimal Taxation
Throughout the tumultuous period in the history of the income tax studied in this paper, economists have been peculiarly absent in the normative discussion of the optimal
progressivity of our tax system. To be sure, economic evidence supporting (or disputing)
the importance of supply side incentives for labor supply and savings have been central
in the debates over tax structure. But, despite the enormous theoretical importance of
the optimal income tax literature that grew out of Mirrlees (1971) classic study, there
was little use of the optimal income tax framework to provide guidance as to how taxes
should be set. This likely re ects two limitations of this framework and its successors.
First, the theoretical development is rather esoteric, and diÆcult to translate to empirically relevant quantities; this led subsequent simulations of the optimal tax system (such
as Stern (1976) or Tuomala (1990)) to rely solely on crude calibrations. Second, the set
of predictions that were generated from these models, such as the conclusion that the
marginal tax rate should be zero on the highest income taxpayer, were of little relevance
for real world tax design.
In this section, we attempt to draw on our empirical framework to provide a computation of the optimal income tax system that is both theoretically rigorous, and empirically
based. To do so, we draw on Saez (1998), who showed how the optimal income tax formula could be expressed in terms of income and substitution e ects. In our application,
given the existence of only negligible income e ects, we can simplify the analysis further
by considering the model of Saez (1998) with only substitution e ects.

5.1 Theory
The tax schedule is de ned by the rates in each bracket and the guaranteed income level
that is redistributed to all taxpayers. As we have derived elasticity results for three income
ranges ($10,000-$50,000, $50,000-$100,000 and above $100,000), we naturally derive the
optimal tax rates in each of those three brackets. We also derive the optimal tax rate in the
bottom bracket (incomes between $0 and $10,000) in order to complete the characterization of the optimal tax structure. However, even our comprehensive estimation approach
does not allow us to estimate an elasticity in such a ne income range. Therefore, we assume that the elasticity of both broad and taxable income for those in this range is equal
24

to 0.4 as suggested by MoÆtt's (1992) review of the literature on behavioral responses of
the low income population to welfare program parameters.
Let us introduce some notation. As optimal rates are computed from the top to the
bottom, indices go from the top to the bottom.
 z1 ; z2; z3 are the income cut-o levels $100,000, $50,000 and $10,000 de ning the
brackets.
 z1 ; z2; z3 ; z4 are the mean of incomes in each of the four brackets [z1 ; +1), [z2; z1 ],
[z3 ; z2 ] and [0; z3 ].
 1 ; 2; 3 ; 4 are the optimal rates in each of the four brackets.
 h1; h2 ; h3; h4 are the share of taxpayers in each of the four brackets. The sum of the
hi 's is normalized to one.
 g1 ; g2; g3; g4 are the average social marginal weights in each of the four brackets.
These weights represent the redistributive tastes of the government. The government is
indi erent between giving gi dollars to taxpayers in bracket j and gj dollars to taxpayers
in bracket i.
 1; 2; 3; 4 are the average elasticities (weighted by incomes) in each of the four
brackets.
The top rate bracket is the easiest to derive. At the optimum value 1 , a small change
d1 has no rst order e ect on welfare. Increasing 1 by d1 increases mechanically tax
revenues (in the absence of behavioral responses) by h1 [z1 z1 ]d1 . However, each dollar
raised in the top bracket is valued only (1 g1 ) by the government because it reduces the
welfare of the top bracket taxpayers. The net bene t for the government is thus,
(1

g1 )h1 [z1

z1 ]d1

(4)

The government loses revenue because of behavioral responses. As there are no income
e ects, the behavioral response is due uniquely to the marginal rate change in the top
bracket. By de nition of 1 (which is the elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate), this
response reduces reported income in the top bracket by dz1 = z1 1 d1 =(1 1 ). Therefore,
the total tax revenue lost in the top bracket is equal to,

h1 z1 1

1

1

25

1

d1

(5)

At the optimum, the sum of (4) and (5) must be zero and thus the optimal top rate is,

1

=

g1 )[z1
z1 1

(1

z1 ]

(6)
1 1
Note that the well-known zero marginal rate at the top is obtained when z1 is close to
the top taxpayer because in that case z1 tends to z1 and 1 tends to zero.
The optimal rate in the second bracket can be computed in a similar way. We now
assume that the top rate remains xed at 1 and we consider a small change d2 . Each top
bracket taxpayer pays [z1 z2 ]d2 additional taxes. Taxpayers in the second top bracket
pay on average [z2 z2 ]d2 additional taxes. The mechanical e ect (net of welfare loss)
is thus given by:
((1

g2 )h2 [z2

z2 ] + (1 g1 )h1 [z1

z2 ]) d2

The behavioral response comes only from the second bracket taxpayers (because there
are no income e ects). It can be written exactly as (5) with index 2 replacing index 1.
Therefore, the optimal rate in the second bracket is:

2

(1

g2 )h2 [z2

z2 ] + (1 g1 )h1 [z1
z2 h2 2

z2 ]

(7)
1 2
The optimal rates in the two remaining brackets can be derived by repeating the same
exercise.
1

3
4

3

=
=

=

(1

g3 )h3 [z3

z3 ] + [(1 g2 )h2 + (1 g1 )h1 ][z2
z3 h3 3

z3 ]

(1

g4 )h4 z4 + [(1 g3 )h3 + (1 g2 )h2 + (1 g1 )h1 ]z3
z4 h4 4

(8)

(9)
1 4
The logic behind these optimal tax formulas is simple. Increasing the rate in a bracket
produces a negative behavioral response in that bracket (proportional to the average
elasticity and the number of taxpayers in the bracket) but allows the government to
raise more revenue from all the taxpayers above that bracket. Saez (1998) derives the
optimal (non-linear) tax formula by considering the limiting case of an in nite number
of in nitesimal brackets. In the absence of income e ects, the structure and the logic of
that non-linear tax formula is the same as equations (6) to (9).
26

The government also chooses the guaranteed income level that is redistributed to
everybody as a lump-sum. At the optimum, the government values equally one additional
dollar of public funds and one additional dollar for the guaranteed income level. The
welfare e ect of the latter change (expressed in terms of public funds) is simply g1 h1 +
g2 h2 + g3 h3 + g4 h4 . As there are no behavioral responses induced by this change (no
income e ects), it must be the case that this sum is equal to one. The guaranteed income
level is then equal to total tax receipts (per capita) minus government consumption (per
capita) which is taken as exogenously given.
The values of the gi 's are the social marginal weights at the optimum. Therefore,
an increase in government consumption would not decrease the guaranteed income level
one for one because of the indirect e ect it would have on social weights and thus on the
optimal tax system. However, for our simulations, we simply choose values for the weights
at the optimum. It should nevertheless be remembered that these weights represent the
redistributive tastes of the government around the optimal tax system. In other words,
the same redistributive weights imply more taste for redistribution with a generous tax
system in place rather than with a less generous tax system.8

5.2 Revenue Maximizing Constant Rate
Before moving to the numerical implementation of this optimal tax framework, it is worth
considering a more straightforward application of our estimated elasticities: the revenue
maximizing constant linear tax rate. This rate is the maximum rate that the government
can set before starting to lose revenue. It can be derived in a straightforward way from
equation (6) setting z1 = 0 (single bracket starting at the bottom) and g1 = 0 (government
wants to maximize revenue and thus puts no weight on the welfare loss of taxpayers). In
that case, the revenue maximizing rate   is simply   = 1=(1 + ), where  is the average
elasticity weighted by incomes. Using our results in Table 4 (columns (5) and (6)), we
obtain a tax revenue maximizing rate equal to 71% for Taxable Income (elasticity 0.400)
8 It

should also be noted that the density weights hi 's in formulas (6) to (9) are the density weights
at the optimum and that these might di er somewhat from the empirical density weights we are using
because of behavioral responses to taxation. However, simulations taking into account this e ect show
that this a ects very little optimal rates and does not change any of our conclusions. Therefore, we have
decided to present simple simulations using directly empirical density weights.

27

and equal to 89% for Broad Income (elasticity 0.120).9

5.3 Numerical Implementation
We present two sets of numerical implementation results, one for Broad Income and another one for Taxable Income. Which is relevant depends on the underlying thought
exercise. If the social planner is free to reshape the tax system and remove all the deductions and exemptions embodied in the current law, then the Broad Income simulation is
most appropriate; this represents the optimal rates where the social planner can choose
the broadest possible base. But, if the planner is constrained to operate within the basic
exemption and deduction structure of the existing income tax, then the Taxable Income
simulation is most relevant; this represents the optimal rates when the planner is constrained on the tax base but can choose the tax rates freely.
We take the density distribution by brackets (the hi 's) and the average income in each
bracket (the zi 's) from the empirical distribution of Income for our full sample. These
numbers are displayed in the rst two rows in Tables 9 (Broad Income) and 10 (Taxable
Income). The average elasticities i by bracket are given by our empirical results for Broad
Income (Table 9) and Taxable Income (Table 10) that were presented in Table 8. For
the two intermediate brackets for Broad Income, our elasticities results were below zero.
Zero elasticities imply that optimal rates should be 100%. Therefore, we posit small but
positive elasticities for those two groups (0.05). As noted above, for the bottom bracket,
we choose an elasticity equal to 0.4, following MoÆtt's (1992) summary of the literature.
In fact, the estimated pattern of rates and demogrants is fairly insensitive to the elasticity
of the bottom income group. For taxable income, we use the sample divided by taxable
income groups to estimate optimal tax rates.
These elasticity assumptions are displayed on row 3 of Tables 9 and 10. Government
revenue need per household is taken as given at the level of total income tax revenue
collected on average from 1979 to 1990. Expressed in 1992 dollars, this value is equal to
$6,200. Therefore the optimal income schedule we compute raises as much revenue as the
current income tax but and also provides transfers to low incomes. We make a number
of assumptions for the redistributive tastes of the government.
9 Though

our estimates are computed only for incomes above $10,000, the estimates are hardly a ected
when including lower incomes because the elasticity  is weighted by income.

28

1) Rawlsian objective: the government cares only about the poorest members of society
and thus sets the tax rates so as to maximize tax revenue (all the gi 's are zero).
Utilitarian objective: the government values redistribution and chooses a declining
pattern for the gi 's. We take two possibilities:
2) Progressive Liberal. There is a steep declining pattern for the gi 's: g1 = 0, g2 = g3 =2,
g3 = g4 =2. g1 = 0 means that the government sets the top rate so as to maximize revenue
collected from top bracket taxpayers (soak the rich).
3) Compassionate conservative. There is no di erence between rich, middle-class and
lower middle class but some compassion toward really poor individuals (incomes below
$10,000): g1 = g2 = g3 = g4 =2.
4) Finally, we consider the No redistributive objective: the gi 's are the same for
everybody. The government simply wants to raise a given amount of revenue and minimize
excess burden. Therefore, the guaranteed income level is set to zero.
5) Actual Tax Schedule. In that case, the tax rates in each bracket are taken from
the actual tax schedule. Implicit weights gi are derived from the optimal tax formulas (6)
to (9). These weights represent the implicit tastes of the actual government; even if the
government does not consciously maximize a social welfare function, it is behaving as if
it were indeed maximizing a social welfare function with those particular weights. This is
known as the inverse optimum problem in optimal taxation. It has been applied a number
of times in the commodity taxation case (see e.g. Ahmad and Stern (1984)). Recently,
Gabaix (1998) outlined a method for solving the inverse optimum problem in the case of
the income tax that is similar in spirit to what is attempted here. We present this case
for Taxable Income only because the relevant elasticities for the actual tax schedule are
the elasticities of Taxable Income. For the bottom income group, we use an overall tax
rate (incorporating transfer programs as well) of 0.45, from Dickert, Houser and Scholtz
(1995) (p. 20).
The results of the simulations are displayed in Tables 9 and 10. Each Table is divided
into panels corresponding to each of the cases described above. In each case, we report
the social weights, the optimal rates in each bracket, the optimal guaranteed income level
(last column) and the average rates of taxation in each bracket (average tax paid over
average income). The guaranteed income level is equal to total taxes collected (per capita)
minus government consumption per capita (set equal to $6,200). The average rates are
29

negative at the bottom because income is redistributed from rich to poor through the
guaranteed income (except of course in panel 4). It is constructive to think of the high
rates on low income groups as phaseout rates for the lump sum transfer amount.
The results show that the low elasticities of Broad Income imply fairly high tax rates.
Because elasticities are very low for the middle income groups, their tax rates are very
high. The tax rates which maximize tax revenue are above 96% for the rst two brackets.
The top rate is relatively smaller at 73% because the elasticity at the top is higher.
With a utilitarian criterion, the tax rate in the bottom bracket is reduced and the rate
is highest in the $10,000-$50,000 tax bracket. This is because, since there is more weight
on this middle income range, optimal tax policy will produce a slower phaseout at the
bottom so that this income group bene ts more from the lump sum guarantee amount.
The rates for the top two brackets are lower especially in Panel 3 with mild redistributive
tastes. However, in both cases, the tax structure is highly progressive on average due to
the large guaranteed income level.
In Panel 4, with no redistributive tastes, the tax rates are highest at the bottom because (almost) everybody pay those rates but the distortion is borne only by the low
income people who contribute little to tax revenue. Therefore, the tax structure is regressive and the top rate is extremely low (3%). This tax structure minimizes deadweight
burden and raises as much revenue as the current income tax system.10
To summarize, our small elasticities for Broad Income imply that the government has
the option of extending considerably the redistributive structure of the income tax even
if its tastes are only mildly redistributive. Optimal tax theory suggests that the most
eÆcient way to do so is to implement a large negative income tax program with a high
guaranteed income and fairly steep rates in the rst two brackets (from $0 to $50,000).
However, these recommendations are valid only in the context of a tax on the Broad
Income base where all deductions and exemptions rules have been removed. Our empirical
results show that Taxable Income is much more tax sensitive than Broad Income implying
that under the current system, imposing these high optimal Broad Income tax rate would
be sub-optimal.
Table 10 displays the optimal tax results for Taxable Income. The elasticities for
10 Note

that this eÆcient tax structure is very similar to the actual Social Security payroll tax which
applies a at rate to wage income below some cap (around $65,000).

30

Taxable Income are considerably higher than the Broad Income elasticities and the corresponding optimal rates are thus lower. In particular, the top rate maximizing tax revenue
is signi cantly lower (49%) and we obtain a decreasing pattern of marginal rates at the
top in three of the four cases. The tax system is however still progressive in the top 3
Panels (as evidenced by the pattern of average rates) because redistribution is still taking
place through the universal guaranteed income level. Note however that this guaranteed
income is substantially lower than for the Broad Income case because the tax base is
smaller and more responsive to tax rates. With mild redistributive tastes in Panels 3
and 4, the top rate is very low (18% and 5% respectively) because it is ineÆcient to tax
sharply the very elastic incomes of the rich.
Panel 5 displays the implicit welfare weights using Taxable Income elasticities. The
results show that the government is implicitly weighting roughly equally the welfare of the
bottom three brackets, and much less the welfare of the top bracket. The weight for the
top bracket is particularly low because the tax rate is high relative to the top maximizing
revenue rate of 49%.11
These optimal tax simulations are subject to two important caveats. First, we have
applied a model designed in the context of earnings taxation to apply to taxation of full
income. This is only theoretically appropriate if general equilibrium e ects of income
taxation are negligible. If capital taxation, for example, a ects the capital stock then
the marginal product of labor and capital might be a ected and our partial equilibrium
simulation would not capture this e ect.
Second, we are relying on di erences in estimated elasticities across income groups that
are imprecise. It is worth noting, however, that our general pattern results is not very
sensitive to the values of the elasticities used. So long as elasticities are higher at the top
of the income distribution, a contention which is consistently supported by our estimates,
redistribution should not take place through an increasing pattern of marginal rates unless
there is dramatically lower social weight on the very rich than on the middle and upper
11 To

understand the pattern of weights below the top, remember that the optimal rate in a given
bracket depends on how the government values a lump-sum tax levied on all taxpayers in the brackets
above. Since the weight is so low on the top group, the fact that the marginal rate is not very high for
the third group implies a high weight on that group. Therefore, the social weight in a given bracket does
not depend only on the elasticity and tax rate in that bracket but also on the social weights in all the
brackets above.

31

middle class. Rather, redistribution should occur through adding a large negative income
tax component to the tax system, with guaranteed income that is taxed at fairly high
rates at the bottom of the income distribution.

6 Conclusion
Over the last few years, economists have recognized the centrality of the elasticity of
taxable income as a parameter of interest for evaluating tax policy. But the substantial
variability in the estimates of this central parameter have made it diÆcult to draw conclusions about the role that taxes play in determining income generation. Moreover, the
fact that we have a non-linear tax system implies that it is critical to estimate not just
an overall elasticity, but how that elasticity varies along the income distribution.
We have presented a framework that provides new estimates of the elasticity of taxable
income that surmounts some problems with previous work. We nd that the elasticity is
0.4, which is large but well below early estimates of its value. We also nd much lower
elasticities for real, broadly de ned, income; about two- fths of the di erence between
these results arises from the mechanical e ect that the base of broad income is smaller,
but the majority arises from the fact that tax preferences are sensitive to tax rates. And
we nd that the income e ects of tax changes on taxable income are small, implying little
di erence between compensated and uncompensated elasticities.
Moreover, this framework allows us to explore the variation in this elasticity along the
income distribution, and we nd that it is primarily driven by the response of very high
real income taxpayers to changes in tax rules. We then use these ndings to implement a
model of optimal income tax schedules, and nd that they suggest for most distributional
preferences a tax system which is progressive on average but not on the margin, with a
large demogrant that is rapidly taxed away at the bottom of the income distribution, but
with marginal rates that fall, rather than rise, with income.
One important di erence between our study and previous work is the size of the tax
changes being studied. Most of the previous literature has focused on the Tax Reform Act
of 1986, which imposed large changes in tax rates on upper income taxpayers, whereas our
variation comes in addition from bracket creep, state tax changes, and changes through
ERTA and TRA on other groups which were more modest. If individuals react more
32

strongly to large, and presumably as a result better understood, changes, then by \muddying the waters" with these smaller change we may be reducing the estimated elasticity
relative to the previous literature. Of course, it is not at all obvious why the reaction to
the large changes of TRA 86 only are more relevant for projection purposes than are the
reactions to all tax changes in the 1980s; TRA was more dissimilar than it was similar
to the modal post-war tax reform. Thus, our estimates are probably the preferred ones
for the types of modest (relative to TRA 86) reforms that are currently contemplated by
Congress.
These ndings have a three potentially important implications for tax policy. First,
they highlight the value of having low tax rates on a broad tax base, a position long
advocated by economists. The large elasticities that we observe are driven by \holes" in
the tax base that allow taxpayers, particularly at higher income levels, to reduce their
tax burdens. With a broader tax base we would distort behavior less and could therefore
raise revenues more eÆciently.
Second, they suggest that the substantial concern currently expressed about the distorting impact of high implicit tax rates at the bottom of the income distribution may be
overblown. Most of the concern is focused on the $10,000 to $50,000 income range that
we examine where the EITC is phased out. But we nd no evidence that, at least for
the explicit taxes that arise through the federal and state income tax system, taxpayers
in this range are substantially changing either their real incomes or reported taxes in
response to tax policy. This suggests that the distributional advantages of tightly income
targeted tax subsidies may outweigh the eÆciency costs of high implicit tax rates on the
lower middle income taxpayers, as is illustrated by the high optimal rates in this bracket
in our simulations.
Of course, our study does not consider non- lers and individuals who move into ling
status between a pair of years. If these individuals are particularly responsive, then there
still may be concern about the high implicit rates arising through transfer programs.
This type of responsiveness is indeed suggested by the high elasticities of labor force
participation with respect to taxation estimated in Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999). This
potential dichotomy between the responsiveness of those inside and outside of the tax
system suggests that attention be paid to incentives that reward work per se rather than
marginal increments to hours worked.
33

Third, we do nd that there is substantial responsiveness of taxable income to taxes
among the highest income taxpayers. This suggests that the optimal tax system should
feature declining (or at least not increasing) marginal rates, although perhaps increasing
average rates. These ndings stand in contrast to the actual pattern of marginal rates
that we observe in most developed countries. As our nal simulations show, the high
rates for upper income taxpayers imply very low social weight on that group. It is an
interesting political economy question why tax systems have universally evolved towards
progressive marginal rate structures.

34

Appendix
Income De nitions
Broad Income is de ned as the sum of all the items that compose Total Income less
Capital Gains and Social Security Bene ts. Capital Gains are excluded because their
tax treatment is special and thus the relevant marginal rate is not the same as for other
income. Social Security bene ts are also excluded because they were fully exempted
from taxation before 1984 and thus are not present in the data for the years 1979 to
1983. Broad Income includes Wages, salaries and tips, Interest Income (taxable and
exempted), Dividends (taxable and exempted), Alimony received, Business income (or
loss), Total IRA distributions, Total Pensions and Annuities, Income reported on Schedule
E (Partnerships, Trusts, etc.), Farm Income, full Unemployment Compensation and Other
income.
Taxable Income is a de nition consistent over the years and closest to the 1990 de nition of taxable income. Taxable Income is de ned as our Broad Income de nition minus
all the adjustments that are made to arrive at taxable income. Because the de nition
of taxable income changes from year to year due to the numerous tax reforms, we have
included in the our Taxable Income de nition only the adjustments that can be computed
in all the years from 1979 to 1990. In order to get a consistent de nition, exemptions
are xed in real value at the 1990 level before being substracted from Broad Income.
The standard deduction (also xed at the real level of 1990 standard deduction) is also
deducted. Finally, real itemized deductions in excess of the real 1990 standard deduction
are deducted to arrive at our de nition of Taxable Income.

In ation Parameters
The in ation parameters are applied to incomes to obtain real incomes over the period
and to impute lagged tax rates using the TAXSIM calculator. These in ation parameters
were computed as the average income growth of Broad Income for each of the years 1980
to 1990 using our tax return data. Taking year 1992 as base year index 100), the incomes
for years 1979 to 1990 have been de ated using the following indices: 50.3 55.1 59.9 63.7
66.3 70.4 73.9 76.6 79.7 86.0 89.0 92.9. Our results are not sensitive to small changes in
those in ation parameters.
35

References
[1] Ahmad Ehtisham and Nicholas Stern, \The Theory of Reform and Indian Indirect
Taxes", Journal of Public Economics, 25(3), 1984, pp. 259-298.
[2] Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll. \The E ect of Income Taxes on Household Behavior." OÆce of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, mimeo 1997, forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistics.
[3] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy \Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches", in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3, 1999.
[4] Boskin, M. J. \Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest." Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86, pp. S3-S27.
[5] Carroll Robert. \Tax Rates, Taxpayer Behavior, and the 1993 Tax Act." OÆce of
Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, mimeo 1998.
[6] Dickert, Stacy; Scott Hauser and John Scholz. \The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Transfer Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation.", Tax
Policy and the Economy, vol. 9, ed. J. Poterba. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995.
[7] Eissa, Nada. \Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Women: the Tax Reform Act
of 1986 as a Natural Experiment." NBER Working Paper No. 5023, 1995.
[8] Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. \An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.",
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1993, 12(1), pp. 189-194.
[9] Feldstein, Martin. \The E ect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act." Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103(3), pp.
551-572.
[10] Gabaix, Xavier. \The Cost of Inequality: Theory and Applications", MIT mimeo
1998.

36

[11] Goolsbee, Austan. \What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive Compensation.", NBER Working Paper, No. 6333, 1997, forthcoming Journal
of Political Economy.
[12] Goolsbee, Austan, \It's Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Don't
Work on the Rich." in Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the
Rich, ed. J. Slemrod, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2000.
[13] Goolsbee, Austan. \Evidence on the High-Income La er Curve from Six Decades of
Tax Reform.", forthcoming in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1999.
[14] Gordon, Roger H. and Je rey K. MacKie-Mason. \Tax Distortions to the Choice of
Organizational Form.", Journal of Public Economics, 1994, 55(2), pp. 279-306.
[15] Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod, \Are `Real' Responses to Taxes Simply Income
Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?" in Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. J. Slemrod, Cambridge University
Press, forthcoming 2000.
[16] Hall, Robert. \Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.", Journal of Political
Economy, 1988, 96, pp. 339-57.
[17] Hausman, Jerry. \Labor Supply." in How Taxes A ect Economic Behavior, ed. H.
Aaron and J. Pechman. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.
[18] Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. \Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107, pp. 35-78.
[19] Lindsey, Lawrence. \Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts: 1982-1984, with
Implications for the Revenue Maximizing Tax Rate." Journal of Public Economics,
1987, (33), pp. 173-206.
[20] Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum. \Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers." NBER Working Paper No. 7363, 1999.
[21] Mirrlees, James A., \An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation."
Review of Economic studies, 1971, 38, pp. 175-208.
37

[22] MoÆtt, Robert. \Incentive E ects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.", Journal
of Economic Literature, 1992, 30, pp. 1-61.
[23] MoÆtt, Robert and Mark Wilhelm. \Taxation and the Labor Supply Decisions of
the Auent." in Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich,
ed. J. Slemrod, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2000.
[24] Navratil, John. \The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981: Evidence on Individual
Taxpayer Behavior from Panel Tax Return Data." Unpublished Harvard Thesis 1995.
[25] Pencavel, John. \Labor Supply of Men." in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-102.
[26] Saez, Emmanuel. \Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates." Unpublished MIT mimeograph, 1998.
[27] Saez, Emmanuel, \The E ect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of
`Bracket Creep'.", NBER Working Paper No. 7367, 1999.
[28] Sammartino, Frank and David Weiner. \Recent Evidence on Taxpayers' Response to
the Rate Increases in the 1990's.", National Tax Journal, 50(3), 1997, pp. 683-705.
[29] Slemrod, Joel. Do Taxes Matter?, Cambridge: MIT press, 1990.
[30] Slemrod, Joel. \High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: the
Anatomy of Behavioral Response.", in Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, eds. M. Feldstein and J. Poterba, University of Chicago, 1996.
[31] Slemrod, Joel. \Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income
Elasticities." National Tax Journal, 1998, 51(4), pp. 773-88.
[32] Stern, Nicolas H. \On the Speci cation of Models of Optimal Taxation." Journal of
Public Economics, 1976, 6, pp. 123-62.
[33] Tuomala, Matti (1990), Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

38

Figure 1: Income and Substitution Effects of a Tax Change

Substitution effect: dτ=τ -τ
2

1

After tax income z-T(z)

Income effect: dR-z dτ

dR-z dτ

Tax Schedule (after reform)
R

2

Tax Schedule (before reform)

R

1

0

Income z

Slope 1- τ

2

Slope 1- τ

1

Table 1: Previous Studies

Author
(Date)
(1)

Data
(Years)

Tax
Change
(2)

Sample

(3)

(4)

Controls for Mean
Reversion and Income
Distribution
(5)

Income
Definitions

Elasticity
Results

(6)

(7)

Lindsey
(1987)

Repeated Tax
Cross-Sections
(1980 to 1984)

ERTA 81

AGI>$5K

None

Taxable Income

Elast.: 1.05 to 2.75
Central Estimate: 1.6

Feldstein
(1995)

NBER Tax Panel
(1985 and 1988)

TRA 86

Married, Non-Aged
non-S corp creating
Income>$30K

None

AGI
Taxable Income

Elast. of AGI: 0.75-1.3
Elast. of Taxable Income:
1.1 - 3.05

Navratil
(1995)

NBER Tax Panel
(1980 and 1983)

ERTA 81

Married,
Income>$25K

Use Average Income

Taxable Income

Elast. of Taxable Income:
0.8

Auten-Carroll
(1997)

Treasury Tax Panel
(1985 and 1989)

TRA 86

Single and Married
age 25-55, Inc.>$15K
Non-S corp creating

Include Log Income
in base year

Gross Income
Taxable Income

Elast. of Gross Inc.: 0.66
Elast. of Taxable Income:
0.75

Sammartino and
Weiner (1997)

Treasury Tax Panel
(1985 to 1994)

OBRA
1993

Less than 62 years
old

None

AGI

Close to zero permanent
response of AGI

Goolsbee
(1998)

Panel of Corp. Exec. OBRA
(1991 to 1994)
1993

Corporate Executives
Use Average Income
95% with income>$150K

Wages, Bonus
Short Run Elast.: 1
and Stock Options Long Run Elast.: 0.1

Caroll
(1998)

Treasury Tax Panel
(1987 and 1996)

OBRA
1993

Married aged 25-55
Income>$50K

Use Average Income

Taxable Income

Elast.: 0.5

Saez
(1999)

NBER Tax Panel
(1979 to 1981)

Bracket
Creep

Married and Singles
only

Include Log Income
and Polynomials
in Income

AGI
Taxable Income

Elast. of AGI: 0.25
Elast. of Taxable Income:
0.4

TRA 86

High Incomes
Oversampled

Use Various Sets
of Instruments

AGI

Elast. of AGI: 0 to 2
depends on Instruments

Incomes >$30K

None

Taxable Income

Elast. from -1.3 to 2
depending on Tax Reform

Moffitt and Wilhelm SCF Panel
(2000)
(1983 and 1989)
Goolsbee
(1999)

Tax Statistics Tables Various
(1922 to 1989)
Tax Ref.

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Mean
(1)

Standard Deviation
(2)

Broad Income

$43,334

55,104

Taxable Income

$25,873

45,508

Married Dummy

0.645

Single Dummy

0.28

Itemizer Status

0.41

Federal Tax Rate

23

8.8

4

3.5

73

10.6

Federal Tax Liability

$6,737

23,555

State Tax Liability

$1,072

1,694

Number of Observations

69,202

State Tax Rate
Average net-of-tax rate

Notes: Summary Statistics given for all observations with Broad Income above $10,000.
All dollar values are expressed in 1992 dollars.

Table 3: Variation in After-Tax Shares log(1-T'p/1-T'1)

Year

$10K and above

$10K to $50K

$50K to $100K

$100K and above

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1979-1982

-0.019
[0.058]
5,465

-0.015
[0.055]
3,846

-0.039
[0.045]
1,411

0.043
[0.118]
208

1980-1983

0.026
[0.059]
10,864

0.020
[0.050]
7,762

0.026
[0.052]
2,660

0.132
[0.111]
442

1981-1984

0.042
[0.063]
5,720

0.032
[0.052]
4,059

0.056
[0.060]
1,428

0.158
[0.109]
233

1982-1985

0.029
[0.050]
5,794

0.021
[0.047]
4,160

0.045
[0.053]
1,394

0.071
[0.057]
240

1983-1986

0.001
[0.082]
5,180

0.004
[0.041]
3,598

-0.004
[0.115]
1,327

-0.033
[0.210]
255

1984-1987

0.037
[0.077]
5,969

0.028
[0.074]
4,296

0.053
[0.070]
1,418

0.102
[0.108]
255

1985-1988

0.042
[0.092]
11,918

0.025
[0.085]
8,589

0.068
[0.076]
2,780

0.183
[0.113]
548

1986-1989

0.042
[0.091]
6,122

0.024
[0.084]
4,385

0.067
[0.075]
1,444

0.186
[0.105]
293

1987-1989

0.009
[0.057]
12,091

-0.001
[0.053]
8,663

0.022
[0.052]
2,826

0.084
[0.060]
602

Notes: Means, standard deviation and number of observations reported. Income cuts based on Broad income
definition.

Table 4: Basic Elasticity Results

Income Controls

None

Log Income

Log Income
10-piece Spline
Broad
Taxable
Income
Income

Broad
Income

Taxable
Income

Broad
Income

Taxable
Income

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.300

-0.462

0.170

0.611

0.120

0.400

(0.120)

(0.194)

(0.106)

(0.144)

(0.106)

(0.144)

Dummy for Marrieds

-0.008
(0.010)

-0.062
(0.018)

0.045
(0.014)

0.049
(0.023)

0.050
(0.012)

0.055
(0.021)

Dummy for Singles

-0.037
(0.012)

-0.053
(0.019)

-0.034
(0.013)

-0.032
(0.022)

-0.036
(0.013)

-0.027
(0.021)

-0.083
(0.015)

-0.167
(0.021)

Spline 1st decile control

0.225
(0.086)

-0.884
(0.039)

Spline 2nd decile control

-2.74
(1.13)

-0.538
(0.047)

Spline 3rd decile control

-0.317
(0.055)

-0.279
(0.057)

Spline 4th decile control

-0.071
(0.051)

-0.445
(0.069)

Spline 5th decile control

-0.197
(0.054)

-0.003
(0.075)

Spline 6th decile control

-0.074
(0.053)

-0.253
(0.081)

Spline 7th decile control

-0.127
(0.056)

-0.124
(0.083)

Spline 8th decile control

-0.061
(0.057)

-0.172
(0.083)

Spline 9th decile control

-0.027
(0.076)

-0.057
(0.125)

Spline 10th decile control

-0.072
(0.041)

-0.126
(0.064)

69,129

59,199

Elasticity

Log(income) control

Observations:

69,129

59,199

69,129

59,199

Notes: Estimates from 2SLS regressions. Income range is $10,000 and above. Regressions weighted by
income. All regressions include dummies for marital status and dummies for each base year.

Table 5: Subsitution and Income Effects

Broad Income
(1)

Taxable Income
(2)

A. No Income Effect Included
Elasticity

0.071
(0.066)

0.396
(0.114)

N. Obs

69,129

45,765

Sustitution Effect

0.072
(0.069)

0.430
(0.121)

Income Effect

-0.071
(0.096)

-0.135
(0.108)

N. Obs

69,089

45,728

B. Income Effect Included

Notes: Estimates from 2SLS regressions. Regressions are unweighted. Income Range:
broad income above $10,000 in column (1) and taxable income above $10,000 in column (2).
Regressions include 10 splines in log(income).
All regressions include dummies for marital status and dummies for each base year.

Table 6: Variations in Timing

Broad Income
Number of Obs.
Taxable Income
Number of Obs.

3 Year Lag
(1)

2 Year Lag
(2)

1 Year Lag
(3)

0.120
(0.106)
69,129

0.085
(0.104)
116,250

0.192
(0.105)
145,550

0.400
(0.144)
59,199

0.331
(0.138)
100,385

0.410
(0.164)
127,644

Notes: Estimates from 2SLS regressions. Income range is $10,000 and above. Regressions weighted
by income. Regressions include 10 splines in log(income).
All regressions include dummies for marital status and dummies for each base year.

Table 7: Adding Year-Specific Income Controls

Broad Income

Taxable Income

(1)

(2)

0.125
(0.109)
69,129

0.477
(0.149)
59,199

A. Time Trend*Splines included
Elasticity Estimate
Number of Obs.

B. Year Dummies*log(income) included
Elasticity Estimate
Number of Obs.

0.095
(0.137)
69,129

0.459
(0.218)
59,199

Notes: Estimates from 2SLS regressions. Income range is $10,000 and above. Regressions weighted
by income. All regressions include 10 splines in log(income).
All regressions include dummies for marital status and dummies for each base year.
Regressions in panel A include additional Time Trend*splines interactions.
Regressions in panel B include additional year dummies*log(income) interactions.

Table 8: Elasticity
Results by Heterogenous Groups

Broad Income

Taxable Income

(1)

(2)

Taxable Income
(using taxable
income cuts)
(3)

Income Range
$10K to $50K ($10K to $32K col. (3))
N. Obs

-0.044
(0.085)
49,364

0.180
(0.164)
39,902

0.284
(0.180)
26,635

Income Range
$50K to $100K ($32K to $75K col. (3))
N. Obs

-0.065
(0.154)
16,688

0.106
(0.219)
16,293

0.265
(0.192)
16,338

Income Range
$100K and above (above $75K col. (3))
N. Obs

0.171
(0.240)
3,076

0.567
(0.298)
3,004

0.484
(0.316)
2,792

Itemizers
$10K and above
N. Obs

0.266
(0.068)
28,117

0.647
(0.099)
25,746

Non-Itemizers
$10K and above
N. Obs

-0.210
(0.079)
41,012

-0.179
(0.122)
33,569

Married
$10K and above
N. Obs

0.071
(0.130)
44,623

0.352
(0.176)
37,685

Single
$10K and above
N. Obs

0.189
(0.208)
19,349

0.385
(0.254)
17,562

PANEL A: Income Ranges

PANEL B: Itemizing Status

PANEL C: Marital Status

Notes: Estimates from 2SLS regressions. Regressions weighted by income. Income ranges in columns (1) and
(2) based on Broad Income in base year. Income ranges in column (3) based on Taxable Income in base year.
All regressions include dummies for marital status and dummies for each base year and 10 income control
splines.

Table 9: Optimal Tax Results, Broad Income Elasticities

Income Groups

$0-$10K

$10K-$50K

$50K-$100K

(1)

(2)

(3)

$100K and
above
(4)

0.4

0.05

0.05

0.171

$5,200

$26,800

$66,200

$185,100

0.200

0.590

0.178

0.032

Average Elasticities
Mean Income
Density Weights (h's)

Guaranteed
Income Level
(5)

1. Maximizing Tax Revenue (Rawlsian)
Social Weights (g's)

0

0

0

0

Optimal Rates

96

96

88

73

-403

-1

55

69

Social Weights (g's)

2

1

0.5

0

Optimal Rates

66

88

84

73

-350

-1

51

67

1.66

0.83

0.83

0.83

61

79

56

30

-270

8

45

40

Optimal Rates

20

21

8

3

Average Tax Rates

20

21

18

9

Average Tax Rates

$25,900

2. Utilitarian: Progressive

Average Tax Rates

$21,700

3. Utilitarian: Conservative
Social Weights (g's)
Optimal Rates
Average Tax Rates

$17,200

4. No Redistribution

$0

Notes: Optimal Rates are computed using formulas (6) to (9). Average Rates are total tax liability (including
guaranteed income level) over income.

Table 10: Optimal Tax Results, Taxable Income Elasticities

Income Groups

$0-$10K

$10K-$32K

$32K-$75K

(1)

(2)

(3)

$75K and
above
(4)

0.4

0.284

0.265

0.484

$4,800

$20,050

$46,200

$138,100

0.301

0.404

0.250

0.045

Average Elasticities
Mean Income
Density Weights (h's)

Guaranteed
Income Level
(5)

1. Maximizing Tax Revenue (Rawlsian)
Social Weights (g's)

0

0

0

0

Optimal Rates

94

82

64

49

-224

12

46

51

Social Weights (g's)

2

1

0.5

0

Optimal Rates

68

66

56

49

-161

12

40

47

1.66

0.83

0.83

0.83

Optimal Rates

59

51

29

18

Average Tax Rates

-73

24

33

25

Optimal Rates

43

19

8

5

Average Tax Rates

43

31

21

11

0.84

1.03

1.01

0.13

45

23

35

45

Average Tax Rates

$15,300

2. Utilitarian: Progressive

Average Tax Rates

$11,000

3. Utilitarian: Conservative
Social Weights (g's)

$6,400

4. No Redistribution
$0

5. Actual Schedule
Social Weights (g's)
Actual Rates

Notes: Optimal Rates are computed using formulas (6) to (9). Average Rates are total tax liability (including
guaranteed income level) over income.

