                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MARKET PROVISION OF PUBLIC GOODS:
                                THE CASE OF BROADCASTING


                                             Simon P. Anderson
                                               Stephen Coate


                                             Working Paper 7513
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7513

                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        January 2000




We thank Tim Besley, John Conley, Simon Cooper, Maxim Engers, and Joel Waldfogel for useful discussions
and seminar participants at the Department of Justice and the Universities of Bristol, Caen, California at
Berkeley, Cergy-Pontoise, and Illinois for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Simon P. Anderson and Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Market Provision of Public Goods: The Case of Broadcasting
Simon P. Anderson and Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 7513
January 2000
JEL No. D43, L13, L82

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper studies the market provision of a specific type of public good: radio and television

broadcasts. Its main focus is to explore the ability of the market to provide broadcasting efficiently in a
world in which broadcasters earn revenues by selling time to advertisers and advertisements provide
information to consumers about new products. The paper shows that market provided broadcasts may
feature too few or too many commercials, depending on the relative sizes of their social benefit and their
nuisance cost to viewers. In addition, the market may provide too few or too many types of programs,
depending on the relative size of viewing benefits and the benefits to advertisers from contacting viewers.
The possibility of both under and over-provision of advertisements and programming, means that there are
ranges of the parameters for which the market provides broadcasting close to efficiently. The paper also
considers whether the market performs better under monopoly or competition and studies how the ability
to charge viewers subscription prices impacts market performance.


Simon P. Anderson                                                Stephen Coate
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
University of Virginia                                           Cornell Univesity
Charlottesville, VA 22901                                        Ithaca, NY 14853
sa9w@virginia.edu                                                and NBER
                                                                 sc163@cornell.edu
