NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS, BANKING INSOLVENCY, AND
SILENT RUNS IN THE ASIAN FINANCIAL CRISIS

Edward J. Kane

Working Paper 7514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7514

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2000

This paper extends and refocuses analysis originally presented in Kane (1998). The author wishes to
acknowledge the excellent research assistance of Tara Rice and to thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Bhagwan
Chowdry, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments on previous drafts. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

2000 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

Capital Movements, Banking Insolvency, and Silent Runs in The Asian
Financial Crisis

Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 7514
January 2000
TEL No. G2, F3, K2

ABSTRACT
This paper supplies an agency-cost and contestable-markets perspective on the financial policies

that triggered the Asian financial crisis. The agency-cost analysis hypothesizes that individual-country
regulators knew that politically directed loans had made their banks insolvent, but purposefully gambled
that deregulation could allow the insolvent banks to grow their way out of trouble.
The contestable-markets paradigm sets this gamble in the context of off shore innovations in financial

technology and regulatory systems that made it progressively easier for wothed Asian citizens to move
funds to foreign institutions. These perspectives portray the simultaneous breakdown of repressive financial

systems as a technology-led victory of market forces over longstanding government efforts to wall out
foreign financial competition.

Professor Edward J. Kane
Finance Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

4- —

Furman and Stiglitz (1998, PP. 12) stress that any credible explanation of the East

Asian crisis must account simultaneously for the crisis and for the region's precrisis

record of growth and stability. Their own explanation (pp. 13-20) roots the crisis in
government financial policies and not in the management of foreign-trade regimes,

international liquidity, or monetary and fiscal aggregates. Furman and Stiglitz blame
East Asian governments for:

1. Undertaking rapid financial and capital-account deregulation without
addressing the concomitant need to beef up their supervisory capacity; and

2. Failing to be "aware" of the systemic risk posed by the growing possibility
that the massive precrisis inflows of private capital into their countries might
fail to earn returns large enough to service the foreign debt being generated.
The explanation tendered in this paper supplies an agency-cost and contestable-

markets perspective on these so-called policy mistakes. The agency-cost part of the
argument portrays the crisis as the fruit not of blindness, but of time-inconsistent policy

gambling. It rejects the hypothesis that East Asian authorities could have truly blinded
themselves to the growing vulnerability imposed on their banking systems by booking

loans dictated by political pressure at par. Instead, the analysis substitutes the more
reasonable hypothesis that authorities had this guilty knowledge and responded to this
information myopically by gambling that deregulation would enable their insolvent banks

to grow their way out of trouble. The operative strategy had two components: helping to
cover up the losses imbedded in bank loan portfolios and enabling their banks to compete
more aggressively for domestic savings and foreign funds.

The regulatory-gambling model treats the decision to poorly supervise financial
and capital-account liberalization as a purposeful rather than inadvertent move.

Regulators and politicians hoped to preserve the rents earned in the past by directing

cheap loans to politically powerful parties and sectors. These hopes were encouraged by
high precrisis rates of economic growth and by the obvious difficulty of establishing the
purposefulness of their scheme if the strategy failed.

The contestable-markets part of the story sets this gamble in the context of the
increasing globalization of financial-services competition. Year by year, offshore
innovations in financial technology and regulatory systems have been expanding
opportunities and lowering the costs for worried Asian citizens to move their wealth into
foreign institutions. Viewed from this Schumpeterian perspective, the successive
breakdown in the financial systems of the five Asian crisis countries was less a matter of
Kindleberger-Minsky "psychological contagion" than the simultaneous destruction of

longstanding government efforts to wall out foreign competition. Advances in
information and contracting technology made it easier for foreign firms to surmount
barriers to entry in distant markets at the same time that improvements in Western
regulatory systems made offshore institutions seem safer to Asian citizens than ever

before.
I. Precrisis and Postcrisis Movements of Capital
Beginning in mid-1997, five East Asian countries lapsed into severe financial

crisis: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, South Korea and Thailand. The crises
centered both on the value of these countries' currencies and on the solvency of their
1998; Garcia, 1998; Schwartz, 1998).
banking systems (Barth
Figure One tracks the relative value in U.S. dollars of each country's currency

from April 1, 1997 to April 30, 1999. In all five crisis countries, the period of sharp
decline ended by February, 1998. The period of free fall was longest and deepest in
Indonesia, which was the only country to experience a political crisis as well. In all
countries, currency values have strengthened since early 1998. As with the fall, the
recovery has been rockiest in Indonesia, where political uncertainties remain strong. As
Mei (1999) documents, political instability makes financial stability hard to maintain.

Malaysia stabilized its currency by imposing controls on capital movements. The
other four countries negotiated a series of assistance agreements with international

2

lending institutions and particular foreign countries. The sources and size of outside

assistance are summarized in Table 1. For a country undergoing crisis, the availability of
outside aid is largely conditioned on its promise to maintain convertibility, to reform
domestic financial regulation, and to strengthen its insolvent banks.

Many observers attribute the precrisis strength and sharp mid-1997 decline
observed in East Asian currency values to fluctuations in external short-term capital
movements, particularly to capital flows presumed to have been initiated by foreign
banks (e.g., Rodrik and Velasco, 1999; Mayer, 1998). Table 2 shows that U.S.,
Canadian, European, and Japanese banks increased their holdings of crisis-country debt

by $74 billion between yearend 1995 and midyear 1997 and went on to reduce their
aggregate position by $112 billion from this peak. The overall amount of this outflow
corresponds almost dollar-for-dollar with the amount of international assistance reported
for crisis countries in Table 1. Given the conditions that accompanied the outside aid, the
similarity of these two magnitudes supports the cynical hypothesis that international
crisis assistance has more to do with helping foreign banks than helping the citizens of

crisis countries.
Figure Two shows that Japanese banks (who have themselves been in continual
crisis since the early 1 990s) amassed the biggest positions and have so far beaten the

strongest retreat. The continued insolvency of maj or Japanese banks suggests that

banking policies and conditions in Japan may have contributed to the crisis by creating
incentives for Japanese bankers to book extraordinarily high-risk loans at home and

abroad (Kane, 1993). Figure Two shows that, even at yearend 1998, the exposure of
Japanese banks in Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand remained high.

The expansion of foreign lending by Japanese banks in crisis countries was bound
to squeeze the profit margins of local banks. Local profit margins and economic networth were further and steadily undermined by longstanding political pressure for banks

to make subsidized loans to selected economic sectors. To restore industry profit margins
to a sustainable level, insolvent institutions had to be closed or absorbed into stronger
enterprises. Table 3 summarizes the extent of insolvency-resolution activity in the four
largest crisis countries during the first nine months of the crisis. By the time exchange
rates stabilized, more than half of Thai banks and about a third of Korean and Indonesian

3

banks had been resolved. In contrast, Malaysia failed to move its program for industry
restructuring beyond the planning stage.
The character of banking regulation in any given country is influenced by

bureaucratic structures (Wall and Eisenbeis, 1999) and information asymmetries that

foster incentive conflict in regulatory decisionmaking. The spread of banking insolvency
creates bad incentives not just for bankers, but also for their regulators (Kane, 1998).

Regulators come under strong political and career pressure to take actions that extend
implicit guarantees to depositors, guarantees that effectively destroy coverage limits that
may be formally imbedded in explicit deposit-insurance contracts.
Because Japanese regulators were slow to resolve banking insolvencies at home,

Japanese banks may well have initiated disruptive capital inflows into and out of the

crisis countries. However, the paper argues that the precrisis expansion of East Asian
debt at European and North American banks may more reasonably be attributed to efforts
by residents of the crisis countries to protect themselves from the unacknowledged, but
growing insolvency of their domestic banking systems.

Section II explains how sectoral political pressures create incentive conflicts that
tempt regulators to adopt policies that generate short-term macroeconomic growth and
specific sectoral subsidies at the risk of increasing the likelihood and probable depth of a
future banking crisis. Section III explains that the precrisis pattern of regulation adopted
in crisis countries was bound to lead to growing bank insolvencies and escalating silent

runs. Section IV lays out a general model of the life cycle of a regulation-induced
banking crisis. Section V expands the model to provide a role for international
competition in regulatory services and shows how regulatory competition can facilitate
the development of silent runs on an insolvent banking system. Section VI applies the

model to explain the stylized facts of the Asian case. Section VII summarizes the
argument and offers some policy advice to the IMF and World Bank.

II. Distortionary Effects of Politically Determined Patterns of Financial Regulation and
the Macroeconomy
From a macroeconomic point of view, financial activity collects and allocates
aggregate savings. The more efficiently financial institutions accomplish these twin
tasks, the higher a country's rate of investment and the more robust is the value of the

4

capital stock put into place. Conversely, poor financial performance wastes savings by
supporting projects for which the subpar returns owners realize upon completion cause
the value of the capital stock to decline below its cost of production.

Erecting an array of buildings whose rents can barely begin to service their

mortgage debt represents a classic case of bank-facilitated misinvestment. The local
economy speeds up during the building stage and slackens when the rents prove

inadequate to earn profit for the owners. The ability of individual bankers to challenge
borrower projections is often in short supply in developing countries and may be nullified
by perverse incentives conveyed by inappropriate financial regulation.

This paper conceives of financial regulation as banking policy: efforts to monitor
and influence what bankers do and who bears the consequences of actual and potential

bank losses. This simplification means that the analysis applies most directly to countries
where banks finance the maj or portion of a nation's real investment. In such countries,
the unreliability of public information simultaneously restrains the expansion of domestic
bond and stock markets and taxpayers' ability to hold officials accountable for the
adverse consequences of the banking policies they follow.
From a political-economy point of view, banking regulation is a service that

produces private and social benefits and generates private and social costs. The benefits
lie in three realms: improvements in customer confidence, improvements in customer
convenience, and assistance or resistance to bank efforts to accumulate and exercise

market power. These regulatory benefits flow in different proportions to different
individuals and to different economic sectors.
Because banking regulation is costly to produce, it is possible for authorities to

produce it more or less efficiently. Even if the costs of regulation are minimized, the
burden of financing these costs must be allocated across society. The present discounted
value of the difference between the benefits a sector receives from bank regulation and
the costs that banking regulation imposes on that sector may be defined as the sector's net
regulatory benefit from banking policy, NRB.

In lobbying for favorable banking policies, we assume that individuals organize

themselves by economic interests into n sectors. Competition with other sectors consists
of capturing regulatory benefits and shifting the costs of financing these benefits to

5

parties located in other sectors. We assume that members of every sector seek selfinterestedly to push their own NRB as high as they can, irrespective of whether the

resulting pattern of regulation may be expected to undermine regulatory efficiency or to
have unfavorable long-run macroeconomic effects.
Social controls on the job performance of government regulators responsible for

protecting the safety and soundness of financial institutions differ between developed and
developing countries. Although institutional mechanisms for promoting politically
determined loans differ between these types of countries, poor information flows and
incentive conflict in government policymaking lie at the heart of banking crises.

In developed and developing countries alike, financial regulators subject foreign
banks and the foreign operations of domestic banks to patterns of regulation that differ
importantly from those that apply to strictly domestic banking operations. The
consequences of two particular asymmetries are most relevant to the Asian Crisis. First,
most developed countries are willing to allow their domestic banks to book a wider range
of risks in foreign subsidiaries than they are prepared to tolerate in home-country offices.

This is because relationships with internationally active customers are a geographically
footloose part of the banking business and because politicians don't expect to confront
responsibility for foreign banking losses in domestic political arenas. This creates
incentives for offshore banks to "overlend" in foreign markets. Second, barriers to the
entry of foreign financial firms into local banking markets customarily exist, but in recent
years officials both in developed regions and in many developing countries have been
persuaded --by technological change and appropriate side payments-- to relax these
barriers (Claessens, Demirguc-Kunt, and Huizenga, 1997).

III. Banking Subsidies and Silent Runs
Banking environments and patterns of banking regulation vary greatly from
country to country. Nevertheless, three strategic elements characterize the banking
policies of almost every country in the world today:

1. Politically-Directed Subsidies to Selected Bank Borrowers: The policy
framework either requires or rewards banks for making credit available to
designated classes of borrowers at a subsidized interest rate;

6

2. Subsidies to Bank Risk-Taking: The policy framework commits government
officials to providing on subsidized terms either explicit or conjectural
guarantees to holders of bank liabilities;

3. Defective Monitoring and Control of the Subsidies: The contracting and
reporting framework for government officials fails to make them directly
accountable for controlling the size of either subsidy.

Taken together, the first two elements in the strategy are standard elements of
rent-seeking theory. They explain how short-horizoned authorities can allow banks to
snatch wealth surreptitiously from taxpayers and simultaneously require loan officers to

pass some or all of the wealth that is snatched to a politically designated set of favored

borrowers. The third element is a new wrinkle emphasized here. It explains what
prevents taxpayers from monitoring the joint cost of the first two strategies and from
disciplining excess transfers in timely fashion through political action or parliamentary

review. Creating an enforceable obligation for regulators to report truthfully to taxpayers
and watchdog institutions the size of the dual subsidies would make authorities

accountable for explaining whether and how taxpayer benefits generated indirectly by
these subsidies might be said to justify the costs that they pass through to taxpayers.
Without side payments from the sectors that receive net benefits, it would be
unlikely that a growing flow of subsidies could prove incentive-compatible for top

government officials even for short periods. To enlist high-ranking regulators into the
benefit-redistribution game, two further conditions must hold. First, taxpayers must be
kept from convincingly assessing by indirect means the magnitude of the costs they face
in funding the subsidies. Second, regulators themselves must be able to extract laundered
incentive compensation from banks and borrowers. Moreover, the compensation offered
must be sufficient to balance the risk of damage to the reputations of policymakers and
the regulatory bureaus they head if, during their watch on the bridge, the system for
covertly financing the subsidy were to break down.

Contradictory policy regimes may be portrayed as accidents waiting to happen. A
banking crisis occurs when a sufficient amount of bad luck hits a banking system whose
managers have made their institutions vulnerable to this amount and type of bad luck.

7

Formally, the odds of experiencing a bureaucratic breakdown in a financial
system's intersectoral cost-shifting process may be modeled as an evolutionary binomial

process. We call the two states: continuation and breakdown. The probability of
breakdown, p, rises with the extent to which government guarantees (G) are not
supported by dedicated reserves. This reserve shortfall corresponds to the cumulative
size of taxpayers' hidden responsibility for making good on unfunded guarantees of bank

liabilities (T). T may also be interpreted as an index of system fragility (F). When and as
T becomes substantial, p also rises with the informativeness of the accounting principles
that are in use in a given country (A):

pp[T(F);A].

(1)

In any accounting system, the very act of making a subsidized (i.e., below-

market) loan creates an unbooked loss for banks. This overvaluation may be conceived
as "sabotaging" the reliability of the asset and net-worth values recorded on conventional
bank balance sheets. The damage from value-sabotaged lending is monitored by
financially sophisticated parties but only begins to become visible to taxpayers when and
as the amount of government-directed loans looms larger and larger on bank balance
sheets and as shortfalls emerge in the cash flows realized from the maturing investment
projects from which the subsidized bank loans must be serviced.

A bank's enterprise-contributed net worth (NWE) represents the value that the
owners could get for the bank if government deposit guarantees did not exist. Sooner or
later, savvy large-denomination depositors come to appreciate the unreported hole that
value-sabotaged loans imbed in accounting approximations to the opportunity-cost value

of their banks' NWE. As a bank's NWE declines through zero, it becomes a "zombie"

institution. A zombie is an insolvent institution whose ability to renew its deposit
funding and its foreign debt depends entirely on the continuing credibility of the explicit
and implicit government guarantees that the government's banking policies attach to its

obligations. As long as the government guarantees remain credible, its creditors have
little reason to force the zombie into a corporate grave.

Systemwide fragility F increases politically with the number of zombies (Z) and
economically with the aggregate size of their negative NWE:

8

F=

F[Z,

NWE a)].

(2)

The more zombies there are in play, the more cohesively the industry may be

expected to lobby against insolvency resolution. The larger accumulated opportunitycost losses become, the larger unbooked government debt with which fiscal authorities

must contend. What we may call a "silent run" begins not when a bank becomes a
zombie, but when the accumulated implicit fiscal deficit from the government's
unbooked loss exposure in zombie banks begins to scare large-denomination depositors.
As more and more depositors and investors rationally begin to doubt whether officials
can or will continue to support its existence, the silent run on a country's banking system
gathers steam.

Doubts about a government's willingness or capacity to make taxpayers absorb

the unfunded cost of guaranteeing the country's zombie banks are a function of T. The
triggering condition is that the aggregate guarantees G soars so far above dedicated
reserves that taxpayer resistance is expected to develop. This political resistance
threatens the survivability of the incumbent government and promises to undermine its
ability to raise the funds needed to pay the bill T(F) in full. We describe runs by
sophisticated large depositors as silent because pressure on a troubled bank from
sophisticated large depositors generates far less adverse publicity than a line of panicked
small depositors does when a bank is experiencing a conventional run.

What a silent run does generate is a growing increase in each zombie bank's

funding costs. In developing countries, a zombie bank's first line of defense against a
silent run is typically to arrange loans from relatively well-informed foreign banks. Like
the sophisticated depositors that zombie bankers manage to retain, foreign banks demand

higher interest rates and increased collateralization for their claims. The net outflows of
domestic deposits that zombie banks experience are financed by a combination of
selected asset sales and high-rate new debt. In consciously deciding to finance a silent
run, foreign banks may feel confident that (as in Mexico in 1994) they can successfully
lobby the IMF, their host government, and their home governments to protect them

against defaults on their holdings of the debt of host-country banks. Foreign banks may

9

also find it advantageous to speculate against the currency in offshore derivatives

markets.
Unless and until bank regulators take steps to increase the credibility of their
guarantee system (e.g., by establishing a substantial line of credit with the International

Monetary Fund), a silent run on a nation's banking system tends to escalate. This is
because zombie banks' asset sales and funding-cost increases make the fragility of the
zombies' condition visible to more and more outside observers by causing a deterioration
in the accounting values of income and net worth. When a zombie bank sells assets at
market value, its unbooked losses on subsidized loans become a larger proportion of its

footings. The more liabilities that a zombie bank rolls over at increased interest rates, the
more severely its accounting and economic profits and those of its healthier competitors
are squeezed.
A silent run increases pressure on regulators to acknowledge that zombie banks
are benefiting from deposit insurance and other less-formal government guarantees in

ways that stronger banks and general taxpayers must eventually help to pay for. As this
realization spreads, it progressively undermines the willingness of taxpayers and stronger

banks to tolerate the regulatory status quo. As a silent run unfolds, reduced profit
margins spread insolvency to previously sound banks and disturbing information is

revealed about the size of T(F). As the run proceeds, net regulatory burdens diverge
more and more drastically between zombie and nonzombie banks. The transfer of
benefits to zombies from taxpayers and viable banks becomes progressively greater the
longer a silent run proceeds. Regulatory efforts to retard the exit of inefficient and
insolvent deposit institutions lower the profit margins that strong banks can earn on
borrowed funds and push their prospective costs for funding the government's guarantee
services above the value of the guarantees that the strong institutions receive.

Our theory of the Asian Crisis may be contrasted with that of authors such as
Chang and Velasco (1998) who locate the trigger for the crisis directly in a growing

mismatch in the maturity of a country's international assets and liabilities. In our theory,
the imbalance in maturity is intensified by insolvency-driven silent runs. A surge in
short-term capital inflows is triggered by foreign lenders' increasing concern for being
able to unwind the positions they establish in economically insolvent Asian banks. The

10

short-funding that troubled banks accept can be sustained only as long as their

government's guarantees remain highly credible.
Using data specific to the U.S. savings-and-loan insurance mess, Kane and Yu

(1995) show how the precrisis evolution of T can be estimated and separated from
imbalances in liquidity per se. A straightforward testable implication of our safety-net
breakdown theory is that financial crises are improbable in countries (such as Singapore
and Taiwan) whose banks are short-funded but whose banking regulators keep unbooked

taxpayer loss exposures (T) small. Tornell (1999) presents data that accord with this
presumption.

Figure Three breaks the evolution of what we may call a regulation-induced
banking crisis into six stages. The banking crises that have rolled through Japan, Korea,
the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand in recent years illustrate the first three

and one-half stages of this model. Authorities resist moving beyond stage 4A unless
several efforts at partial recapitalization have resulted in renewed crisis. In recent years,

only a few crises have passed beyond stage 4A. However, events in the U.S. and
Argentina during the 1990s illustrate some of the later stages of this life-cycle.

Rolling and incompletely resolved crises in other countries prior to 1997 taught
sophisticated Asian depositors and taxpayers at least three lessons. First, the frequency
and geographic extent of banking crises convincingly demonstrated that, around the
world, numerous banks had found it reasonable to book potentially ruinous risks.

Looking at the period 1977-1995, Caprio and Klingebiel (1996) cite 58 countries in
which the net worth of the banking system was almost or entirely eliminated. Second, in
country after country, domestic (and sometimes foreign) taxpayers had been billed to bail

out banks, depositors, and deposit-insurance funds. Caprio and Klingebiel report that
taxpayers' bill for making good on implicit and explicit guarantees typically ran between
1 and 10 percent of GDP. The size of these bailouts established that bankers had often

managed to shift a substantial amount of bank risk to taxpayers. Finally, authorities
deserved substantial blame for the size of the bills taxpayers had been asked to pay.
Officials actively encouraged loss-causing patterns of credit allocation and compounded

the damage from credit losses by not resolving individual-bank insolvencies until their
situations had deteriorated disastrously. The extent of the losses indicated how

11

dangerous it was to let politically corrupted risk-taking preferences of high government
officials strongly influence the flow of aggregate investment.

IV. Asset Prices and Currency Crisis
For any policymaker, a crisis may be described as a time of upheaval that

generates strong pressure for decisive changes in policy strategy. A country's currency
undergoes a crisis when foreign and domestic holders of wealth seek to reduce holdings

of assets denominated in the target currency and to sell target-currency assets short. A
currency crisis inevitably tests the solvency of a country's banks because bank deposits
typically form the main portion of liquid assets that are denominated in a country's
currency.

It is instructive to frame the evolution of economic crises as resulting in a lagged
fashion from a dialectical collision of contradictory forces:

THESIS: UNSUSTAINABLE POLICY MIX
• Expansionary Fiscal Effects of Unbooked Subsidies to Banks vs. Capacity
of Reserves to Support Relatively Fixed Exchange Rates (Krugman, 1979)

• Loss-Causing Credit-Allocation Scheme ("government-sabotaged loans")
vs. Poorly Funded Government Guarantees of Bank Liabilities (Dooley,
1997; Kane, 1998)

ANTITHESIS: MARKET DISCIPLINE TESTS GOVERNMENT PROMISES
TO SUPPORT EXCHANGE RATE AND BANKING SYSTEM
LIABILITIES

• In a Currency Crisis, the Market Test = a Bear Raid
• In a Banking Crisis, the Market Test = a Silent Run or Flight to Quality
SYNTHESIS: CRISIS ARISES WHEN AUTHORITIES LOSE THEIR NERVE
AND CREATE SERIOUS DOUBTS ABOUT THEIR WILLINGNESS TO
MAINTAIN THE CONTRADICTIONS IN MACROECONOMIC OR
BANKING POLICIES.

• Rent seeking is bound to impart to the new policy mix contradictory
elements that will conflict with market forces in new ways.

12

• The probability of crisis rises the longer an unsustainable policy mix stays
in place.
The appropriate policy response to currency crisis pressures depends on the nature
of the prior contradictions in government or business policy that occasioned the crisis. A
particular issue is how extensively the observable run on the currency is compounded --or
even occasioned-- by falling prices for risky financial assets. Asset-price meltdowns are
most likely to occur when incentives for overlending by offshore zombie banks (e.g.,
those of Japan) confront a host-country policy regime that offers incentives for

overborrowing at domestic firms. In such cases, pressure on asset prices is apt to
generate a crisis-intensifying run from claims issued by insolvent domestic corporations
and commercial banks.
In the Krugman (1979) model of currency crisis, authorities accommodate explicit
domestic overspending by financing a series of unsustainable current-account deficits

which draws down the country's foreign-exchange reserves and foreign lines of credit. In
such a crisis, central-bank reserves may be rebuilt by shrinking the current-account
deficit by allowing the exchange rate to decline and by tightening fiscal and monetary
policy.

In the five Asian crisis countries, government overspending was mostly implicit
and current-account deficits proved unsustainable because they supported a malinvested
transfer of foreign private capital. As long as foreign-initiated capital inflows persisted,
the current account had to accommodate the transfer of enough real resources to absorb

them. Table 2 shows that a good portion of the precrisis capital inflow took the form of
lending by risk-hungry zombie banks from Japan.
In the five crisis countries, besides supporting domestic investment, capital

inflows in 1994-1996 financed any depositors who wanted to flee zombie banks and
permitted foreign-exchange reserves to increase by over $35 billion (Institute of

International Finance, 1998). Recipient countries ran current-account deficits to absorb
these capital inflows and suffered a substantial decline in investment spending when the
inflows stopped. Using even the crudest model of aggregate demand, this interruption in
resources looking to finance domestic investment projects implied a sizable recession.
During this recession, capital and labor had to move out of inefficient activities

13

(including many of the projects previously subsidized by politically driven schemes for

allocating credit) and into efficient ones. The resulting asset revaluations revealed and
accentuated hidden losses and deepened the insolvencies of the region's zombie

institutions.
It is painful to resolve corporate and banking insolvencies in the midst of a

recession. In crisis circumstances, politicians are strongly tempted to reflate demand and
either impose strict capital controls (as in Malaysia) or to direct foreign bailout funds to

strengthening the resources of the government's system for guaranteeing zombie lending
institutions, without doing much to resolve the continuing incentive distortions that

undermined banking-system insolvency in the first place. Nevertheless, the gambles
made by Japanese authorities support the hypothesis that leaving bank and corporate
insolvencies unresolved fosters incentives for further malinvestment and enhances the
likelihood that an even deeper crisis will emerge down the line.
The policy mistakes that reversed the 1994-1996 capital inflows were made in the
financial, corporate, and government-planning sectors that allowed rent seekers to

determine how most of the resources transferred from abroad would be used in each

country. It is because these capital inflows were not invested at a satisfactory real rate of
return that asset values and bank net worth now have to be written down in recipient
countries. Had increasing government loss exposures been financed by taxes and private
real asset values either been sustained by an appropriate expansion in productive capacity
or written down promptly as unfavorable information surfaced, large-denomination
depositors and other prior investors in recipient-country assets would have had no reason
to run recipient-country currencies.

V. The Two-Stage Globalization of Regulatory Competition'
Contemporary theories of industrial organization seek to explain how a product's
market structure evolves through time to permit efficient firms to discipline or displace

relatively less-efficient competitors. The force of these theories is particularly easy to
grasp when we focus on hypothetical markets that meet a set of ideal conditions that
Baumol, Panzar, and Willig (1986) call "perfect contestability."
1

This section draws heavily on Kane (1991).

14

A market is perfectly contestable when entry and exit costs are each zero and
incumbent firms exit quickly whenever they find themselves faced with negative profits.

In perfectly contestable markets, low-cost firms readily displace high-cost firms and
incumbent competitors are prevented from setting monopoly prices by the threat of hitand-run entry by other equally-efficient firms.
This paper deploys an imperfectly contestable-markets perspective on marketstructure change to discern two stages of financial deregulation in Asia and elsewhere.
The first stage takes the form of de facto deregulation of entry barriers by market forces.

The second stage consist of subsequent de jure ratification and regularization of market
developments by the financial regulatory establishment.

During the last 30 years, technological change has made banking and other formal
and informal financial markets increasingly more contestable. This brought clients that
were regulated by regulators from other countries and from other domestic jurisdictions

into increasing competition with one another. The second stage of deregulation followed
when and as this mutual invasion of traditional markets put increasing pressure on
specialized incumbent regulators to re-examine the burdensomeness of their rules.

First Stage: Dc Facto Market Deregulation
For several decades and particularly in corporate banking markets around the

world, technological change steadily lowered entry costs for foreign and non-traditional
competitors. Initially, the more-cautious foreign and nontraditional financial firms

booked their market-share incursions in innovative ways. They did banking business by
making creative use of substitute products, substitute organizational forms, and substitute

offshore locations. In most countries, a new entrant's ability to use differently regulated
substitute opportunities was facilitated by longstanding and burdensome restrictions on
how traditional deposit institutions could compete domestically.

Second Stage: De Jure Ratification and Reregularization of Market-Driven
Deregulation
The second stage occurred when regulators officially acquiesced in this

innovative entry by foreign and non-traditional firms and went on to relax many of the

restraints under which their traditional clients had previously operated. As banks'
aggregate market share shrank, they pressed politically for their traditional domestic

regulators to relax or jettison their most burdensome regulations. At the same time,

15

foreign and non-traditional entrants into a country's banking markets pressed authorities
to offer them charters that could regularize and reduce the circumvention costs

occasioned by their creative de facto incursion into that country's banking markets. In
Asia and elsewhere, authorities' positive response to these political pressures during the
1980s and 1990s has been labeled financial deregulation.
Around the world, governmental and market deregulation has been greater for
wholesale and private banking markets than for retail ones. Moreover, the word
deregulation is in any case a misnomer for the detailed pattern of second-stage or

"regularizing" regulatory adjustments that followed. In many countries a deregulation of
entry costs was combined with lags in imposing adequate prudential supervision that
amounted to a far-from-deregulatory accentuation of regulatory barriers to exit for

insolvent domestic deposit-institution competitors. Using the contestable-markets
paradigm of market-structure change makes it clear that banking deregulation in most
countries initially occurred only on the entry side and that subsequent regulatory efforts
to resist the exit of at least some classes of traditional domestic competitors foreshortened
some of the increased contestability in specific banking markets that entry relaxation
would otherwise have produced. Banking regulators have lowered regulatory entry costs
almost to zero, but in adopting or strengthening domestic guarantee systems, many
countries turned around and raised incumbent exit barriers thereafter.

It is important to understand that incumbent banks' ability and willingness to run

negative profits are a form of exit costs. Exit costs limit a new entrant's ability to
penetrate a market. By resisting the exit of its unprofitable clients, a regulator can
prevent efficient competitors from being able to earn enough profits to sustain permanent
entry. As foreign and nontraditional financial-services competitors have come to
appreciate the importance of regulator-financed exit costs in many countries, they have
slowed their rate of entry into new banking markets and even reversed some of their past
entry.

VI. How Regulatory Competition Influenced the Asian Banking Crises
What Diaz-Alejandro (1985) and the press describe as a "banking crisis"may be
more accurately characterized as the surfacing of tensions caused by the continuing

16

efforts of zombie banks to force the rest of society to accept responsibility for the

zombies' unpaid bills for making bad loans. In the five Asian countries, longstanding
systems for subsidizing inefficient loans to favored individuals imposed unhooked losses

on their banking systems. These situations lasted for years. They turned into banking
and currency crises only when doubts began to surface about authorities' willingness and
ability to bond the growing liabilities of an economically insolvent banking system. As
in the U.S. savings-and-loan mess, crisis pressures were triggered in the face of silent
runs by regulatory second thoughts about the wisdom of asking taxpayers to pay the full
value of conjectural government guarantees.
Around the world, financial institutions and markets and concomitant regulatory
systems show numerous country-specific features (Wilson, 1986; Germides etal., 1991).
Differences in patterns of financial regulation parallel differences that exist in the
particular economic, political, and bureaucratic deficiencies and inefficiencies that
regulation is overtly or covertly expected to correct (Kane, 1999).

However, the survival of differences in regulatory patterns is limited by the
tendency of private capital and loan-making opportunities to flow to markets and
institutions that offer their customers the best deals. The extent to which net regulatory
burdens on financial markets and institutions differ across countries is narrowed by the

regulatory arbitrage this deal-flow entails. When and as technological change in
information processing and telecommunications lowers the cost of transacting with
foreign entities, adverse flows of capital and financial deals should help to persuade a
nation's authorities to lower the net burdens that their regulatory framework imposes on
the savers, investors, and financial intermediaries that transact in its financial markets.
In recent years, the increased frequency of banking and currency crises traces to

two events. First, advances in information and communications technology have
globalized banking markets and the market for government guarantees. Second,
globalization of markets for banking and guarantee services has made it less costly for
domestic corporations and wealthy investors to mount silent runs on a country's zombie
banks.
When banking markets are globalized, services that provide regulatory benefits to

bank customers are available from foreign as well as domestic suppliers. The greater is

17

customer access to foreign suppliers, the more easily the struggle for net regulatory
benefits in one country can spill outside its national boundaries to involve foreign banks
and their home-country suppliers of financial regulation.

The market for regulatory services may be defined as a body of persons that carry
on extensive transactions in the specific activity of promulgating, enforcing, and
accepting regulatory restrictions. Demand-side adjustments exist in this market because

the jurisdictions of individual suppliers are fixed only in the very short run. As a
regulatee' s horizon lengthens, the voluntariness of its relationships with regulators rises

steadily. Switching becomes optimal over any horizon for which the increase in a
regulatee' s NRB is large enough to overcome the transactions cost of transferring all or

part of its regulatory business to a more favorable supplier. Geographic overlaps in the
global market for financial regulatory services have expanded as the costs of entering and
exiting banking markets have declined around the world. Ongoing downward trends in
these entry and exit costs render the margin of regulatory competition --even in
developing countries-- increasingly global.

Because regulation is supplied competitively and accepted voluntarily, rules and
enforcement systems are continually tested and reshaped by market discipline.

Nevertheless, switching costs make the contestability of regulatory markets inherently
imperfect. An individual regulatory entity has market power to the extent it can lower the
net benefits its operations offer without immediately surrendering its entire market share.

Because the market discipline to which labor, capital, and political markets subject
individual regulatory officials (including elected politicians) is less than complete, this
market power can be used to develop personal and bureaucratic benefits.

The perfectibility of regulatory competition is limited by information asymmetries
and other sources of principal-agent conflict inherent in governmental processes.

Taxpayers' social contract with governmental entities invests top officials with quasimonopolistic coercive powers. Although taxpayers want government officials to exercise
these powers to promote the "common good," officials may convincingly misrepresent

the effects and purposes of their policies. It is not easy for citizens to ascertain the true
motives of policymakers or to document side payments that officials choose to conceal.

18

Even when events turn up evidence that favors were received, it is difficult toprove
intent and the political system tends to defend the policies in question.

Regulatory competition provides an economic check on the fairness and
efficiency of sectoral NRBs. On the demand side, competition encourages parties that
feel overburdened by their government's system of regulation to remedy matters by
incurring the switching costs necessary to move their business to the jurisdiction of a
cheaper supplier of regulatory services. The new supplier may be a private organization,
but is more often a foreign government. Technological trends that lower the switching
costs of changing one's regulatory supplier make the demand-side check ever more
complete.

On the supply side, the costs to a supplier of entering and exiting a new financial

market are substantial. The existence of these costs means that the number of potential
new entrants that can economically supply regulatory services to banks in any country is
limited in the short run. For private regulators, entry into new markets is limited by the
costs of building up sufficient public standing and coercive authority to be perceived as a
reliable supplier of regulatory services. Would-be entrants need demonstrable skills and

reputational capital. Successful entry into any regulatory market requires both a capacity
for raising and distributing funds and a capacity for exercising disciplinarypower. An
entrant must be able to enforce a system of rewards and punishments sufficient to change

the behavior of potential regulatees. Every entrant must be able to promise credibly that
it can fairly and truly regulate and is committed to doing this for a long while.

Exploitive regulation drives sophisticated depositors, borrowers, and other bank
stakeholders to book at least some of their business elsewhere: either abroad or in
informal and differently regulated domestic markets. These acts of regulatory arbitrage
limit the extent to which markets will tolerate a vector of regulatory burdens that deviates

from its optimal long-run path composition. Authorities in countries such as Singapore
and Taiwan that aspire to become international financial centers --and indeed inany
country whose political environment supports a reasonably long decisionmaking
horizon—appear to have grasped this long ago.
The 1997-1998 crises in Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and
Thailand were hastened by the continuing technologically driven passage in these

19

countries to a more-globalized market structure in which large depositors could shop for
ways to protect themselves against the burdens of unsustainably costly patterns of
financial regulation. Globalization put the costs and benefits of host-country banking
regulation into closer competition with the Basle-enhanced regulatory systems of
offshore financial centers.
Offshore banking competition shortened the crisis-gestation period in two ways.

First, even limited entry by outside banks expanded the stock of well-priced domestically
available substitutes for deposits that local citizens had previously held in host-country
banks. This lowered the cost to Asian depositors of participating in a silent run on local
banks. Second, the greater safety of foreign-bank deposit substitutes reflects the greater
economic efficiency of the (albeit still-imperfect) performance guarantees written for
each offshore entrant by the regulatory systems of its homeland.

Each new crisis constitutes an exit cost that society pays to shrink the domain of a
high-cost or inequitable regulator. Crises are triggered by efforts to avoid the
inefficiencies and inequities that political maneuvering tends to produce when a
government enjoys monopoly power in its domestic "onshore" market for regulatory
services. By squeezing the equilibrium rents that short-sighted or corruptible officials
can extract in individual countries, offshore regulatory competition has the salutary effect
of creating pressure to discipline inefficient regulators and perhaps even to improve
public-service contracting in the longer run.
In a perfect world, the normative goal of financial reform would be to induce fair

and efficient patterns of regulation and supervision. Regulators should be made
accountable not just for producing a stable financial economy, but for providing this

stability fairly and at minimum cost to society. In practice, this means establishing
incentives that lead authorities to adopt market-mimicking standards of regulatory

performance. In the absence of explicit or implicit government guarantees, markets
would insist that any bank that experiences opportunity-cost losses do one or more of

three things: shrink, raise more capital, or pay higher interest rates for funds. The publicpolicy problem is to find efficient ways to make it in regulators' self-interest to invoke
"market-mimicking" disciplines when and as a country's important institutions weaken.

20

VII. Summary and Policy Implications
This paper seeks to establish a cohesive microeconomic perspective on the

financial crises experienced in Asia during 1997-98. The model offered emphasizes how
distortions created by faulty banking regulation affect capital allocation, asset prices, and

bank solvency. The analysis combines four ideas:
1. Regulatory distortions create ex-ante incentives for capital misallocation.
Government guarantees cause banks to allocate capital to unsustainably risky

projects that could be financed only at much higher interest rates if

government guarantees did not exist. Politically directed credit subsidies put
too much capital into favored sectors and too little capital elsewhere.

2. When politically directed loans are made at below-market interest rates, an
unbooked opportunity loss is incurred by the lending bank. Government
deposit guarantees cannot credibly cover continued growth in these unbooked

losses indefinitely without incident. From time to time, a government's
ability and willingness to bail out its insolvent banks is bound to be tested by

silent runs. A crisis occurs when the accumulated size of banks' opportunity
losses becomes both too big to hide and too big to cover over with budget
gimmickry.

3. The entry of foreign and better-regulated banks into the domestic market tends
to accelerate the demise of insolvent domestic banks. Savers silently shift
funds towards foreign banks. Foreign banks, free of credit-allocation
pressure, pick off the best customer relationships and new investment projects
in the economy.

4. Domestic asset prices fall as the true value of the capital stock is revealed.
The decline is reinforced macroeconomically as investment is curtailed and

the formerly subsidized domestic firms are denied access to new credit. The
losses filter through domestic-bank balance sheets, forcing the banks to realize
market-value losses and households to reduce their spending.
Our analysis treats runs on the currencies of crisis countries as insolvency-

revealing runs on their banks. Although IMF officials were quick to assist in stabilizing
troubled currencies, they found it much harder to address the banking side of each crisis.

21

The contradictions in regulatory policies that made banks insolvent were too well
supported politically to be corrected swiftly.
IMF officials understand that strengthening bank supervision is a critical part of

crisis resolution. But the IMF's own political vulnerability supports a reluctance to
publicize the particular incentive structures that made a crisis country's supervision weak

in the first place. In a crisis atmosphere, it is apt to seem politically destablizing for the
IMF to stress the need for public-service contracting reforms and information-disclosure
regimes for banks and regulators that would be strong enough to make tougher
supervision in an incentive-conflicted regulator's self-interest.
Still, for any country, the size of sustainable deviations from a fair and efficient
distribution of net regulatory burdens falls with declines in the opportunity costs its

citizens face in engaging in capital flight. In turn, the net benefit to individuals of
engaging in capital flight increases with advances in information technology, with the
volatility of the real economy, and with the fluidity of the political environment.
Recognizing this creates incentives for the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund to improve the quality Of their policy advice in the future. Allan Meltzer (e.g.,
1998) has long emphasized that, to avoid subsidizing insolvent banks, IMF loans to crisis
countries should be made only to demonstrably solvent banks on good collateral and only

at a penalty rate. International institutions might also undertake research to clarify for
authorities in developing countries that the global information revolution has unleashed
market forces that make it short-sighted to adopt credit-allocation schemes that are bound
to decapitalize their banks and increasingly difficult to ask their taxpayers to subsidize

weak banks and uneconomic enterprises. Finally, international institutions could
reinforce this advice by fostering the development of information-revealing private

markets in credit derivatives whose payoffs would be conditioned on the occurrence of
observable default events in various developing countries.

22

REFERENCES

Barth, James, R. Dan Brumbaugh, Lalita Ramesh, and Glenn Yago, 1998. "The Role of
Governments and Markets in International Banking Crises: The Case of East
Asia," in George Kaufman (ed.), Bank Crises: Causes, Analysis and Prevention,
Research in Financial Services: Private and Public Policy, Vol. 10. Stamford,

Conn.: JAI Press, pp. 177-233.
Baumol, Wiffiam, John C. Panzar, and Robert D. Wiffig, 1986. "On the Theory of

Contestable Markets," in C. Frank Matthewson and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), New
Developments in the Theory of Industrial Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

pp. 339-365.
Caprio, Gerald, and Daniela Klingebiel, 1996. "Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad Policy,
Annual Conference on Development Economics, Washington:

The World Bank, pp. 79-104.

_____ 1999. "Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises," Washington, DC:
The World Bank (Working Paper, May).
Claessens, Stijn, Ask Demirguç-Kunt, and Hany Huizenga, 1997. "How Does Foreign
Entry Affect the Domestic Banking Market?," Washington: The World Bank
Development Research Group (mimeo).

De Bonis, Riccardo, Allessandro Giustiniani, and Giorgio Gomel, 1999. "Crises and
Bail-outs of Banks and Countries: Interconnections, Analogies, Differences,"

Rome: Banca d'Italia, Research Department.
Demirguç-Kunt, Ask and Enrica Detragiache, 1998a. "The Determinants of Banking

Crises in Developing and Developed Countries," IMF Staff Papers, 45(1), pp. 81109.

_____

1998b. "Financial Liberalization and Financial Fr

Annual World Bank

Conference on Development Economics, pp. 303-331.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F., 1985. "Good-Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial
Crash," Journal of Development Economics, 19, pp. 1-24.

Dooley, Michael P., 1997. "A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets," NBER Working
Paper No. 6300, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research
(December).

Edwards, Sebastian, 1999. "On Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexico and East Asia,"
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
7233 (July).

Furman, Jason and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1998. 'Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998:2, pp. 1-114.
Garcia, Gillian G.H., 1998. "The East Asian Financial Crises," in George Kaufman (ed.),

op. cit., pp. 21-32.
Germides, Dimitri, Dennis Kessler and Rachel Meghir, 1991. Financial Systems and
Development: What Role for the Formal and Informal Financial Sectors?,

Development Centre Studies, Paris: OECD.

Gorton, Gaiy, 1992. "Banking Panics," in Peter Newman, Munay Milgate, and John
Eatwell (ed.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Money & Finance, Vol. 1, pp.

146-148.
Herring, Richard J., and Susan Wachter, 1999. "Real Estate Booms and Banking Busts:
An International Perspective," Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, Wharton

Financial Institutions Center Working Paper No. 99-27.
Institute of International Finance, Inc., 1998. Capital Flows to Emerging Market
Economies, Washington (Jan. 29).
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky (editors), 1982. Judgement Under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kane, Edward J., 1993. "What Lessons Should Japan Learn from the U.S. Deposit
Journal of Japanese and International Economics, 7 (December

1993), pp. 329-355.

_____ 1998. "Capital Movements, Asset Values, and Banking Policy in Globalized
Markets," in Seongtae Lee (ed.), The Implications of Globalization of World

Financial Markets, Seoul: Bank of Korea, pp. 278-298.

_____ 1999a. "Capital Movements, Banking Insolvency, and Silent Runs in the Asian
Pacific Basin Finance Journal (forthcoming).

_____ 1999b. "Designing Financial Safety Nets to Fit Country Circumstances: A

Progress Report," Washington: The World bank (incomplete).

Krugman, Paul, 1979. "A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises," Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, 11(August), pp. 311-325.
Mayer, Martin, 1998. The Asian Disease: Plausible Diagnoses, Possible remedies, Levy
Institute Public Policy Brief, No. 44 (September).
Mei, Jianping, 1999. "Political Risk, Financial Crisis, and Market Volatility," New York:
New York University Department of Finance(unpublished).

Meltzer, Allan, 1998. "Financial Structure, Saving, and Growth: Safety Nets, Regulation,
and Risk Reduction in Global Financial Markets," in Seongtae Lee (op. cit.), pp.

3-23.
Rodrik, Dani, and Andrés Velasco, 1999. "Short-Term Capital Flows," Presented at the
Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, Washington: World Bank
(April).

Schwartz, Anna J., 1998. "Asian Banking Crises in the 1990s: All Alike?," in George
Kaufman (ed), op. cit., pp. 139- 164.

Wall, Lany D., and Robert A. Eisenbeis, 1999. "Financial Regulatory Structure and the
Resolution of Conflicting Goals," Journal of Financial Services Research,
(forthcoming).

Wilson, J.A.G., 1986. Banking Policy and Structure: A Comparative Analysis. New
York University Press, New York.

Table 1

Assistance Offered Crisis Countries by the International Community
(in billions of U.S. $)

Country

IMF

Commitments
Multilateraf
Bilateral

IMF
Disbursements

Total

As of 6/9/99

Indonesia

11.2

10.0

21.1

42.3

9.5

Korea

21.1

14.2

23.1

58.4

19.4

l.6

0

0

l.6

1.6

4.0

2.7

10.5

17.2

3.2

37.9

26.9

54.7

119.5

33.7

Philippinest
Thailand
Total
*

Notes: World Bank and Asian Development Bank.
As of yearend 1998.

Source: These data were graciously provided by Gillian Garcia of the IMF. They update a table published in Garcia (1998), p. 27.

Table 2

International Claims of BIS Reporting Banks on Countries outside
the Reporting Area (in millions U.S. $)
End-December 1995

Japan
Claims on:
Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

21,297
21,309
7,289
987
37,056
87,938

U.S.

2,778
7,590
1,523
2,946
4,097
18,934

Germany UK
3,893
7,318
2,249
711
4,977
19,148

Other Europe
and Canada

2,727
3,861

8,758
13,291

1,158
631

2,918
2,413
7,886
35,266

2,822
11,199

All
Other*

5,390
24,023
1,622
637
6,156
37,828

GRAND

TOTAL
44,843
77,392
16,759
8,325
62,994
210,313

Claims by Banks in Country:

End-June 1996
Japan
Claims on:
Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

Claims by Banks in Country:

21,947
22,368
8,102
1,397
37,777
91,591

End-December 1996
Japan

U.S.

3,551
9,582
1,896
3,351

4,433
22,813

Germany

4,843
8,529
3,195
1,475
6,381
24,423

UK

3,260
4,140
1,218
782
3,070
12,470

Other Europe
and Canada
10,385
15,059
3,536
2,864
9,664
41,508

All

GRAND

Other*

TOTAL

5,645
28,205

2,124

49,306
88,027
20,100

921

10,795

8,309
45,204

69,409
237,637

Claims by Banks in Country:
U.S.

Germany

UK

Other Europe
and Canada

All
Other*

GRAND
TOTAL

Claims on:

Indonesia
SouthKorea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

22,035
24,324
8,210
1,558
37,525
93,652

5,279
9,355
2,337
3,902
5,049
25,922

5,508
9,977
3,857
1,820
6,914
28,076

3,834
5,643
1,417
1,173
3,128
15,195

12,258
19,554

4,067
3,751
10,210
49,840

6,609
31,100
2,346
1,085
7,321
48,461

55,523
99,953
22,234
13,289
70,147
261,146

End-June 1997

Claims by Banks in Country:
Japan

Claims on:
Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

23,153

23,732
10,489

2,109
37,749
97,232

End-December 1997
Japan
Claims on:
Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

22,018
20,278
8,551
2,624
33,180
86,651

End-June 1998

U.S.

4,591
9,964
2,400
2,816
4,008
23,779

UK

Germany

5,610
10,794
5,716
1,991
7,557
31,668

4,332
6,064
2,011
1,076
2,818
16,301

Other Europe
and Canada
13,377
20,781
5,211

4,230
10,442
54,041

All
Other*
7,663
32,097
2,993
1,893
6,808
51,454

GRAND
TOTAL
58,726
103,432
28,820
14,115
69,382
274,475

Claims by Banks in Country:
U.S.

4,898
9,533
1,786
3,224
2,533
21,974

Germany UK
6,174
9,616
7,197
2,999
6,028
32,014

4,492
6,924
2,014
1,607
2,361
17,398

Other Europe
and Canada
13,520
18,883
5,061
6,240
9,554
53,258

All
Other*

7,286
28,946
2,919
3,038
5,179
47,368

GRAND
TOTAL
58,388
94,180
27,528
19,732
58,835
258,663

Claims by Banks in Country:
Japan

U.S.

UK

Germany

Other Europe
and Canada

All
Other*

GRAND
TOTAL

Claims on:

Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

19,030
18,934
7,905
2,308
26,120
74,297

3,226
7,409
1,149
3,025
1,757
16,566

5,876
8,400
5,160
2,161
5,286
26,883

28

3,967
5,634
1,613
1,775

2,088
15,077

12,773
15,687
4,394
7,152
8,567
48,573

5,396
16,380
2,803
1,382
2,983

28,944

50,268
72,444
23,024
17,803
46,801
210,340

'4

End-December 1998

Japan

Claims on:
Indonesia
South Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
TOTAL

16,402
16,925
6,623
2,324
22,437
64,711

Claims by Banks in Country:
U.S.

3,537
6,291
858
2,657
1,358
14,701

Germany

5,638
8,250
4,618
2,304
4,687
25,497

UK

3,814
5,551
2,040
1,844
1,775
15,024

Other Europe
and Canada
10,567
13,905
4,370
5,452
8,150
42,444

All
Other*

GRAND
TOTAL

4,869

44,827
65,293
20,826

14,371

2,317
1,579
2,342
25,478

16,160
40,749
187,855

Source: "The Maturity, Sectoral and Nationality Distribution of International Bank Lending," Bank for
International Settlements, various years.

"All Other" Claims include claims of affiliates and branches of banks which have their headoffices outside of the BIS reporting area and "residual" claims.
*

Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Ireland have no exposure to the selected Asian countries.

29

Table 3
Number of Bank Insolvencies Resolved or Scheduled to be Resolved in the Four Largest Asian
Crisis Countries During the First Nine Months of the East Asian Crisis
Nationalized!
Administered by
Restructuring
Agency

July, 1997 Number
of Banks and
Finance Companies

ClosedlSuspended

Thaliand

108

56

4

0

4

Malaysia
Indonesia

60

0

0

41

0

228

16

56

11

0

56

16

2

0

0

South Korea

Planning to Merge

Source: The Economist, (April 4, 1998), as printed in De Bonis, Guistiniani, and Gomel (1999).

Foreign-Bought
(majority stake)

Figure One
Comparative Exchange Rates Relative to the U.S. Dollar
April 1, 1997 -April 30, 1999
(April 1, 1997 = 100)
120

100

80

60

40

20

0

4'

4'

0

4,

sJ.
C,

31

Figure Two
International Claims of U.S., Japanese and European Banks on
the Five Asian Crisis Countries, Yearend 1997 and 1998
100
90
80

70

Billions 60
50

40
30

20

uu,IIIIIIlIIuuI

10

0

U.S.

• Indonesia

Japan

Europe and Canada

South Korea 0 Malaysia 11111 Philippines 0 Thailandj

Source: Bank for International Settlements, May 1998 and May 1999.

32

Figure Three
Six Stages of a Regulation-Induced Banking Crisis
1. Generation of Multiple Zombies
• Transition Via Government-Directed Lending and Subsidies to
Risk Taking
• Transition to Zombieness is Apt to Be Particularly Rapid at StateOwned Banks
2. Escalating Silent Runs Driven by Size of Unbooked Losses Test
Strength of Government Commitment to Support Zombies
• Regulatory Reliance on Disinformation and Coverup
• Difficulty for Banks of Weathering Runs Rises Over Time

3. Palpable Bureaucratic Breakdown in Government's Guarantee
Support Mechanisms
4. Recapitalization of Government Stabilization Funds
A. Stopgap Partial Recapitalization: Back to Stage 2
B. Full Taxpayer Bailout or Explicit Nationalization
5. Clean-Up of Zombie Institutions

6. Blame Distribution and Substantial Change in the Banking-Policy
Regime

