NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORWARD AND BACKWARD INTERGENERATIONAL GOODS:
A THEORY OF INTERGENERATIONAL EXCHANGE

Antonio Rangel

Working Paper 7518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7518
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

I am grateful to Alberto Alesina, Marty Feldstein and Eric Maskin for their suggestions and support during
the process of writing about intergenerational issues . I also want to thank James Alt, Gadi Barlevy, Doug

Bernheim, Francesco Caselli, Andrew Cohen, Alejandro Cunat, David Cutler, Sven Feldman, Drew
Fudenberg, Jerry Green, Oliver Hart, James Hines, Mireille Jacobson, Matthew Jackson, Chad Jones,
Jonathan Katz, David Laibson, John Ledyard, Jeff Liebman, Andreu Mos-Colell, Jill Morningstar, Stephen
Morris, Casey Mulligan, Dina Older-Aguilar, Torsten Persson, James Poterba, Richard McKelvey, Todd
Sandler, Ken Shepsle, Andrei Schleifer, Joaquim Silvestre, Tomas Sjostrom, Steve Tadelis, Jaume
Ventura, Richard Zeckhauser and seminar participants at Harvard, Caltech, Davis, Stanford,
Northwestern, Illinois-Urbana, Iowa, and Rochester for their helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Antonio Rangel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Forward and Backward Intergenerational Goods: A Theory of Intergenerational Exchange
Antonio Rangel
NBER Working Paper No. 7518
February 2000
JEL No. H0, H3, H4, I2, D1, D7, C7, E6
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a theory of intergenerational exchange for generations that are either selfish
or have non-dynastic altruism. The main building blocks of the theory are forward and backward
intergenerational goods (FIGs and BIGs) and the relationship between them. A FIG is a transfer from
present to future generations, like parental investments in education and the preservation of the environment.
A BIG is a transfer from future to present generations, like pay-as -you-go social security or taking care
of elderly parents. We show that there is a fundamental difference between BIGs and FIGs. BIGs
generating a positive surplus are self-sustainable, but FIGs never are. However, even with selfish
generations, optimalinvestment in future generations can take place if the equilibrium social norm links BIGs
and FIGs. The tools developed here can be used to understand a wide class of intergenerational problems,
from the political economy of environmental treaties to the economics of seniority institutions. Two
applications are developed in the paper: (1) the political economy of intergenerational public expenditures,
and (2) investment in children within the family.

Antonio Rangel
Assistant Professor of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
rangel@leland.stanford.edu

