                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGES
                            THROUGHOUT THE WAGE DISTRIBUTION


                                             David Neumark
                                             Mark Schweitzer
                                             William Wascher


                                           Working Paper 7519
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7519

                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2000




We are grateful to Scott Adams for outstanding research assistance, and to seminar participants at Michigan
State, the University of Kentucky, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and Florida State University for
helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the authors only, and do not necessarily reflect those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, or their staffs. This research was carried out while Neumark was a Visiting Scholar at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

© 2000 by David Neumark, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Minimum Wages Throughout the Wage Distribution
David Neumark, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher
NBER Working Paper No. 7519
February 2000
JEL No. J18, I3, J23, D31

                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper provides evidence on a wide set of margins along which labor markets can adjust in
response to increases in the minimum wage, including wages, hours, employment, and ultimately labor
income, representing the central margins of adjustment that impact the economic well-being of workers
potentially affected by minimum wage increases. The evidence indicates that workers initially earning near
the minimum wage are adversely affected by minimum wage increases, while, not surprisingly, higher-wage
workers are little affected. Although wages of low-wage workers increase , their hours and employment
decline, and the combined effect of these changes is a decline in earned income.
        We also delve into the political economy of minimum wages, attempting to understand the vigorous
support of labor unions for minimum wage increases. Using the same empirical framework, we find that
relatively low-wage union members gain at the expense of the lowest-wage nonunion workers when
minimum wages increase.


David Neumark                                                    Mark Schweitzer
Department of Economics                                          Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Michigan State University                                        P.O. Box 6387
East Lansing, MI 48824                                           Cleveland, OH 44101
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu

William Wascher
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th and Constitution Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551
