                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE PROGRESSIVITY OF SOCIAL SECURITY


                                          Julia Lynn Coronado
                                              Don Fullerton
                                              Thomas Glass


                                           Working Paper 7520
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7520

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




We are grateful for helpful suggestions from Martin Feldstein, Wei-Yin Hu, Jeff Liebman, Gib Metcalf, Maria
Perozek, Jim Poterba, Jon Skinner and Al Teplin. This paper is part of the NBER program in Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Board
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Julia Lynn Coronado, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Progressivity of Social Security
Julia Lynn Coronado, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass
NBER Working Paper No. 7520
February 2000
JEL No. H22, H55

                                                ABSTRACT

         How much does the current social security system really redistribute from rich to poor? We use
the PSID to estimate lifetime wage profiles and actual earnings each year for a sample of 1778 individuals,
and we use mortality probabilities to calculate expected payroll taxes and social security benefits. For a
given set of “facts” about the net flows received by each individual, measured progressivity depends on
many assumptions. This paper attempts to capture and to quantify all of the individual characteristics that
are relevant to determine the progressivity of a life-cycle program like social security.
         We proceed in seven steps. First, we classify individuals by annual income and use Gini coefficients
to find that social security is highly progressive. Second, we reclassify individuals on the basis of lifetime
income and find that social security is less progressive. Third, we remove the cap on measured earnings
and find that social security is even less progressive. Fourth, we switch from actual to potential lifetime
earnings (the present value of the wage rate times 4000 hours each year). This measure captures the value
of leisure and home production, so those out of the labor force are less poor, and net payments to them
are less progressive. Fifth, we assign to each married individual half of the couple’s income. The low-wage
spouse is then not so poor, and social security becomes even less progressive. Sixth, we incorporate
mortality probabilities that differ by potential lifetime income. Since the rich live longer and collect benefits
longer, social security is no longer progressive. Finally, we increase the discount rate from 2% to 4%,
which puts relatively more weight on the earlier-but-regressive payroll tax and less weight on the later-but-
progressive benefit schedule. The whole social security system is then regressive.


Julia Lynn Coronado                                                  Don Fullerton
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System                     Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20551                                                 University of Texas
jcoronado@frb.gov                                                    Austin, TX 78712
                                                                     and NBER
                                                                     dfullert@econ.utexas.edu

Thomas Glass
Glass & Company, CPAS
515 Congress Ave., Suite 1900
Austin, TX 78701
tglass@glasscpa.com
