NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHOICE, CHANCE, AND WEALTH DISPERSION
AT RETIREMENT

Steven F. Venti
David A. Wise

Working Paper 7521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging. We are also grateful to the Unicon Research
Corporation for providing a copy of their CPS Utilities data and software. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Choice, Chance, and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement
Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 7521
February 2000
ABSTRACT
“People earn just enough to get by” is a phrase often used to explain the low personal saving rate
in the United States. The implicit presumption is that households simply do not earn enough to pay for
current “needs” and to save. We show in this paper that at all levels of lifetime earnings there is an
enormous dispersion in the accumulated wealth of families approaching retirement. It is not only households
with low incomes that save little; a significant proportion of high income households also saves little. And,
a substantial proportion of low income households save a great deal. We then consider the extent to which
differences in household lifetime financial resources explain the wide dispersion in wealth, given lifetime
earnings. We find that very little of this dispersion can be explained by chance differences in individual
circumstances – “largely outside the control of individuals” – that might limit the resources from which
saving might plausibly be made. We also consider how much of the dispersion in wealth might be
accounted for by different investment choices of savers – some more risky, some less risky – given lifetime
earnings. We find that investment choice is not a major determinant of the dispersion in asset accumulation.
It matters about as much as chance events that limit the available resources of households with the same
lifetime earnings. We conclude that the bulk of the dispersion must be attributed to differences to in the
amount that households choose to save. The differences in saving choices among households with similar
lifetime earnings lead to vastly different levels of asset accumulation by the time retirement age approaches.
Steven F. Venti
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu

David A. Wise
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
dwise@nber.org

