                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CHILDREN’S WELFARE EXPOSURE AND
                                 SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENT


                                             Phillip B. Levine
                                            David J. Zimmerman


                                            Working Paper 7522
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7522

                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2000




We would like to thank Greg Duncan, Ted Joyce, Kathy McCartney, Barbara Wolfe, participants of the Joint
Center for Poverty Research Conference on Tax and Transfer Programs for Low Income Participants, and
participants of workshops at the National Bureau of Economic Research Children’s Program, Boston College,
Dartmouth College, and the University of Georgia for their helpful comments and the William T. Grant
Foundation for financial support (award #95168995). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Phillip B. Levine and David J. Zimmerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Children’s Welfare Exposure and Subsequent Development
Phillip B. Levine and David J. Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 7522
February 2000
JEL No. I38, J13

                                           ABSTRACT

       We examine the extent to which children are exposed to the welfare system through their
mother’s receipt of benefits and its impact on several developmental outcomes. Using data from the
matched mother-child file from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), we find that
children’s welfare exposure is substantial. By age 10 over one-third of all children will have lived
in a welfare household; black, non-Hispanic children face a much higher rate of exposure. Simple
correlations suggest a strong negative relationship between maternal welfare receipt and children’s
outcomes. In this paper we implement three alternative strategies (instrumental variables, sibling
difference, and child fixed effects models) designed to identify whether this correlation can be
attributed to the mother’s welfare receipt directly or to other characteristics of mothers who receive
welfare, regardless of whether or not those characteristics are observable to the researcher. Based
on the results of all three estimation strategies, we find little evidence of any causal link between
maternal welfare receipt and children’s developmental outcomes.


Phillip B. Levine                                             David J. Zimmerman
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
106 Central Street                                            Fernald House
Wellesley College                                             Williams College
Wellesley, MA 02481                                           Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER                                                      david.j.zimmerman@williams.edu
plevine@wellesley.edu
