                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW DO UK-BASED FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEALERS
                          THINK THEIR MARKET OPERATES?


                                           Yin-Wong Cheung
                                            Menzie D. Chinn
                                             Ian W. Marsh


                                           Working Paper 7524
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7524

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




This study was begun while Marsh was at the University of Strathclyde and he is grateful for the grant that
financed the survey. We would also like to thank, without implication, Torsten Boehler (BNP), Mark Clark
(Indosuez), Hugh Macdonald (Royal Bank of Scotland), Ronnie MacDonald, Marcin Przybyla, Mark Salmon,
Jamie Thom (Bank of England), Michela Vecchi and seminar participants at City University, Central Bank
of Malta and the Bank of Valletta for assistance and helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Ian W. Marsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
1.      Introduction
One week spent at the side of a top foreign exchange trader led a recognised expert in the field to realise
the extent of the gap between how academic economists view exchange rate determination and the way
market professionals work (Lyons, 1999, Chapter 1). This realisation contributed significantly to the
emergence of a new literature in exchange rates – market microstructure – and hence to a wider
appreciation of the important role played by traders. This paper seeks to add to our knowledge of the
actions of foreign exchange traders by presenting the results of a survey of their beliefs and actions. It
addresses three main topics: the microeconomic operation of the foreign exchange market (including trader
techniques, counterparties, and trading mechanisms); traders’ views on exchange rate determination
(including the (ir)relevance of the concept of fundamental value, the factors that are thought important over
a range of horizons, and the predictability of exchange rate trends); and further market microstructure
factors (the size of bid-ask spreads, and the factors that determine them). Further aspects of the market
are addressed in the survey, but are not discussed in this paper to conserve space. A copy of the full
survey, incorporating the results of all questions, is given in Appendix A.
        The results of the survey do not in general set a new research agenda for international economists.
Rather, they highlight the areas where the gap between academic teaching and traders’ views remain large.
These divergences do not necessarily mean that academics are wrong due to ivory tower isolation. Instead,
they indicate where further work is needed if we are to understand why workers at the sharp-end of the
industry disagree.
        The results point to three areas of divergence between academic writing and traders’ views. First,
fundamental value is seen as a relevant concept by a large proportion of traders at horizons much shorter
than mainstream academic theory can explain. Maybe practitioners have better models than academics,
or maybe academics with good models become traders and keep their findings secret. Alternatively, since
the majority of traders close out positions by the end of a working day, horizons of six months are of only
academic interest to most traders. But it remains that over half the respondents think exchange rate
changes over a six-month horizon (or less) accurately reflect changes in economic fundamentals. The
academic consensus is closer to thirty-six months.



                                                     1
        Second, ‘speculative forces’ appear to be an important factor in determining short-term currency
movements. This is over and above the contribution made by economic factors (which is in any case tiny),
news, technical trading effects and bandwagon effects. Answering the question of what factors precipitate
speculative flows in addition to the alternatives may contribute to our knowledge of exchange rate
determination.
        Third, although much has been made of the differences between chartists and fundamentalists, this
survey shows very little evidence of systematic differences of opinion between these two groups.
Furthermore, two relatively unresearched groups – jobbers and customer-led traders – appear to be
equally important in the market. Arguably, models of the exchange rate market should incorporate a richer
cast of participants. However, there is clear evidence of heterogeneity in the foreign exchange market as
a whole. There is no consensus among traders on a wide range of important issues relating to fundamental
value and the determinants of exchange rate movements.
        The results also suggest a new answer to an old puzzle. The concept of purchasing power parity
as a measure of an exchange rate’s fundamental value is supported by a sizeable proportion of traders.
However, a much smaller percentage of respondents would trade in such a way as to move exchange rates
closer to PPP levels. This suggests an alternative reason for the ambiguous empiricalresults of tests of PPP.
In addition to the standard arguments such as measurement difficulties and price frictions, traders, who
jointly determine exchange rates, in the main do not act so as to restore equilibrium.
        Finally, the results point to a new puzzle. Traders do not vary their bid-ask spread either very often
or for some of the reasons thought important in the microstructure literature. Instead, market convention
appears to exert a strong hold over traders. Why this is so deserves further research, and the importance
of ‘market norms’ should be incorporated into microstructure models.
        The next section describes the survey and the findings relating to the operation of the market.
Section 3 contains results of questions collected under the broad heading of fundamental value, and section
4 considers additional microstructural affects. The paper closes with a brief conclusion and overview.




                                                     2
2.      The data
The data used in this study were collected by a postal survey of UK-based foreign exchange dealers
conducted in March/April 1998. A copy of the questionnaire is reported in Appendix A. Approximately
1,940 surveys were sent out to named dealers whose affiliations were extracted from the 1997 Hambro’s
Dealers Directory. Of these, 18 dealers were based in each of Belfast and Edinburgh, 8 in Leicester, 7
in Glasgow, and 3 in Manchester. The remainder were all London based. Postage-paid return envelopes
were supplied, and all responses were entirely anonymous. Staff turnover and bank closures resulted in
32 non-deliverable questionnaires, and the Bank of England dealers declined to participate but offered to
discuss the results of the survey. A total of 110 completed surveys were returned, a response rate of
approximately 5.8%. This low response rate may be due to the nature of some of the requested
information. In particular, daily trading limits, departmental turnover and counterparty details (discussed
below) could all be deemed too sensitive for even anonymous release. Nevertheless, the response rate still
falls into Alreck and Settle’s “typical” range of 5–10% for a postal survey (Alreck and Settle, 1985).


2.1     The respondents
A description the distribution of respondents is given in table I which cross-tabulates the respondents by
rank (“dealer/junior dealer”, “chief/senior dealer”, “treasurer/manager” or “other”), daily position limit (in
US$ millions or value at risk, VaR) and departmental average daily turnover (in US$ millions). The first
two measures are indicative of a trader’s importance in the market. In particular, the daily position limit
is the maximum open position a dealer is authorized to assume during the trading day. Since in most
cases dealers square their positions at the end of a trading day, the position limit can be used as a proxy
for a dealer’s trading capacity. This can only be an indication of a trader’s importance since, in practice,
traders rarely approach their daily limits. The departmental daily turnover is a comparable indicator of the
importance of the trader’s employer in the market. Some traders did not give full details for all three
variables and are instead described in a footnote to the table.
        One factor not detailed in the table is the nationality of the organisation. The parent companies of
the dealers’ organisations are internationally distributed – 36 are UK-based, 41 are from other European



                                                      3
countries, 8 are US-based, 12 are Asian (ten of which are from Japan), with 13 based in other countries,
primarily the Americas or the Middle-East. Though this is a survey of the UK foreign exchange market,
we have in fact gathered views from traders of many nationalities and whose companies are headquartered
around the world.


2.2     Trading technique
One popular technique for analysing financial markets is to hypothesise the use of different trading
techniques (Frankel and Froot, 1990; Taylor and Allen, 1992; Menkhoff, 1998). In particular, much has
been made of the different factors driving fundamentalists and technical analysts (Goodhart, 1988; Cutler,
Poterba and Summers, 1990; De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann, 1990). Frankel and Froot
(1990) suggest that traders switching between these techniques may explain the highly unpredictable nature
of exchange rates. DeGrauwe and Dewachter (1990) go a step further and argue that mixing technical
analysts with fundamentalists can generate a chaotic model.
        Table II details the techniques that the respondents thought best characterised their current dealing
methods, together with their methods of five years ago. In addition to technical trading and fundamental
analysis, respondents were given “jobbing”, “customer order-driven” and “other” as alternatives. Jobbing
describes the (usually rapid and continuous) buying and selling of a currency for small profit each round trip.
Adapting Silber’s (1984) description of a scalper in a futures pit, a jobber looks to sell at his offer what he
bought at his bid, or buy back at his bid what he has already sold at his offer.
        Many of the traders surveyed claim to use at least two techniques and so the number of chosen
techniques is much larger than the total number of responses to the question (110). Fundamental and
technical trading-based strategies are both followed by approximately one-third of dealers, with even more
selecting jobbing and customer orders as the driving forces behind their trading. Only two traders selected
“other”, indicating that the four remaining alternatives characterise the majority of traders in the market.
        Two points are worth stressing from these results. First, the large proportions of respondents using
jobbing techniques or following customer orders stands in contrast to the general perception that the foreign
exchange market is dominated by technical analysis (Taylor and Allen, 1992). Second, fundamentals are



                                                      4
as equally widely followed as technical analysis. The differences are probably due to the wording of the
questions asked. For example, in Taylor and Allen (1992) respondents give the relative importance of
technical analysis versus fundamentals along a ten-point scale at various trading horizons. In our survey,
we ask the traders to select the most appropriate description of their trading method and provide a wider
list of alternatives. Our results confirm and extend the findings of Menkhoff (1997) who, based on a survey
of German foreign exchange professionals, shows fundamentals and “flows” to be equally important as
technical analysis.
          The only major change in the gross figures over the five-year period is the replacement of jobbing
with technical trading-based strategies by a substantial proportion of respondents (the P2 test of equality
is strongly rejected by a test statistic of 12.0 with three degrees of freedom). As both are predominantly
short-term strategies, this arguably represents a change in style rather than a shift in the nature of the
market.
          The gross numbers mask a multitude of changes at the individual level. For, example, of the 34
dealers that used fundamentals five-years ago only 26 still do so today. Similarly, although 36 dealers
based their strategies on customer orders both five-years ago and today, only 26 maintained this approach
– ten dealers have stopped using customer orders and these have been replaced by ten others that have
begun to use customer orders.


2.3       Counterparties and trading systems
Table III(a) gives the breakdown of current trading by counterparty, and comparable figures from five
years ago. The numbers are remarkably constant over time and indicate that around one-third of deals are
with non-bank customers, the rest being interbank transactions. This breakdown favours customer orders
slightly compared with previous work which has estimated customer orders at around one-fifth of turnover.
Bank of England (1998) reports that trading with non-financial institutions constituted seven percent of
turnover in London during April 1995 while other (non-bank) financial institutions made up 18% of
business. The figure for non-bank financial institutions was lower in April 1998 (9.5%), with non-financial
customer business unchanged.



                                                      5
        What is noticeably different is the method of dealing (table III(b)). Currently, one-half of all
business is conducted via electronic broking systems (EBS, Reuters 2000-2 etc), one-third via the
interbank network and one-fifth through traditional voice brokers. Five years ago, electronic brokers only
had five percent of the market with voice brokers and the interbank network sharing the remaining trades
equally. The statistically significant gain of market share by electronic brokers (t-test of no change in
market share is 17.2) has come at the expense of both traditional brokers and, to a lesser extent, the
interbank network (individual t-statistics are -16.5 and -5.7 respectively, although these are not
independent).


2.4     Correlations
Conceivably, relationships might exist between the descriptive responses discussed in this section. Trivially
but reassuringly, for example, customer-order led traders conduct a significantly greater proportion of their
deals with customers (52%) than other types of traders (22%); t-statistic is 6.76. At a more meaningful
level, however, there is no significant relationship between trader type and any measure of market power
(daily position limit, departmental turnover or rank), implying that high-ranking traders do not seem to use
one particular trading strategy. Regarding trading systems, low position limit traders (<US$25m) do appear
more likely to use the interbank network (41%) rather than brokers when compared to higher-ranking
traders (25%); t-statistic is 3.19.



3.      Fundamental value
Most (macro)economic models of the exchange rate seek to explain a fundamental or equilibrium value.
Our survey shows that traders believe ‘fundamental value’ to be a concept of relevance to the foreign
exchange market, but that this only truly becomes a widely-held view when considering exchange rate
movements over a period in excess of six-months.
        When looking intraday only three percent of traders agree that exchange rate changes accurately
reflect movements in fundamental value (table IV(a)). This rises to 58% for the intermediate horizon of up
to six-months, and to 87% for the long run (over six-months). Just one percent of respondents selected


                                                     6
“no opinion”, and then only over the long run which may be a period beyond the ken of exchange rate
traders.
           The responses to this question accord in part with the academic literature. Twenty-five years of
research has had only limited success in modelling movements in exchange rates over horizons below six-
months, where the findings of Meese and Rogoff (1983) still hold considerable sway. For example, in their
comprehensive survey of exchange rate modelling Frankel and Rose (1995) conclude:


           “..the Meese and Rogoff analysis at short horizons has never been convincingly overturned
           or explained. It continues to exert a pessimistic effect on the field of empirical exchange
           rate modelling in particular and international finance in general.”

The modern literature, in comparison, has much more to contribute to the prediction and explanation of
longer-term currency movements. Mark (1995) and Chinn and Meese (1995) incorporate (different) long-
run equilibria via error-correction modelling and demonstrate statistically and economically significant
forecasting power but only over horizons in excess of thirty-six months.
           However, a slender majority of traders see a relevance for fundamentals over the intermediate
horizon, yet as the above quote suggests, there are very few academic papers demonstrating this (an
exception is MacDonald and Marsh, 1997). This may imply that traders have access to better forecasting
models, or that any horizon in excess of one day is not of practical relevance and therefore easily
misjudged. But it could serve as a spur to those who believe that a combination of advanced econometrics
and economic theory can result in better explanations for exchange rate movements than a standard survey
of the literature would suggest.


3.1        Factors that determine currency movements
In order to glean further information on the perceived causes of movements in the exchange rate, traders
were asked to select the single most important driving factor over the same three horizons. Their responses
are summarised in table IV(b), which gives the number of responses for each answer divided by the total
number of responses, since many panellists chose more than one factor. Intraday, over-reaction to news
was cited most frequently (32.8% of respondents), closely followed by bandwagon effects (29.3%) and


                                                       7
speculative forces (25.3%). Economic fundamentals are deemed irrelevant (0.6%) and technical trading
is also ranked relatively lowly (10.3%).
        News has been recognised as important to the exchange rate since the asset approach was
developed in the 1970s (Mussa, 1976, 1979; Dornbusch, 1976). Studies of news announcements have
demonstrated both the rapid response of the market and its tendency to over-react (Ederington and Lee,
1993). An additional question in the survey addresses the speed with which the market incorporates new
information about a range of economic variables. The responses indicate that some announcements are
thought to be more rapidly discounted than others. For example, 61% of panellists judge that interest rate
news is incorporated into the current price within ten seconds of the announcement (and a further 28% say
it is discounted within a minute), whereas news on GNP/GDP and the money supply is thought to be
assimilated within ten seconds by just 27% and 21% respectively. Nevertheless, and in line with recent
studies using high-frequency data (Ederington and Lee, 1993; Anderson and Bollerslev, 1998), a clear
majority claims that the FX market assimilates new information on all major economic variables within one
minute. Further details regarding the answers to this and other questions are available on request.
        Giventhis reaction speed, it is not surprising that news ceases to be important over the medium run,
where instead economic fundamentals (31.4%), speculative forces (30.7%) and technical trading (26.3%)
come to the fore. Over the long run, economic fundamentals are the only factor of real importance,
although eleven percent of dealers still feel that technical trading is the primary explanation for such currency
movements.
        These results support three strands of the literature. First, the relative ranking of technical and
fundamentalanalysis across horizons accords with the findings of Taylor and Allen (1992). They document
that technical analysis dominates the use of economic fundamentals intraday but that for longer-run
predictions economic fundamentals are deemed more important by traders. Similarly, both this survey and
that of Taylor and Allen find a substantial minority of traders that bucks the trend and persists in considering
technical analysis to be important over long horizons.
        Second, while a substantial amount of work has considered the relative roles of technical analysis
and economic fundamentals, this survey points to other factors as being much more important over short



                                                       8
horizons. In particular, speculative forces rank highly intraday and are the only factor perceived to have
a significant role over both the intraday and medium-run horizons. To the extent that traders measure
speculative forces from the order flow through the market, this provides support for the newly emerging
microstructure literature’s focus on the information revealed by customer deals and via brokerage systems
(Lyons, 1999). The survey suggests that micro factors are small in neither importance nor persistence,
confirming recent evidence presented in Lyons and Evans (1999). However, the factors that prompt these
flows remain to be explained. Traders clearly make a distinction between speculative forces on one hand,
and bandwagon effects, technical trading and economic factors on the other. A model capable of
explaining exchange rate movements needs to consider another factor, over and above the usual suspects.
        A third aspect of the literature considers the forecasts and expectations of traders, usually by means
of survey data.     Researchers have examined two types of expectations formation in particular by
performing the following regressions:




A clear pattern emerges from these studies (Frankel and Froot, 1987, 1990; Froot and Ito, 1989; Chinn
and Frankel, 1994). At short horizons, extrapolative expectations, as characterised by the first equation,
are strong and follow a bandwagon form. That is, the estimated coefficient $E is significantly greater that
zero such that positive (negative) changes in the log exchange rate, s, over the previous j periods are
extrapolated into further positive (negative) expected changes over the forthcoming k periods. However,
as k, the forecast horizon, lengthens the expectations coefficient turns negative implying that expectations
are more stabilizing – a positive (negative) change is expected to follow a negative (positive) move. This
switch appears to occur in predictions over a period somewhere between three and six months. This move
to the stable form over the longer-run coincides with estimates of $R in the second equation which are
increasingly positive and significant as k rises. Such findings are supportive of a regressive expectations
formation mechanism whereby the exchange rate is forecast to move towards its equilibrium or fundamental
value, s) . Equilibrium is loosely specified in many of these papers and, in increasing levels of sophistication,

                                                       9
is proxied by a constant, a long-term moving average or purchasing power parity estimates. Frankel and
Froot (1987), for example, find an expected half-life of 2.5 years for deviations from a PPP equilibrium.


        These findings compare very closely to the results of this survey. The respondents suggest that
economic fundamentals are of essentially zero importance intraday, where instead bandwagon effects are
singled out as the major determinant. However, these destabilising influences swiftly disappear as the
horizon lengthens and economic fundamentals rank as the most important factor over the medium-run and
dominate over the long-run. As the horizon lengthens, the power of attraction of fundamental value rises.


3.2     Purchasing power parity and fundamental value
The precise meaning of ‘fundamental value’ was left unspecified in the survey, but traders were asked for
their views on purchasing power parity (PPP) since this theory lies at the root of most models of the
exchange rate. The results are not encouraging for proponents of PPP. As might have been expected, less
than five percent of respondents thought PPP could be used to gauge or predict exchange rate movements
intraday. But this only rose to 16.4% over the medium-run and 44.3% over the long-run (table IV(c)).
        Even if almost one-half of respondents thought PPP relevant over the long-run (with 20%
undecided), they were less willing to risk money on their beliefs. Less than 27% would sell the US dollar
if a PPP-based calculation showed it to be overvalued, 65% would do nothing, and the rest were
undecided. Fortunately none would buy the dollar. Standard economic reasoning suggests that factors
such as price rigidities or the use of non-comparable price indices make PPP difficult to uncover
empirically. This survey indicates that a lack of action by market participants who jointly determine
exchange rates may be another reason for the weak evidence.
        A common view is that PPP is “only one indication of true value” and can be used to compute fair
value only “in very wide bands”. Traders may think that economic fundamentals matter in the long-run, and
many think they are important in the medium-run as well, but purchasing power parity alone is not seen as
a good indication of fundamental value.




                                                   10
3.3     Exchange rate forecastability
Since academics view the exchange rate as a particularly difficult variable to forecast, traders were asked
for their views. They were requested to indicate the degree of predictability of the market trend over the
same three horizons as before, using a five-point scale where one indicates no predictability and five
represents high predictability. The mean level of predictability and the standard deviation of responses are
given in table IV(d).
        Unexpectedly, given that most of their deals will be intraday, traders ranked intraday movements
as more difficult to predict than medium and long-run movements. The respondents gave an average grade
of 2.20 intraday, compared with 2.94 over the medium-run and 2.89 for the long-run. The increase in
predictability as the horizon lengthens from intraday to the medium-run is highly statistically significant (t-
statistic is 5.6), while the subsequent slight decline is insignificant (t-statistic is -0.5). The question then
becomes, why do traders mainly engage in intraday deals and not longer-term if the latter are more
predictable? Conversations with traders suggests that they perceive the risk involved in intraday trading
to be much less than in overnight trades. Some traders do not have access to a full-service 24-hour dealing
room, and even those that do are concerned about having to deal during the much thinner and more volatile
overnight markets (see Andersen and Bollerslev, 1998; Danielsson and Payne, 1999).
        These results should be considered alongside the earlier findings that more predictable forces such
as economic and technical trading factors are deemed important over horizons in excess of one day.
However, in a trading environment thought to be dominated by news releases and speculative forces (about
which an individual trader has only patchy information), exchange rates should not be highly predictable.
Traders who thought medium-run changes in exchange rates to be determined by reaction to news and/or
speculative flows were significantly less likely than their peers to raise their estimated predictability of the
exchange rate as the horizon increased (p-value 0.099, based on a standard contingency table test of
independence).




                                                      11
3.4     Technical analysts and fundamental traders
As noted above, much is made in the literature of the different trading strategies and actions of
fundamentalists and technical analysts. In this sub-section responses are disaggregated by trader type in
an attempt to see whether traders’ views on the relevance of fundamental value diverge significantly. In
short, the answer is that they do not.
        Traders were classified as fundamentalists (technical analysts) if they selected fundamental analysis
(technical trading rules) as the best way to describe their trading method. Since several traders chose both
options, these two categories are not mutually exclusive but the overlap is only a small proportion of either
category. The proportion of traders in each classification responding positively to three different questions
on fundamental value were then calculated, and the results graphed in figure 1. Equal levels of agreement
for the two classifications would result in points on the 45° line.
        There is perfect and unanimous agreement that intraday changes in the exchange rate do not reflect
changes in fundamental value (point 10.I, at the origin of the figure). Fundamentalists are more inclined to
agree that exchange rate changes reflect fundamental value changes in the medium and long-run (since
points 10.M and 10.L lie some way below the diagonal). Similarly, they are more likely to reply that
fundamental factors are key determinants of exchange rate movements over the medium run (15.M.fund).
Technical analysts are more likely to agree that bandwagon effects are an important factor in determining
intraday exchange rate movements (15.I.band) and, surprisingly, that PPP can be used to gauge/predict
exchange rates intraday (18.I). Nevertheless, these deviations from equality are small and the correlation
between the responses is almost 95 percent. Further, a non-parametric test of independence between
response and technique is only significant for question 10.M.
        There are differences between fundamentalists’ and technical analysts’ views on the predictability
of trends. At each of the three horizons, fundamentalists are more optimistic: they give and average returns
of 2.25, (3.00), and [3.08] at intraday, (medium-run), and [long-run] intervals, which can be compared
with technical analysts’ averages of 2.14, (2.84), and [2.92]. Nevertheless, although suggestive of a
relationship between the importance of economic fundamentals and exchange rate predictability, these
differences are not statistically significant.     It is not possible from these responses to argue that there



                                                     12
are systematic differences between technical and fundamental traders’ beliefs on fundamentals and the
determinants of exchange rate movements. Neither was it possible to find such discrepancies when other
types of trader were considered, nor when the respondents were disaggregated by seniority, daily trading
limit or departmental turnover. Menkhoff (1998) also failed to find consistent differences between the
beliefs of what he called “rational arbitrageurs” and “noise traders”.
        This is not to say, however, that the actions of technical and fundamental traders do not differ.
Furthermore, the level of heterogeneity between market participants as a whole is high – the relevance of
fundamentals over the medium-run showed no clear consensus; three different determinants of intraday
exchange rate movements ranked equal first; three factors shared 90 percent of the votes over the medium-
run too; the relevance of PPP over the long-run is as controversial among traders as it is academics. While
we have not been able to explain the different responses of individual traders by workplace characteristics
or trading technique, this survey has highlighted the very real disagreements that exist between market
participants.


4.      Microeconomic aspects of foreign exchange dealing
Market microstructure is a major growth area in foreign exchange economics. Dissatisfaction with the
failure of macroeconomics-based attempts to model key exchange rates, perhaps best exemplified by
Meese and Rogoff (1983), is a major cause. More positively, the success of the microstructure approach
in explaining hitherto opaque aspects of other asset markets has acted as a spur.
        Lately, a proliferation of new databases facilitating high frequency studies and/or containing
microeconomic variables (e.g. inventory positions, order flow and bid-ask spreads) has allowed empirical
research to address some of the issues raised by the theoretical microstructure literature. Unfortunately,
the sheer size of the market, combined with its decentralized nature, makes generalizations based upon this
empirical work questionable. Rather than seek ‘hard numbers’, this survey concentrates on opinions. This
is not without danger and this is fully recognised by the authors. However, we believe that the paucity of
information in this area means that with any plausible levels of measurement error or selection bias, the
results of this survey contain sufficient information to be relevant to current research.



                                                     13
4.1     Bid-ask spreads
One of the major variables studied in the market microstructure literature is the bid-ask spread. This is the
standard measure of transactions costs in many financial markets, and has been studied in the FX market
by Bessembinder (1994), Bollerslev and Melvin (1994), and Hartmann (1999) among others.
        The size of the interbank bid-ask spread appears to differ between currencies. Dollar-
Deutschmark deals are, on average, quoted with a three-point spread (e.g. DM1.7565-68); dollar-yen and
dollar-sterling have mean spreads of four-points; dollar-Swiss franc is closer to 4.5 points. These numbers
disguise the situation slightly in that the modal response for the yen is three-points (47% of responses,
compared with 33% for five-points), whereas the modal response for the pound sterling is five-points
(56%, compared with 32% for three-points). Overall, it is clear that the dollar-mark market has the
narrowest spread, followed in turn by the yen, the pound and the Swiss franc. These rankings are exactly
the same as the volume of turnover in the London FX market according to the Bank of England (1995)
indicating that market liquidity affects spreads.
        When asked whether market convention or the potential costs determined the spread that they
themselves quote under most circumstances, 69% of traders selected the former. The potential costs of
a quote were unspecified in the survey but the literature highlights order processing, adverse selection and
inventory holding costs. In a recent paper Flood, Huisman, Koedijk and Lyons (1998) add search costs
to this list. Irrespective of how the spread is apportioned, the majority of dealers feel it more important to
satisfy unwritten market ‘rules’. The most important reason for conformity was “to maintain an equitable
and reciprocal trading relationship” (56% of respondents), followed by “to secure a good market image
for the firm” (25%). In conversation, traders emphasise that quoting wide spreads will only drive turnover
away and that the ability to maintain a tight quote is seen as enhancing a trader’s reputation. One dealer
said that “taking the pain is all part of the macho image traders have of themselves.”
        However, bid-ask spreads are seen to alter in the market at certain times, and traders were asked
the frequency with which their quoted spreads differed from convention, in both directions. Overall,
spreads are increased less than one-fifth of the time by ninety percent of respondents, and reduced less than
one-fifth of the time by three-quarters of the respondents (Figure 2). Summarising, spreads are only



                                                     14
occasionally adjusted in either direction, but there is a greater tendency for spreads to be narrowed rather
than widened.


4.2     Liquidity, inventory and information effects
Microstructure theory suggests three main factors which might lead traders to change their spreads, the
liquidity effect, the inventory effect, and the effect of asymmetric information (O’Hara, 1995). Traders
were asked their reasons for changing their quoted spreads from the market convention, and the results
suggest that the liquidity effect is dominant (figure 3). This was confirmed in conversations with traders.
        Approximately thirty percent of respondents selected a thin market (either thin and hectic or, less
often, thin and quiet) as a major reason for changing their spread. An unexpected change in volume was
selected by another 9.5%, and almost 20% of traders chose “before and after a news announcement”.
We interpret the latter as a liquidity effect since volume is known to dry up before a scheduled release and
to often increase dramatically once unexpected news is revealed. However, some traders have suggested
that widening spreads before an announcement is more of a hedging tool in the face of uncertainty.
        The asymmetric information options – a quote for a small bank (proxying an ill informed
counterparty) or an informed bank – garnered some sixteen percent between them. The unequivocally
inventory-related options of holding a position against the market trend and an increasing cost of holding
a position were rarely selected. However, as Cheung and Wong (1999) note, changes in volatility and
liquidity both alter the cost of holding a position. Increased market volatility could conceivably be linked
to all three of the factors, and so the 15.6% of respondents that made this selection are not easily
apportioned.
        These considerations make it impossible to rule out inventory effects as being important
determinants of bid-ask spreads, but traders said that inventory considerations are rarely seen as affecting
spreads (assuming the position does not threaten trading limits) since (a) a position can always be laid off
in the brokers market, and (b) changing the spread signals the inventory position more clearly than simply
shading the quote up or down as appropriate.
        Several market participants wondered whether the emerging dominance of the electronic broking



                                                    15
services will alter the behaviour of traders. In particular, since these services allow traders to enter one-
sided quotes and make the inside quote (best bid and best ask) much more transparent than the bilateral
interbank market, an individual trader’s spread will become an irrelevance.


5.      Conclusions
In this paper we have documented the factors that practitioners believe affect the foreign exchange market.
We do not contend that our methodology substitutes for the vast empirical literature addressing the
workings of the currency markets and the characteristics of exchange rate dynamics. Rather, our work
offers market information that is not available from a typical theoretical or empirical exercise. Thus, the
results from the survey complement the studies in both the microstructure and macroeconomic literatures.
        A key finding is that the irrelevance of the macroeconomic factors detected in the plethora of
empirical exchange rate studies is to be expected, given the market participants’ own assessment of the
factors important at the daily, weekly, or even monthly, horizon – namely over-reaction, speculative, and
bandwagon effects. It re-affirms the importance of the non-fundamental factors in explaining short-term
exchange rate fluctuations. On the other hand, the time horizon at which dealers believe fundamentals to
have significant effects on exchange rates seems much shorter than that reported in the empirical literature.
It is a challenge to reconcile these two strands of evidence.
        At the same time, our study points out several new avenues of enquiry. Many studies have pointed
to agent heterogeneity as the source of seemingly unstable exchange rate relationships, as in the Frankel
and Froot “Chartist/Fundamentalist” dichotomy. The heterogeneity of traders’ beliefs is evident in our
survey results. However, our results do not detect a systematic difference in views between those who self-
identify themselves as technical traders, versus fundamentalists. The implications of heterogeneous traders
for exchange rate dynamics and the channels through which the diverse beliefs affect exchange rates require
further analysis.
        While market practitioners accord some importance to purchasing power parity as determinant of
a currency’s ‘fundamental value’, it clearly does not dominate in their trading calculations. Otherwise, their
response to a PPP deviation would be much more prominent. Rather, traders view long term movements



                                                     16
as being determined by a much larger set of fundamental variables. Identifying the manner in which these
other factors enter expectations may lend guidance to future empirical modelling of exchange rates.
        Finally, our survey results point to an additional factor determining bid-ask spreads in the interbank
foreign exchange market. The market norm is strong and, apparently, is recognized and followed by the
traders. It is hard to track down the origins of this norm, but given its strong presence, it seems reasonable
to incorporate this, along with the other usual factors, in studies of bid-ask spreads. Practitioners also
indicate the prevalence of the macho image – the ability to endure the “pain” of a tight spread is seen as
a sign of a good trader. Further investigation of the role of this behavioural phenomenon may shed
additional insight to the bid-ask spread dynamics.




                                                     17
                                             Table I

Categorisation of respondents by daily position limit (US$ millions or Value at Risk),
departmental daily turnover ($ millions), and rank (D denotes a dealer, CD denotes a chief
dealer, and T denotes a treasurer/manager). One respondent chose the "other" category and
described him/herself as a ‘repo dealer’. Since his/her daily limit was so much greater than any
other 'dealer' in a similarly sized organisation we chose to categorise this respondent
separately. Some respondents did not give full information on all three variables and these are
detailed below the table.

                                                     Daily Position Limit
 Volume            Rank      <25      26 - 50        51 - 75    76 -100     >100    VaR
                   D          7          1
 <100              CD         13         1
                   T          5
                   D          5
                   CD         13         2                          1
 100 – 500
                   T          3          1                                           1
                   Repo                                                      1
 500 – 1,000       CD         3          4                          1        1       2
                   D          1          1                                   1
 1,000 – 5,000     CD         3          6              4           3        2       1
                   T          1          2                          1        2       4
                   CD                    2                          1        2       1
 >5,000
                   T                                                                 2

Not categorised: 1 dealer in 1,000-5,000 turnover department; 3 chief dealers, one each in 100-
500, 500-1,000 and 1,000-5,000 turnover departments; 1 treasurer with 26-50 daily limit.




                                                18
                                           Table II

Traders were asked to select the technique which best characterised their dealing method.
Many traders selected more than one technique. In the columns headed ‘Total’, the number
of traders selecting a category is given. In the columns headed ‘Percent’, the proportion of
traders selecting each category is given.

 Technique                                 Current                  Five Years Ago
                                   Total             Percent      Total         Percent
 Technical trading-based             36                32.7%       15             13.8%
 Customer orders-based               41                37.3%       36             33.0%
 Fundamentals-based                  37                33.6%       34             31.2%
 Jobbing                             40                36.4%       58             53.2%
 Other                                2                 1.8%        2                1.8%
 Total number of responses         110                           109




                                             19
                                           Table III

Dealers were asked to give the proportions of their FX transactions that (a) relate to interbank
and customer business, and (b) are traded via the interbank network, traditional and electronic
brokers.

                                                   Current                Five Years Ago

 (a)     Interbank business                         67.7                        67.4

         Customer business                          32.3                        32.6

 (b)     Interbank trades                           33.5                        47.2

         Traditional broker trades                  15.9                        47.1

         Electronic broker trades                   50.6                        5.7




                                              20
                                           Table IV

Traders were asked the following questions relating to fundamental value in FX:

                                    Intraday            Medium-run              Long-run
                                                      (within 6 months)      (over 6 months)

         (a) Do you believe exchange rate movements accurately reflect changes in the
                          fundamental value? [Question 10 on survey]

 Yes                                        3                     57.8                 87

 No                                        97                     42.2                 12

 No opinion                                 0                      0                    1

  (b) Select the single most important factor that determines exchange rate movements in
                        each of the three horizons listed. [Question 15]

 Bandwagon effects                         29.3                    9.5                  1

 Over-reaction to news                     32.8                    0.7                  0

 Speculative forces                        25.3                   30.7                  3.1

 Economic Fundamentals                      0.6                   31.4                 82.5

 Technical trading                         10.3                   26.3                 11.3

 Other                                      1.7                    1.5                  2.1

       (c) Do you think the PPP condition can be used to gauge/predict exchange rate
                                 movements? [Question 18]

 Yes                                        4.8                   16.4                 44.3

 No                                        87.4                   67.3                 34.9

 No opinion                                 7.8                   16.3                 20.8

    (d) On the scale 1 to 5, please indicate if you believe the market trend is predictable.
     (“1” indicates NO predictability, “5” indicates HIGH predictability) [Question 12]

 Mean                                       2.2                    2.93                 2.89

 Standard Deviation                         0.98                   0.99                 1.16



                                                21
                                        Figure 1
   Responses of traders regarding fundamental value, disaggregated by trading technique.
Number of respondents that agreed with the question as a proportion of respondents that
                                  expressed an opinion.



                                 100

                                                                                                15.L.fund

                                  80                                                            10.L
             Technical traders




                                  60
                                                                  15.I.band
                                                                              18.L
                                                                          ----------15.I.news
                                                                    15.I.spec
                                  40                                            10.M
                                                               15.M.spec
                                                          15.M.tech
                                                                        15.M.fund
                                                          15.I.tech
                                                   18.M
                                  20
                                                  15.L.tech
                                           18.I   15.M.band

                                   0       10.I
                                       0          20          40           60           80       100
                                                    Fundamental traders



         The labels to each point give the question number (10, 15 or 18), followed by the
         horizon (Intraday, Medium or Long) and any applicable options (for Question 15).




                                                              22
                                        Figure 2


  35

  30

  25

  20

  15

  10

   5

   0
            <1%             <5%             <10%              <20%          >20%

                                      Smaller        Larger


Distribution of the proportions of interbank quotes that differ from the market convention




                                           23
                                              Figure 3
Please check the 3 (or fewer) most important reasons for you to quote a bid-ask spread different from
                                      the market convention



                                          Other (1.50%)
                                   Counter (3.80%)
                               Posn cost (0.60%)               Thin&Quiet (7.50%)
                      Informed bank (7.20%)

                  Small bank (8.70%)
                                                                             Thin&Hectic (23.70%)
              Against trend (2.10%)




                Chg. Volat. (15.60%)
                                                                         Chg. Volume (9.50%)

                                        News (19.80%)




                                                          24
References

Alreck, P.L. and R.B. Settle (1985) The survey research handbook R.D. Irwin: Homewood, IL.

Andersen, T. and T. Bollerslev (1998) “Deutsche mark–dollar volatility: intraday activity patterns,
       macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 53,
       219–266.

Bank of England (1995) “The foreign exchange market in London,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin.

Bank of England (1998) “The UK foreign exchange and over-the-counter derivatives markets in April
       1998,” available from www.bankofengland.co.uk

Bessembinder, H. (1994) “Bid-ask spreads in the interbank foreign exchange markets,” Journal of
      Financial Economics, Vol. 35, 317–348.

Bollerslev, T. and M. Melvin (1994) “Bid-ask spreads and volatility in the foreign exchange market: an
        empirical analysis,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 36, 355–372.

Cheung, Y-W. and C.Y-P. Wong (1999) “A survey of market practitioners’ views on exchange rate
       dynamics,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Chinn, M.D. and J.A. Frankel (1994) “Patterns in exchange rate forecasts for 25 countries,”, Journal of
       Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 26, 759-770.

Chinn, M.D. and R.A. Meese (1995) “Banking on currency forecasts: how predictable is change in
       money?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 38, 161-178.

Cutler, D., J. Poterba and L. Summers (1990) “Speculative dynamics and the role of feedback traders,”
        American Economic Review, Vol. 80, 63–68.

Danielsson, J. and R. Payne (1999) “Real trading patterns and price in spot foreign exchange markets,”
       mimeo, London School of Economics.

De Grauwe, P. and H. Dewachter (1990) “A chaotic model of the exchange rate,” CEPR Discussion
      Paper Number 466.

De Long, J.B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers and R. Waldmann (1990) “Noise trader risk in financial markets,”
      Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, 703–738.

Dornbusch, R. (1976) “Expectations and exchange rate dynamics,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.

                                                  25
        84, 1161–1176.

Ederington, L. and J.H. Lee (1993) “How markets process information: news releases and volatility,”
       Journal of Finance, Vol. 48, 1161–1191.

Flood, M., R. Huisman, K. Koedijk and R.K. Lyons (1998) “Search costs: the neglected spread
       component,” presented at HFDF-II conference, Zurich.

Frankel, J.A. and K.A. Froot (1987) “Using survey data to test some standard propositions regarding
        foreign exchange rate expectations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 77, 133-153.

Frankel, J.A. and K.A. Froot (1990a) “Chartists, fundamentalists and the demand for dollars,” in Private
        behavior and government policy in interdependent economies, A.S. Courakis and M.P. Taylor
        (eds.), Clarendon: Oxford.

Frankel, J.A. and K.A. Froot (1990b) “Exchange rate forecasting techniques, survey data, and implications
        for the foreign exchange market,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
        number 3470.

Frankel, J.A. and A. Rose (1995) “A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates” in The
        handbook of international economics by G. Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds), Vol. 3, North
        Holland: Amsterdam.

Froot, K.A. and T. Ito (1989) “On the consistency of short-run and long-run exchange rate expectations,”
        Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 8, 487–510.

Goodhart, C.A.E. (1988) "The foreign exchange market: a random walk with dragging anchor,"
      Economica, Vol. 55, 437-460.

Hartmann, P. (1999) “Trading volumes and transactions costs in the foreign exchange market: evidence
       from daily dollar-yen spot data,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 23, 801–824.

Lyons, R.K. (1999) The microstructure approach to exchange rates, MIT Press, forthcoming.

Lyons, R.K. and M.D.D. Evans (1999) “Microstructure meets asset pricing: order flow as a driver of
       exchange rates,” mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

MacDonald, R. and I.W. Marsh (1997) “On fundamentals and exchange rates: a Casselian perspective,”
     Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 79, 655-664.

Mark, N.C. (1995) “Exchange rates and fundamentals: evidence on long-horizonpredictability,”American

                                                   26
       Economic Review, Vol. 85, 201-218.

Meese, R.A. and K. Rogoff (1983) “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they fit out-of-
       sample?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 14, 3–24.

Menkhoff, L. (1997) “Examining the use of technical currency analysis,” International Journal of
      Finance and Economics, Vol. 2, 307–318.

Menkhoff, L. (1998) “The noise trading approach – questionnaire evidence from foreign exchange,”
      Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 17, 547–564.

Mussa, M. (1976) “The exchange rate, the balance of payments and monetary and fiscal policy under a
       regime of controlled floating,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 78, 229–248.

Mussa, M. (1979) “Empirical regularities in the behavior of exchange rates and theories of the foreign
       exchange market,” in Policies for employment, prices and exchange rates, Carnegie-Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy by K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds), North Holland:
       Amsterdam.

O’Hara, M. (1995) Market microstructure theory, Blackwell: Oxford.

Silber, W.L. (1984) “Marketmaker behavior in an auction market: an analysis of scalpers in futures
        markets,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 39, 937–953.

Taylor, M.P. and H. Allen (1992) “The use of technical analysis in the foreign exchange market,”Journal
        of International Money and Finance, Vol. 11, 304-314.




                                                  27
