                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOW LARGE IS THE BIAS IN SELF-REPORTED DISABILITY?


                                                Hugo Benítez-Silva
                                                Moshe Buchinsky
                                                  Hiu Man Chan
                                                Sofia Cheidvasser
                                                    John Rust


                                               Working Paper 7526
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w7526

                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         February 2000


This work is made possible by research support from NIH grant AG12985-02. Benítez-Siva is also grateful for the
financial support of the “la Caixa Fellowship Program” in the early stages of this research. Buchinsky is grateful for the
support from the Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. We have benefited from feedback from participants of a Cowles
Foundation Seminar, the NBER Summer Institute, the Hebew University of Jerusalem, comments by Franco Peracchi
at the Conference on Reform of Social Security Organized by the Fundación BBV in Madrid, and from the very able
research assistance of Paul Mishkin. We thank Joe Heckendorn, Dave Howell, Cathy Leibowitz and other members of
the staff of the University of Michigan Survey Research Center (SRC) and the Health and Retirement Survey staff for
answering numerous questions about the data providing us with data from the wave three alpha versions of the HRS.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2000 by Hugo Benítex-Silva, Moshe Buchinsky, Hiu Man Chan, Sofia Cheidvasser, and John Rust. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Large is the Bias in Self-Reported Disability?
Hugo Benítez-Silva, Moshe Buchinsky, Hiu Man Chan, Sofia Cheidvasser, and John Rust
NBER Working Paper No. 7526
February 2000
JEL No. H5
                                        ABSTRACT

         A pervasive concern with the use of self-reported health and disability measures in behavioral
models is that they are biased and endogenous. A commonly suggested explanation is that survey
respondents exaggerate the severity of health problems and incidence of disabilities in order to
rationalize labor force non-participation, application for disability benefits and/or receipt of those
benefits. This paper re-examines this issue using a self-reported indicator of disability status from
the Health and Retirement Survey. Using a bivariate probit model we test and are unable to reject
the hypothesis that the self-reported disability measure is an exogenous explanatory variable in a
model of individual’s decision to apply for DI benefits or Social Security Administration’s decision
to award benefits. We further study a subsample of individuals who applied for Disability Insurance
and Supplemental Security Income benefits from the Social Security Administration (SSA) for
whom we can also observe SSA’s award/deny decision. For this subsample we test and are unable
to reject the hypothesis that self-reported disability is health and socio-economic characteristics
similar to the information used by the SSA in making its award decisions. The unbiasedness
restriction implies that these two variables have the same conditional probability distributions. Thus,
our results indicate that disability applicant do not exaggerate their disability status–at least in
anonymous surveys such as the HRS. Indeed, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that
disability applicants are aware of the criteria and decision rules that SSA uses in making awards and
act as if they were applying these same criteria and rules when reporting their own disability status.



Hugo Benítez-Silva                                                     Moshe Buchinsky
Yale University                                                        Department of Economics
                                                                       Brown University
Hiu Man Chan                                                           Box B
Yale University                                                        Providence, RI 02912
                                                                       And CREST-INSEE
Sofia Cheidvasser                                                      moshe_buchinsky@brown.edu
Yale University

John Rust
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
john.rust@yale.edu
