NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POWER OF THE PILL:
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES AND WOMEN’S
CAREER AND MARRIAGE DECISIONS

Claudia Goldin
Lawrence F. Katz

Working Paper 7527
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7527
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

Tara Watson assisted most ably in the construction of various data sets and Anne Berry aided in numerous
and varied tasks associated with this project. Ellen Meara and Jonathan Gruber kindly provided information
on potential data sets. We have benefited from conversations and communications with Ed Glaeser, Michael
Kremer, David Laibson, David I. Levine, Rhona Mahony, Ellen Meara, Alvin Roth, Kathryn Shaw, and
Andrei Shleifer and from the helpful comments received from participants at the Labor Lunch of the UC
Berkeley Department of Economics and the AEA session “Women’s Labor Market Gains in the 1980s.”
We acknowledge funding from The Spencer Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz . All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 7527
February 2000
JEL No. J0, N3, J1
ABSTRACT
The fraction of U.S. college graduate women entering professional programs increased
substantially around 1970 and the age at first marriage among all U.S. college graduate women soared
just after 1972. We explore the relationship between these two changes and how each was shaped by
the diffusion of the birth control pill among young, single college educated women. Although “the pill”
was approved in 1960 by the FDA and diffused rapidly among married women, it did not diffuse
among young single women until the late 1960s when a series of state law changes reduced the age of
majority and extended mature minor decisions. We model the impact of the pill on women’s careers as
consisting of two effects. The pill had a direct positive effect on women’s career investment by almost
eliminating the chance of becoming pregnant and thus the cost of having sex. The pill also created a
social multiplier effect by encouraging the delay of marriage generally and thus increasing a career
woman’s likelihood of finding an appropriate mate after professional school. We present a collage of
evidence pointing to the power of the pill in lowering the costs of long-duration professional education
for women. The evidence consists of the striking coincidences in the timing of changes in career
investment, marriage age, state laws, and pill use among young single women. The connection between
changes in the age at first marriage and the pill is further explored using state variation in laws affecting
young single women’s pill access. We also evaluate alternative explanations for the changes in career
and marriage.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge MA 02138
and the NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge MA 02138
and the NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

The careers of women and their age at first marriage both changed significantly in the
United States with cohorts born just prior to 1950. Women first began to enter professional
programs, such as medicine and law, in large numbers in 1970 and their entry caused the fraction
female in these programs to rise steeply. Women were 10 percent of first year law students in
1970, but were 36 percent in 1980. The fraction married among young college graduate women
decreased for the same cohorts. Among the cohort of female college graduates born in 1950,
almost 50 percent married before age 23, but fewer than 30 percent did for those born in 1957.
We ask whether the birth control pill and the legislation that enabled young women to
obtain it altered women’s career plans and the age at first marriage. Our answer is that they did.
The empirical argument relies on the timing of various changes. Legal changes in the late 1960s
and early 1970s enabled the diffusion of the pill among young single women. Their pill use first
began to increase with cohorts born around 1948 and we explore, with cross-section data from
1971, the role of law changes in enabling pill use. Beginning in 1972, and continuing to 1979,
the fraction of college women marrying a year or two after graduation plummeted. The pill
encouraged the delay of marriage through several routes and we establish the connection by
estimating the effect of law changes in a state fixed-effects framework. The pill directly and
immediately lowered the costs to women of engaging in long-term career investments by giving
them almost complete certainty and safety regarding the pregnancy consequences of sexual
activity. The delay of marriage, beginning a year or two later, endowed the pill with a “social
multiplier” or indirect effect by reducing the costs in the marriage market to women who delayed
marriage to invest in careers. The relative increase of women to men in professional programs
began its rapid ascent in 1970, just as the first pill cohorts began to graduate from college.
Our framework, therefore, confers two effects on the pill. The first, which we term the

direct effect, is that the pill greatly increased the reliability of contraception and its ease of use.
In the absence of reliable contraception, young women embarking on a lengthy professional
education would have to pay the penalty of abstinence or cope with considerable uncertainty
regarding pregnancy. The pill enabled women to invest in expensive, long-duration training and
not pay as high a price.
The second role for the pill is termed here the indirect (or social multiplier) effect. The
pill affected all women, not just career women, and affected men as well. With the advent of the
pill all individuals could delay marriage and not pay as large a penalty. Women who invest in a
lengthy education often delay marriage until completing their initial career preparation. If in the
interim most everyone else marries, the pool of eligible bachelors will be reduced and career
women will have to settle for a lesser match at the end of the training period. If, instead, others
delay marriage, the career woman will pay a smaller penalty. The pill, by encouraging the delay
of marriage for most youth, created a “thicker” marriage market for career women. Thus the pill
may have enabled more women to opt for careers by indirectly lowering the cost of a lengthy
career investment period.
The first issue we explore is the diffusion of the pill among single women and the legal
reasons for its delayed dissemination. We then formally model the potential effects of the pill on
marriage and career. We establish next that the timing of the pill’s diffusion among young,
unmarried women was caused, in part, by legal changes in the age of majority and mature minor
statutes. We then ask whether the turning points in the pill usage time series are also present in
the series on the age at first marriage and career investment. We establish a prima facie case that
the diffusion of the pill among single college women led to an increase in the fraction of women
undertaking lengthy professional programs. We explore evidence for the indirect role by

-2-

analyzing the relationship between the age at first marriage and state variation in laws affecting
contraceptive availability to youth. Alternative explanations, including abortion law changes, the
resurgence of feminism, affirmative action and other anti-discrimination laws, are assessed.

I. The pill and the single woman
A. The birth of the pill
In 1960 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of norethynodrel, a
synthetic progesterone, as an oral contraceptive for women.1 The product was christened Enovid
by its manufacturer, but nearly everyone else called it and its successors “the pill.” Oral
contraceptives — aka “the pill” — remain among the greatest miracle drugs.2 (See Table 1 for
the history of the birth control pill and landmark decisions regarding contraception.)
The pill diffused rapidly among married women in the United States. By 1965, only five
years after its release, more than 40 percent of married women younger than thirty years were
“on the pill.”3 So rapid was its diffusion that the fraction of all married women using the pill
peaked around 1967. But by the time the pill had reached its maximum diffusion among married
women, it was only just beginning to be used by young single women.
B. Pill diffusion among single women
Both legal and social factors were responsible for the delayed dissemination of the pill
among unmarried women.4 Until the late 1960s single women, below the age of majority and

1

A closely related drug, norethindrone, had already been approved for medical uses, not
contraception, two years before. On the history of the pill, see Asbell (1995) and Watkins (1998).
2
The Economist (Dec. 31, 1999) named the pill the greatest science and technology advance in the
twentieth century.
3
Westoff and Ryder (1977), table II-3. The figure only includes couples using any form of
contraception, including sterilization, rhythm, and withdrawal. Of all married women less than 30 years
old, 26 percent were on the pill in 1965.
4
It should be noted that the fraction of all women who ever used the pill reached a peak of 85 percent

-3-

without parental consent, were often denied access to the pill and other forms of contraception. 5
Before the late 1960s was it was not legal under the Common Law for a physician in any state to
prescribe the pill as a contraceptive device to an unmarried woman below the age of majority
without consent of her parents. 6 But by 1972, on the heels of the 26th Amendment (1971), the
“age of majority” had been lowered to 18 years old in most states. Beginning in the late 1960s,
“mature minors” in many states were enabled, by judicial decision and statute, to obtain
contraceptive services. The extension of family planning services to minors and changes in local
norms regarding appropriate practice had reinforcing effects.
The pill diffused rapidly among single women after they were able to obtain it. In 1976,
73 percent of all ever-contracepting single women 18 and 19 years old had used the drug. 7
Despite numerous “pill scares” concerning medical complications, the pill has remained the
contraceptive method of choice among fertile women independent of marital status.8
State laws did not prevent the determined single woman from obtaining contraceptive
devices and information. Physicians understood that the pill would not be effective unless taken
before sexual relations began and thus they routinely prescribed the pill to patients who were
engaged. Pretending to be engaged was therefore one method of obtaining the pill. 9 The pill

with the cohort born in 1948 and then declined to around 80 percent (calculated from the 1987 National
Health Interview Survey; ICPSR 1990). Lifetime pill usage does not decrease much after the 1948 cohort
and appears to have stabilized at 80 percent. Because the survey was taken in 1987 even the 1948 birth
cohort has an incomplete history of pill usage.
5
Massachusetts and Wisconsin even had legislative proscriptions against the sale of contraceptive
devices to any unmarried individual. Not until 1972 was the Massachusetts law overturned by the U.S.
Supreme Court in Eisenstadt v. Baird.
6
No record exists of a doctor’s successful prosecution under a criminal statute regarding contraceptive
service provision to minors (U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare 1974, p. 70).
7
Zelnik and Kantner (1977), p. 63. Among single, 18 and 19 year old females in 1976, 30 percent had
taken the pill and 60 percent had among those who had ever been sexually active. Source: ICPSR (1982).
8
In 1995, 49 percent of all non-sterile contracepting, never-married women (15 to 44 years old) were
on the pill, as were 22 percent of all non-sterile women in that age group (U.S. Department of Commerce
1998, p. 90).
9
See, for example, Scrimshaw (1981).

-4-

was also used to regulate menses and some single women obtained the pill by convincing a
physician that they had irregular periods.10 We recognize that single women used the pill before
the change in state laws, but we will show that their numbers were small and that the increase
with the change in state laws was substantial.
State laws in the 1960s were also in force to directly regulate the sale of contraceptives.
These laws were the legacies of a federal anti-vice law passed in 1873, known as the Comstock
Law. That law was relatively unimportant but it served to fuel state “Comstockery” so that even
by 1960, 30 states prohibited advertisements regarding birth control and 22 had some general
prohibition on the sale of contraceptives. These laws reflected social norms and must have had a
larger effect on minors whose ability to obtain contraceptives was constrained in other ways.
The laws and social norms that prevented single women from obtaining the pill until the
early 1970s are also barriers to our obtaining information on their use of the pill. A major survey
of fertility and contraception taken in 1970 — the National Fertility Survey — excluded
unmarried women.11 Only two surveys prior to the 1980s inquired of the contemporaneous and
recent sexual practices and contraceptive use of young and primarily unmarried women.12
Just two data sets exist that enable the calculation of pill usage or family planning
services for a large national sample of women regardless of current and prior marital status.
Because our interest is in professional career choice, we focus almost exclusively on the
10

Pretending to be engaged or lying about a medical condition is a demeaning act. Because a pill
prescription had to be maintained on an annual or semi-annual basis, it was a demeaning act that would
have to be repeated regularly.
11
According to the authors of the 1965 and 1970 NFS: “The ideal, of course, would be to include all
women of reproductive age, but the problems inherent in asking questions about fertility and
contraception of never-married young girls have deterred us. The first such national study of teen-aged
girls has since been conducted by John Kantner and Melvin Zelnik … the profession may be close to
reconsidering this whole question” (Westoff and Ryder 1977), p. 4. The 1970 NFS asked pill usage
retrospectively but only for women who were married a month before the date of the question.
12
Zelnik and Kantner (1972, 1977, 1989), ICPSR (1982). We later use both surveys (taken in 1971

-5-

diffusion of the pill among college graduate women. Both data sets give retrospective answers
on pill and/or family planning service usage. Each has the virtue that it enables the tracking of
cohorts born from the late-1930s to the late-1960s and contains information on education and
religion, among other relevant variables. There are, however, deficiencies in both surveys.
(Table 2 describes the data sets we draw on for pill and family planning service use.)
One of the surveys is the cancer risk factor supplement to the National Health Interview
Study (NHIS; ICPSR 1990). The almost 13,000 women interviewed in 1987 were asked, among
other questions, their history of birth control pill usage. They were not asked their age at first
marriage but did record the age at which they had their first birth. The fractions of college
graduate women who first used the pill at various ages are graphed in Figures 1a and 1b. We
consider these data to be the best we can compile concerning the diffusion of the pill among
young (and likely to be unmarried) college women. Only women who did not experience a first
birth before age 23 are included to minimize the fraction already married.
Because the NHIS survey did not ask age at first marriage and because marriage ages
rose beginning with the late 1940s birth cohorts, single women’s pill usage levels will be
overstated especially so for the earliest cohorts considered. Even though we condition on not
having a first birth before age 23, the degree of bias could still be significant. The percentage of
college graduate women who had no births before age 23 but who were already married by age
22 was around 25 percent for cohorts born from 1940 to the early 1950s, but was only about 15
percent for the birth cohorts of the late 1950s and early 1960s.13 Thus our graphs understate the
increase in pill use by single women by including more married women in the older cohorts.
and 1976), although they are of limited use because they are for 15 to 19 year olds.
13
These estimates come from tabula tions of the merged 1990 and 1995 Current Population Survey
(CPS) Fertility and Marital History Supplements. If pill usage were 30 percentage points higher for
married than single women, the overstatement for the older, relative to the younger, cohorts would be

-6-

According to these data, the fraction of women who started taking the pill after age 18
but before 20, that is during college but before the traditional age of majority, reached about 0.1
for cohorts born in 1945 (see Figure 1a). Some of these women were married, thus more able to
obtain the pill, but even with this potential bias a discernable increase in pill usage can be seen
for cohorts born after 1946. First pill usage in the 18 to 20 year interval reached 30 percent by
the cohort born in 1950. After the cohort born in 1950, the increase in pill use among women
younger than 21 years old came about entirely from those obtaining the pill before age 18, a
group that had negligible use. By the cohorts born in 1952, pill usage before age 21 was about
0.35. Similar results, but with higher levels, can be found in Figure 1b where the upper cutoff
point is now age 22 and thus the inadvertent inclusion of married women is greater.
We now present complementary series on family-planning services that, we believe,
better reveal the timing of pill use among never-married women. The source is the National
Survey of Family Growth, Cycle III, 1982 (NSFG82; ICPSR 1985), which contains the
responses of almost 8,000 women. Because the survey asked the age at first marriage, the
turning points for pill use among single women should be more accurate. But the data cannot be
used to track first pill use.14 Instead, we use information on the year family planning services
were first used. Birth control is a family planning service, but so are pregnancy tests and sex
counseling. The levels will, in consequence, be slightly higher than for first pill use.15
We graph, in Figure 2, the fraction of college graduate women receiving their first family
planning services before and between various ages, among those not married before age 22. The

about 3 percentage points.
14
Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz (1996) use the NSFG82 to construct a time series on the fraction of
unmarried women on the pill at first sexual intercourse.
15
More than 74 percent of first family planning visits, among women who in 1982 were younger than
25 years old, were for birth control (NSFG82). The vast majority of those, we can infer from the
NSYW71, were for the pill.

-7-

fraction receiving services between ages 18 and 19 remained at about 5 percent for cohorts born
from 1943 to 1948. But after 1948, the fraction rose steadily to 27 percent for the 1956 cohort.
Whereas only a small percentage received family planning services before age 18 until the birth
cohort of 1952, 20 percent did by the 1955 cohort. The fraction receiving services between ages
18 and 20 rose gradually prior to the 1948 cohort, but it then rose steeply to the 1951 cohort.
Women between 18 and 20 years old would have been most affected by the changes in
state laws regarding the age of majority and this group experienced a sudden and rapid increase
in receipt of such services after the cohort born in 1948. Those receiving services before age 18
would have been most affected by changes in state laws regarding services provided to those
below the age of majority. In both cases, the periods of most rapid increase coincide with
periods when state laws changed, as will be demonstrated below.
The results from the two data sets give relatively consistent results. Not surprisingly, the
levels are somewhat higher for first family planning services than for first use of the pill among
college graduate women. The timing of the increase also differs slightly, by about two years.
Among women who would eventually graduate from college, the increase in contraceptive
services for those of college age began with cohorts born around 1948. Among pre-college
women, the increase began for cohorts born around 1952.
Because the surveys on which we rely for the timing of first pill use or family planning
services are retrospective, there may be doubts regarding their reliability. Women generally
recall the year of their first birth, but do they reliably recall the year that they first took the pill?
There is overwhelming evidence that they do.
We can compare the retrospective answers in the NHIS with more contemporaneous
responses for women 15 to 19 years old by using the National Survey of Young Women 1971

-8-

and the National Survey of Adolescent Female Sexual Behavior 1976 (NSYW71, NSAF76).
The NSYW71 is a nationally based survey of 4,611young women 15 to 19 years old in 1971.
Because we do not know whether those in the NSYW71 eventually graduated from college, we
compare all 19 year olds in the NSYW71 born in 1951 with all women in the NHIS born in
1952. Among those in the NHIS, 33 percent reported having taken the pill before age 20; among
the group in the NSYW71, 34 percent claimed to have ever used birth control pills.16 The
NSAF76 is also a nationally based survey but about half the size of its predecessor version. We
perform a similar comparison with it, but use women born in 1957. In the NHIS among those
born in 1957, 48.2 percent took the pill prior to age 20; in the NSAF76, among those born in
1957, 51.2 percent had ever taken the pill. 17 Thus, the comparison offers convincing evidence
that women do accurately recall the age at which they began taking the pill.
In sum, the use of the pill by unmarried, college-educated women between 18 and 21
years old took off with cohorts born around 1948. Pill usage among this group diffused rapidly
within roughly five years. Contemporaneous pill use rates among married women peaked about
five years earlier. The reasons for the differences in the diffusion of the pill concern laws
affecting contraceptive services to minors, the age at majority, and social norms.
C. State variation in laws affecting contraceptive services
The provision of contraceptive services to unmarried women younger than 21 years was
highly circumscribed before the late 1960s. The majority of physicians understood the law in
most states to require parental consent before non-emergency procedures, including
contraceptive services, could be given to a minor. In 1969 the age of majority for females was
16

The figure using NSYW71 is computed for 19 year olds born Apr. to Dec. 1951. Since the survey
was taken in March 1971, none had completed their nineteenth year. If we, instead, use 19 year olds born
April to August 1951, the figure rises to 39 percent. Sample weights are used.
17
The figure using NSAF76 is computed for 19 year olds born Mar. to Dec. 1956. If we, instead, use

-9-

21 years old in all but 9 states and was 18 years old in only 6 states (see Table 3). State laws
providing family planning services to young women were altered after 1969 in three ways. The
age of majority was lowered in almost all states between 1969 and 1974. Statutes and judicial
decisions began to classify minors as “mature” enough to make decisions, and laws were passed
that allowed family planning services to be used by minors without parental consent.
In addition to the 6 states in 1969 having an age of majority for women of eighteen years,
3 states (CA, GA, and MS) recognized the “mature minor” doctrine or provided family planning
services to minors without parental consent. Thus in just 9 states could a woman of eighteen
years old legally obtain the pill in 1969.18 Just two years later, in 1971, 16 states had an age of
majority of eighteen and 17 (an additional 14) had laws that allowed women below the age of
majority to obtain contraceptive services. Thus, in 1971 a woman of 18 years could, without
legal hindrance, obtain the pill in 30 states. Females 16 years and younger could obtain it in 12
states (see Table 3). In 1974, three years after the 26th Amendment was ratified, just 2 states had
an age of majority that exceeded 18 years and did not have legislation emancipating minors.19
The legal changes of the late 1960s and early 1970s regarding the age of majority and the
mature minor doctrine were not generally motivated by demands for teenage contraception.
Rather, the war in Vietnam and the draft were the main reasons for the passage of the 26th
Amendment and the related changes in the age of majority that preceded and followed its
ratification.20 Reductions in the age of majority, in turn, often led to extensions of the “mature

19 year olds born March to July 1951, the figure rises to 56.1 percent. Sample weights are used.
18
In 5 of the states (AR, ID, NV, OK, UT), the age of majority for females was traditionally lower
than it was for males, probably because women often married young in these states.
19
Today three states have an age of majority exceeding 18 years old (AL 19, MS 21, PA 21), but no
state, it appears, has any binding legislation preventing a minor from obtaining contraceptives. See
http://www.agi-usa.org/pubs/ib21.html the website of the Alan Guttmacher Institute.
20
According to Paul, Pilpel, and Wechsler (1974, p. 142), “The past five years have seen a marked
expansion of the legal rights of teenagers. Most significant has been the reduction of the age of majority

-10-

minor” doctrine. Of the 21 states that changed their regulations between 1969 and 1971, 10
resulted from reductions in the age of majority, 10 from extensions of the mature minor doctrine,
and 1 was due solely to a comprehensive family planning act.21
Some ambiguity surrounds what these laws meant with regard to the provision of
contraceptive services to minors. In no state in 1972, for example, was it per se illegal to
prescribe or sell contraceptives to a minor.22 Rather, the legality both before and after 1972
hinged on whether the minor was “emancipated” by marriage, parental status, parental consent,
or statute. But even then, it often depended on whether a physician believed it was in the best
interests of the patient and consistent with local practice.
The availability of family planning services to women in college is a crucial input to
career change since it occurs when women are making career and family decisions. Universities
and colleges viewed the legal ambiguity in the late 1960s as good reason not to provide family
planning services and certainly not to advertise the availability of services offered on an
individual basis. Only after the age of majority was lowered and the mature minor doctrine was
established in various states did university health services began to offer family planning to
undergraduates and to advertise its availability. Yale University was in the forefront and opened
a family planning clinic in 1969, prompted by a change in student needs with coeducation (Sarrel
... In the majority of cases, this development followed the adoption of the 26th Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution which permits 18-year-olds to vote.”
21
The 1967 Amendment to Title IV of the Social Security Act (Aid to Families with Dependent
Children) requires state and local welfare agencies to provide contraceptive services to eligible
individuals without regard to marital status and age. But this law would not affect the ineligible
population and it is unclear how it affected teenagers in states not recognizing the mature minor doctrine.
22
Until 1966 it was illegal in Massachusetts to sell contraceptives to anyone, married or single. The
law was modified after Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), and from 1966 to 1972 it was illegal in
Massachusetts to sell contraceptives to an unmarried individual and to dispense them to a married person
without a prescription. The revised law was deemed unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in
Eisenstadt v. Baird (March 1972). A Wisconsin law prohibiting the sale of contraceptives to unmarried
persons was overturned in Baird v. Lynch (1974, Civ. No. 71-C-254, W.D. Wis.). See U.S. Department
of Health, Education, and Welfare (1974, 1978). There is no evidence that these laws were enforced.

-11-

and Sarrel 1971). Other institutions quickly followed.
According to the American College Health Association (ACHA), just 12 institutions in
1966 (3.6 percent of those reporting) would prescribe the pill to unmarried students (Barbato
1968, 1971).23 In 1973, according to an extensive survey of institutions of higher education, 19
percent would provide family planning services to students regardless of age and marital status.24
Because larger schools had a higher fraction providing services, about 42 percent of
undergraduates would have been able to obtain such services (Hollis and Lashman 1974).25
Thus, although in 1966 few colleges had student health services that routinely would prescribe
the pill to unmarried women, by 1973 more than two-fifths of all undergraduates, regardless of
marital status and age, could receive family planning services on campus and most others could
obtain them locally without parental consent.
D. The impact of state laws on pill use
Did states with more lenient laws regarding access to contraceptive services by minors
have higher pill use by young unmarried women? The NSYW71 is the only data set, of which
we are aware, that pertains to the most relevant time period (the very early 1970s) and has
information on pill use and state of residence for female teenagers.26 We have coded the

23

In the 1970 ACHA survey, about 35 percent of member institutions claimed they would prescribe
the pill to unmarried minors at their institution (although a low reporting rate biases this statistic upward).
The non-member institutions had far lower fractions prescribing to all students (12 percent) and also had
even lower reporting rates than the member institutions (Hollis and Lashman 1974).
24
No extant records of the 1973 survey exist, so institutional identities are not known. The Wall Street
Journal, however, ran a story in January 1970 stating that various universities, among them the
University of California at Berkeley, Davis, Los Angeles, Santa Barbara, and San Diego; the Universities
of Michigan, Chicago, Illinois, and Washington; Cornell, Yale, and Northwestern Universities, and
Goddard College, but not, claimed the article, the University of Texas and the University of Pennsylvania,
had recently established, or were about to open, unrestricted family planning clinics for students.
25
The 1973 survey was done by the National Center for Health Statistics and the ACHA and included
2,984 institutions (92 percent response rate). The 42 percent figure is our estimate based on a table in
Hollis and Lashman (1974). Only the 1973 ACHA survey is sufficiently complete to provide an estimate
of the fraction of undergraduates who could obtain family planning services on campus.
26
The NSAF76 does not have state of residence and, even if it did, it would be too late.

-12-

respondent’s state residence according to whether the state used the mature minor doctrine or had
a comprehensive family planning statute, both of which would have enabled young women to
obtain the pill. Twelve states fit that description in 1971 (see Table 3, col. 5).
The estimation in Table 4, it should be noted, is given for all never-married women (odd
numbered columns) and for those who were ever sexually active (even numbered columns). The
effect on pill use of being in one of the more lenient states, computed around the mean of the
dependent variable, is virtually identical for the two estimations. Included in the regressions are
covariates for age, education (except for the college women), current school attendance, religion,
and race. Dummy variables for the southern census divisions are also included.
States with more lenient regulations regarding minors had greater pill use by young
unmarried women. For 15 to 19 year olds there was a 30 percent greater pill use (cols. 1 and 2)
and for the 17 to 19 year olds a bit more than 30 percent (cols. 3 and 4). The increase was
greatest for college women. States with more lenient regulations had 40 to 45 percent greater
pill use among young college women than did other states (cols. 5 and 6). The greater difference
for college women may be due to the fact that most university health services, as noted above,
were scrupulous in following the law. But when the law became more permissive or the age at
majority was reduced, many university health services offered family planning services.27
In states with more lenient laws, young women appear to have had greater access to the
pill. But despite our emphasis on law changes, we also recognize the porousity of the laws and
the importance of social norms. Even before 1970 change was “in the air” regarding the rights of
young people. The 1967 social security amendment that allowed poor women to obtain family

27

The results in Table 4 are not fully robust to adding a control for state per capita income. A
disproportionate number of non-southern states with enabling legislation for minors are states with high
levels of income per capita. Thus, for states outside the South, the income variable and the state law
variable are highly correlated.

-13-

planning services without regard to marital status or age was a signal to all physicians. States
often had ambiguous laws that enabled county health departments to extend contraceptive
services to all women (see Bailey 1997 on Kansas). Thus pill use by young single women began
to rise about a year before the sea change in the laws regarding the age of majority.

II. Two illustrative models of the effect of the pill on marriage and career
We have established that the diffusion of the birth control pill among young unmarried
women began in the mid to late-1960s and that its timing appears to have been related to changes
in state laws regarding the age of majority and to a growing sense that young people were
capable of making rational decisions. But how could the diffusion of the pill among young
unmarried women affect the variable of interest — investment in a professional career?
The diffusion of the pill among young single women may have altered their career
decisions through two routes we have termed the direct and the indirect effects. By the direct
effect of the pill we mean the reduction in the cost of marriage delay. This effect operates
through a change in prices. Delay and thus career investment become cheaper, and women with
greater “career ability” become more attractive marriage partners. By the indirect effect of the
pill we mean the lowering of the cost of career through the marriage market. This effect, in
contrast, operates through a thickening of the marriage market for those who delay marriage and
leads to better matches for women who invest in careers, as well as for some others. To simplify
the discussion, we present separate frameworks that clarify the role of each effect.28
A. The direct effect of the pill
Consider a cohort of n women and n men, each initially unmarried, in a 2-period context

28

See Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) for a related model of marriage delay decisions by men and the
determinants of marriage age differences by sex. We examine models of single age cohorts of males and
females and thereby abstract from the possible impact of the pill on sex differences in the age at marriage.

-14-

with no discounting. Members of each sex agree on the ranking of the other in terms of marriage
partners. Each man brings Yi (e.g., income), known to all, to marriage. Each woman brings Nj
(e.g., nurturing), known to all, to marriage and can also contribute "j through a career; "j is
treated as a household public good. We make the simplifying assumption that career investment
by a woman is not possible if she is married in period 1. Delaying marriage sacrifices 8 for each
partner. We interpret 8 as representing utility lost from abstinence (the “impatience factor”) as
well as from foregone home production. The impatience factor and the loss of home production
are the same for all men and women, and 8 = 80 prior to the introduction of the pill. Y, N, and "
are distributed among the n men and women such that Y ~ [Y , Y ], N ~ [ N , N ], and " ~ [α,α],
where Y , N , α > 0. The distributions of Y, N, and " are known by all participants and each
individual’s attributes are perfectly observable.
Consider a match between male i and female j. If they marry in period 1, then the male
gets Nj and the female gets Yi. If they delay marriage to period 2 and the woman invests in a
career, then the male gets (N j + "j ! 80 ) and the female gets (Yi + "j ! 80 ). If "j > 80 , then both
benefit from delay and the woman invests in a career in period 1. If, instead, "j < 80 , they marry
in period 1 and the woman has no career. Since there are no disagreements, we can
unambiguously match men and women based on their value in marriage to the other sex.
Men’s attractiveness to women is completely summarized by Yi. Women’s attractiveness
to men, on the other hand, depends on Fj = max [Nj, (N j + "j ! 80 )]. The marriage market
operates at the start of period 1 by matching men and women by their ranking in terms of Yi and
Fj. The highest ranked male gets matched to the highest ranked female and so on down the
distribution. As depicted in Figure 3, all women with "j $ 80 invest in careers and delay
marriage until period 2; all others marry in period 1.

-15-

III

II

α
Figure 3: Distribution of "

λp

I
λ0

α

The pill reduces 8 from 80 to 8p and shifts down the cutoff point in the " distribution for
careers. The fraction of women with careers and the fraction of women delaying marriage
increase by the same amount. Even with no change in matching there will be an increase in
marriage delay and in career investment. But matching will, in general, change because the
relative attractiveness of women with high career values (higher "j) is enhanced by the pill.
Thus the Fj distribution will shift with the decline in 8.
Three groups of women can be distinguished. Group I are those for whom "j > 80 . These
women delay marriage and have a career with or without the pill. The introduction of the pill
increases the value of each woman in this group by )Fj = 80 ! 8p . Group II women are those for
whom 80 > "j > 8p . In the absence of the pill, they marry in period 1 but they delay marriage and
have a career with the pill. The introduction of the pill increases the marriage value of each
woman in this group by )Fj = "j ! 8p . Group III includes those for whom "j < 8p . The women
in this group do not have a career with or without the pill. The women in Group III lose from the

-16-

pill since some become matched to worse partners.29 Men are unambiguous winners from the
introduction of the pill. Women are, on average, winners, but those in Group III are losers.
The key unambiguous predictions from the direct effect of the introduction of the pill are
an increase in the fraction of career women, an increase in the average age at first marriage, a
decline in the average labor market ability of career women, and an increase in the extent of
positive assortative mating by labor market ability.
B. The indirect effect of the pill
In our modeling of the direct effect, the pill lowered the price of delay and thus
encouraged later marriages and more careers for women. All individuals engaged in optimal
investing and matching given their attributes and the prices they faced. But the increase in the
number of women who delayed marriage had no effect on the decisions of other women.
The pill can, however, have a social multiplier effect. If couples marry “too early,” then
the pill could produce a new equilibrium in which marriages are later, careers are more
numerous, and matches are “better.” By encouraging the delay of marriage, by men and even by
women who do not invest in a career, one of the potential costs of a career — mismatch in the
marriage market — is reduced. Thus careers are fostered in an indirect manner through a thicker
marriage market for career women, even those who do not take the pill.
Consider, again, a 2-period model and a cohort of n men and n women each of whom
would like to marry a member of the opposite sex. Each man and women has an idiosyncratic
intrinsic attribute, Aif,m (e.g., character, trust, taste), which is revealed to all only in period 2.
Mating on Ai produces a gain of P, but only if a perfect match is found (i.e., Aif = Aim). We
assume that the distributions of Aif and Aim are identical and that each value of Aif,m is unique
29

Akerlof, et al. (1996) develop related models of how abortion legalization (and contraceptive
availability) change norms concerning shotgun marriages and out-of-wedlock births. Some women

-17-

within each sex.30 The basic idea is that character and tastes are still being formed in period 1
(which might be interpreted as one’s late teens and early 20s). If a couple marries in period 1,
they mate for two periods (that is, there is no divorce) but cannot mate using attribute A and thus
cannot obtain P.31 Delay of marriage is costly, however, and involves an implicit payment of 8
(the “impatience factor” and the loss in household surplus). A fraction (B) both of men and
women has a high impatience factor (8h ), and (1 ! B) has a low impatience factor (8l < 8h ). The
impatience factor (8) and the intrinsic attribute (Ai) are orthogonal.
A woman who marries in period 1 cannot invest in a career, but if she delays for one
period she can invest and receive a net return of " (convertible into a household public good of
value " both to herself and her husband in period 2). In contrast to the direct effect framework,
" here is assumed to be the same for all women. Search is costless and all unmarried men meet
all unmarried women in each period. The probability of correctly matching on Ai, if one delays
marriage to period 2, will depend on the fraction of individuals remaining unmarried to period 2.
1. Equilibrium in a no-pill world
When the lowest cost of delay exceeds the gains in marriage and career from delay, when
8l > (P + "), no one delays marriage. Even if [" + (1 ! B) · P] < 8l < (P + ") < 8h , no one will
delay and no woman will invest in a career. If, instead, 8l < ", all those with the low impatience
factor will delay. Note that if those with the low impatience factor anticipate that all others in
their group delay, the weaker condition, 8l < [" + (1 ! B) · P], determines whether they delay.32

benefit, whereas others, unwilling or unable to get an abortion or use the pill, are adversely affected.
30
Thus, one perfect match of the opposite sex exists for each individual.
31
We assume n is sufficiently large that the probability of finding a perfect match with random mating
in the first period is essentially zero.
32
For this condition to hold, the participants in the marriage market have to know the various
parameters, in this case the value of B.

-18-

2. Equilibrium in the age of the pill
The pill reduces the “impatience” factors to, say, 8p l and 8p h . In the extreme case, the pill
renders 8l = 8h = 0. All men and women delay marriage and, thus, all mate perfectly on the
meaningful attribute Ai. Each receives (P + ") and all women invest in careers.
More interesting is when the pill lowers 8 such that: 8p l < " < 8p h < [" + (1 ! B) · P].
Since 8p l < ", all low-impatience individuals delay marriage regardless of their expectation
concerning the marriage market. For the low-impatience types, the “direct” effect of a change in
8 is all that matters. The more interesting effects concern the high-impatience types. In the
absence of a change in 8 for low-impatience types, no one in the high 8 group would delay since
8p h > ". The pill doubly impacts those in the high 8 group. Their change in 8 (viz., 8h !8p h ) has
a “direct” effect. But there is also an “indirect” effect, (1 ! B) · P, caused by the higher expected
value of matching given the delay of the low-8 types. That is, the “indirect” effect of a thicker
marriage market can cause even women with small or possibly no change to 8 to delay marriage
and have careers. The “indirect” effect is at least (1 ! B) · P since if each high-impatience type
expected all others to delay, they would all delay if 8p h < (" + P).
C. Lessons from the two models
Our two simple models illustrate how the introduction of the pill may have altered
women’s career and marriage choices. Because up-front, time-intensive career investments are
virtually impossible to undertake for most women with child-care responsibilities, the pill
fostered women’s careers by virtually eliminating the risk of pregnancy. But the pill did far
more than control the timing of births. It altered the marriage market.
The pill enabled young, unmarried men and women to put off marriage while not having
to put off sex. Sex did not have to be packaged with the commitment devices of the past.

-19-

The decrease in the cost of marriage delay altered the rankings of women as potential marriage
partners favoring those with good career prospects. The increased number of individuals putting
off marriage created a thicker marriage market for those who delay. The indirect effect of a
thicker marriage market for career women led even more women to opt for career and delay
marriage — this is the social multiplier effect. An increase in the age of first marriage may also
lead to higher quality matches if preferences are not fully formed at younger ages.
The key empirical predictions are that the introduction of the pill should have been
associated with an increase in professional careers for women, the age of first marriage, and the
age of first birth. Positive assortative mating on earnings capacity and compatibility among
marriage partners, on average, should also have increased. The new equilibrium, however, is not
completely “win-win.” Women with poor labor market prospects may suffer a decrease in the
ranking of potential marriage partners and be the losers in the era of the pill.

III. Evidence for the power of the pill
A. Career investment
The most obvious careers to study in the context of our framework are those that require
extensive formal education, such as the professions of law, medicine, dentistry, and business
administration.33 We express the data on professional education in two ways. One method,
given in Figure 4a, is to deflate by those receiving the baccalaureate in the same year. Another
way is to divide by male first-year students (Figure 4b).
The results are striking. As a fraction of B.A.’s, female entrants to law and medical
schools began a steep climb around 1970. The increase, moreover, peaked in about a decade.
33

Although career investment can take place in a host of settings, we know of no way to determine if
an individual is on a time-intensive career path unless it involves formal education or training.

-20-

Relative male first-year students, the ratios for all four programs — law, medicine, dentistry, and
business — show a sharp break around 1970. Throughout the 1960s the ratio of women to men
was around 0.1 in medicine, 0.04 in law, 0.01 in dentistry, and 0.03 in business administration.
By 1980 it was in 0.42 in medicine, 0.57 in law, 0.24 in dentistry, and 0.39 in business.34
Career decisions of young women appear to have changed abruptly around 1970. The
shift, moreover, did not arise from an increase in the fraction selected among female applicants,
at least not in the case of medical students. The change in the sex composition resulted almost
entirely from an increase in applications by women. As can be seen in Figure 5a, the ratio of
admissions to applicants is almost identical by sex for the entire period considered. The ratio of
female applicants relative to female B.A.’s (Figure 5b), not surprisingly, began to increase
greatly in 1970. The potential reasons for the increase in medical school applications by women
are several and we are emphasizing only one.
The large increases in women’s enrollment in lengthy professional training programs,
starting around 1970, resulted in a sharp rise in women’s presence in law, medicine, and other
professions across the past three decades. The percentage of all lawyers and judges who are
women more than doubled in the 1970s (from 5.1 percent in 1970 to 13.6 percent in 1980) and
was 28.6 percent in 1998. The share of female physicians increased from 9.1 percent in 1970 to
14.1 percent in 1980 and was 28.6 percent in 1998. Similar patterns are apparent for occupations
such as dentists, architects, veterinarians, economists, and most in the engineering fields.35

34

Note that the ratio of female to male professional school students continues to rise even when the
percentage of female B.A.’s who enter professional school does not. The reason is beyond the scope of
this paper and concerns the decrease in the percentage of male B.A.’s, and of all B.A.’s, entering
professional schools. This decrease, moreover, has extended over a rather long period of time.
35
The overall share of women in professional occupations (excluding K-12 teachers and health
assessment occupations such as nurse), increased from 19.9 percent in 1970 to 27.4 percent in 1980 to
36.7 percent in 1998. In contrast the female share of these occupations barely changed from 1950 to
1970. The 1950 to 1980 data have been tabulated from the IPUMS data (Ruggles and Sobek 1997). Data

-21-

B. Age at first marriage, sex, and fertility expectations
Before the availability of the pill, young people devised means to make and secure
commitments that enabled sexual relations. Girls and boys “went steady,” fraternity men
“pinned” or “lavaliered” coeds, and men and women got “engaged.” If a pregnancy resulted, the
couple generally got married (Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz 1996). For other young people marriage
itself was the moment of first sex. The delay of marriage, or the absence of a commitment that
would likely lead to marriage, meant the delay of sex in a world without effective contraception.
In terms of our framework, the absence of the pill meant that 8 was high. The pill loosened the
constraints (and lowered 8). Marriages could be put off, couples could engage in sex, and
commitments need not be made without much penalty. But did this happen?
Marriages were, in fact, delayed considerably beginning with the birth cohorts of the late
1940s, precisely those affected by the pill, and the moment of first sexual relations among the
never-married also decreased by age, again in line with the cohorts affected by the availability of
the pill. We first examine the descriptive statistics on these trends and then examine whether
there is evidence for a causal relationship between changes in the laws and marriage.
1. Descriptive statistics on the age at first marriage and sex
We graph, in Figure 6, the fraction of college graduate women married before ages
ranging from 20 to 30 years. About 50 percent of those born from 1941 to 1949 married before
age 23 (age 22 is the college graduate’s median age). After 1949, however, the fraction married
before age 23 or 24 plummeted. By the cohort born in 1957, the fraction married before age 23
was just 30 percent, or fully 20 percentage points lower than in 1950. Thus the fraction of
women who married a year after college graduation declined precipitously after 1972, the

for 1998 are from the U.S. Department of Labor (1999, table 11).

-22-

moment when most states had changed their laws regarding access to contraceptives for youth.
The fraction engaging in sex before various ages is given in Figure 7, for which we
analyze all women, not just college women, due to small sample sizes.36 The evidence is
strikingly consistent with the timing of pill availability to young, unmarried women. Sexual
activity among the group under 20 years increased with cohorts born after 1947 and for the even
younger group (under 18 years) the increase was with cohorts born around 1952.
Fertility expectations of college women also plunged between the mid-1960s and the
early 1970s. In 1963 80 percent of non-Catholic female college students desired three or more
children and 44 percent wanted at least four. Ten years later, in 1973, just 29 percent wanted
three or more and almost 10 percent wanted none.37 Neither cohort had as many children as they
“desired,” but the desires reflect tradeoffs they were willing to make between family and career.
The logic of our argument concerning the impact of the age at first marriage on career
requires that women who invest in careers generally delay marriage. In lieu of a locating a
representative sample of college graduate women, we have examined registration cards for
Harvard University Law School students in the entering classes from 1962 to 1975. Because the
registration cards were used for diplomas, names on them were routinely updated.38 We find that
the fraction married at the time of law school graduation was about one-third the national
36

The source of the data is the NSFG82. Similar patterns are found when the sample is restricted to
women with some college. To assess the accuracy of the information we also use a more
contemporaneous measure from the NSYW71 and NSAF76 (given as solid markers). The two measures
are, with one exception, remarkably consistent.
37
For the 1963 data see Westoff and Potvin (1967, table 7). We use only non-Catholic women in
nonsectarian schools since Westoff and Potvin oversampled religious institutions but do not give the
population weights. The 1973 data are tabulated from the National Longitudinal Survey of Women 14-24
(Ohio State University 1968-1991) and include all those who ever graduated from a four-year institution
of higher education and who were of approximate college age in 1973.
38
We cannot use these records after it became more common for women to keep their maiden names.
Until 1972 the cards requested information regarding marital status at time of registration. The cards also
listed the names of the parents and we were able to verify whether the woman’s last name matched that of
her father. It is possible that some women in the 1970 to 1972 classes married but did not change their

-23-

average by age and birth year for classes graduating from 1970 to 1972 (born from 1945 to
1947), but was average for those graduating between 1964 and 1966 (born from 1941 to 1943).39
Thus, for the cohorts that greatly increased their numbers in law school, the marriage rate was
significantly below average for college graduate women.
2. State law changes and the age at first marriage
Did the availability of the pill alter the age at first marriage? To assess this connection,
we examine the relationship between pill access and the age of first marriage for college women
by exploiting the substantial cross-state variation in the enactment of laws giving minors access
to birth control services without parental consent (see Table 3). In particular, we examine the
impact of state laws regarding birth control access for minors on the likelihood of getting
married before age 23 for college educated women born in the United States from 1935 to 1957.
Because major changes in abortion access also affected cohorts of women entering college in the
early 1970s (abortion bans were repealed in 5 states in 1969/70 and everywhere in 1973 with Roe
v. Wade), we control for the possible confounding changes in abortion laws.
We use a standard differences-in-differences model that includes controls for both stateof-birth and year-of-birth fixed effects. Dummy variables are included to account for the state
laws regarding birth control and abortion access, in each individual’s state of birth, that existed
when they were 18 years of age, that is around the age of college entrance.40 We use the
Integrated Public Use Micro Samples (IPUMS) from the 1980 Census of Population.

names and thus that we are understating the fraction who married while in law school.
39
Entering marriage rates are much lower than the national average for college graduate women in all
years. The marriage rates in law school are extremely high for the classes in the mid-1960s when there
were only about 20 women in each class, thus about 18 male students for every female.
40
Ideally, we would like to know the legal environment concerning birth control and abortion for each
individual in their state of residence as a teenager and in college. The census provides information on
state of birth and state of current residence only. Since the vast majority of females attending college
reside in their state of birth at 18 and go to college in their state of birth, measures of the legal

-24-

The basic model we estimate is of the form:
Mist = "s + * t + Xist $ + Pst ( + Ast B + ,ist ,
where i indexes individuals, s indexes state of birth, t indexes year of birth; the dependent
variable Mist is a dummy variable equal to 1 if individual i was married before age 23; Xist
contains demographic controls (race dummies); Pst is a dummy variable equal to 1 if i’s state of
birth had a non-restrictive birth control law for minors by the time i was 18 years old; Ast is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if abortion was legal in i’s state of birth at the time i was 18 years old;
the "s are state of birth dummies; and the * t are year of birth dummies.
Because we are concerned with the possible endogeneity of birth control access laws to
state trends in feminist views and attitudes towards women’s careers, we examine the robustness
of our results to including controls for (pre-existing) state-of-birth linear time trends. The
earliest states providing birth control access for minors without parental consent were CA and
GA in 1968; MS in 1969; AR in 1970; and CO, DC, IL, MI, NH, NY, OR, and TN in 1971 (see
Table 3). The wide array of states suggests that idiosyncratic factors affected the passage of
mature minor and family planning laws and not, for example, the strength of the women’s
movement in the state.
Table 5 presents our estimates of the effect of various state laws on the age of first
marriage for cohorts of college women born before and after the diffusion of the pill to single
women. The share of U.S. born female college graduates married before age 23 declined from
47.0 percent for those born from 1940 to 1949, to 38.3 percent for those born from 1950 to 1954,
to 26.8 percent for those born from 1955 to 1957 (1980 IPUMS; see also Figure 6 which uses
CPS data and is not restricted to the native-born). The timing of the decline is consistent with

environment in the state of birth should be a reasonable proxy for the actual laws affecting these women.

-25-

the notion that greater access to the pill for single women led to a delay in marriage. But the
question is whether states with earlier laws providing birth control access to minors experienced
earlier declines in the age of first marriage for college women, and Table 5 assesses that.
The estimates in col. (1) of Table 5 indicate that the adoption of a non-restrictive birth
control law for minors was associated with a modest (but statistically significant) 2 percentage
point decline in the probability that a college graduate women was married before the age of 23.
The estimates in col. (2) show similar modest negative effects of both birth control access and
abortion legalization. The estimates in col. (3) indicate that the impact of birth control access is
robust (even modestly increased) to including controls for state-of-birth trends. The coefficient
on the abortion law variable, however, is now positive but statistically insignificant. Cols. (4)
and (5) show modestly stronger results for the effects of birth control laws when the sample is
limited to white college graduates. And the final column shows modestly attenuated results
when the sample is expanded to include all women with a year or more of college (to address
concerns of possible endogeneity of college graduation decisions to pill access).41
We conclude that there were modest but detectable increases in the delay of marriage of
college-educated women in states where young unmarried women had greater legal access to the
pill. The estimates of the effects of state laws on age of first marriage are not as large as are the
sharp aggregate changes for cohorts with greater pill access, as shown in Figure 6. But this
attenuation is to be expected given our crude measures of state laws and the broad increase in the
availability of the pill to young single women in all states from the late 1960s to the mid-1970s.
C. A prima facie case for the power of the pill on career and marriage
Did the pill cause the increase in career investment and the rise in the age at first
41

A similar pattern emerges when the dependent variable is an indicator for marriage before age 22, as
well as when alternative measures of state pill-access laws are used (e.g., pill access for 18 year olds).

-26-

marriage among cohorts of young women in the early 1970s? We have built a prima facie case
for the power of the pill based on the timing of changes and have offered some suggestive
evidence on causality. Our argument goes as follows.
Despite FDA approval of the pill in 1960 for contraceptive uses and its rapid diffusion
among married women, young single women did not greatly increase their pill usage until the
late 1960s to early 1970s. The primary reason for the change was that states lowered the age of
majority and increased the rights of minors. These legal changes, moreover, were largely
independent of demands for providing contraceptive services to young women. They were
caused, instead, by an enhanced awareness, due in part to the Vietnam War, that young people
matured earlier than in the past and deserved increased rights. Although many physicians had
not been in direct compliance, university health services generally did comply or at the very least
did not broadcast, as they do today, that they offered contraceptives to all students without
question. More lenient laws led to a greater use of oral contraceptives, particularly among
college women.
The next link in our prima facie case is that more lenient laws directly led to an increase
in the age at first marriage. The final link is that the timing of greater pill use among cohorts of
college graduate women coincided with the initial increase of female first-year students in
professional programs, such as law, medicine, dentistry, and business administration.
The power of the pill was twofold. Initially the pill decreased the cost of career
investment in a direct manner and affected only women who were on the pill. But an additional
effect — the social multiplier — evolved over time due to the increased age at first marriage.
The impact of the pill spread even to those who were not on the pill. The pill reduced the cost to
all women of delaying marriage for a career.

-27-

IV. Alternative explanations
We have offered a supply driven explanation for the increase in the career plans of young
college graduate women around 1970. A related and complementary supply-side explanation is
abortion reform. We showed in Table 5 that a dummy variable for the 5 states that underwent
early abortion reform was negatively related to the age at first marriage, but that the variable for
the pill states provided more power and was more robust to the inclusion of state specific trends.
Two populous states (CA and NY), it should be noted, fall into both groups. The case for the
greater importance of the pill is mainly that oral contraceptives had far wider impact than did
abortion. Few college women depended on abortion, as they did the pill, as a safe, reliable,
effective, convenient, and painless means of contraception. Yet, even though the fraction of
women who ever took the pill vastly exceeded that who ever had an abortion, the rate of abortion
use among college-going and young women was exceptionally high by 1976 and was high even
in 1971. Its effect must have served to reinforce the pill’s impact.42
Demand side explanations can also be offered, including the impact of the resurgence of
feminism and of sex discrimination legislation. Although the Civil Rights Act of 1964 covered
discrimination by “sex,” the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) set up to
investigate charges did little about sex discrimination until the early 1970s. The National
Organization for Women was formed in 1966 to pressure EEOC to consider discrimination by

42

The percentage of college-going, young women who ever had an abortion or used the pill is:

As of 1971
% ever had an abortion
% ever took the pill
As of 1976
% ever had an abortion
% ever took the pill

Women attending college in 1971 born in 1952 or 1953
All
Only non-virgins
Non-virgins and single
2.5
6.9
7.7
12.8
35.5
35.2
Women attending college in 1976 born in 1957 or 1958
All
Only non-virgins
Non-virgins and single
5.2
8.4
10.6
43.5
64.2
58.5

Sources: NSYW71, NSAF76.

-28-

sex and, whether as a result of that pressure or not, a substantial increase in sex discrimination
complaints ensued, rising from about 3,150 in 1970 to 18,150 in 1973, and peaking at 29,450 in
1976 (Goldin 1990, fig. 7.1). Affirmative action in the form of Executive Order no. 11246 was
amended in 1967 by Executive Order no. 11375 to cover women, but it took many more years
before it was put into effect (Freeman 1975).
Any of these factors could have generated increased demand for women in professional
positions and thus led to a rise in female enrollments in professional schools. The timing of the
changes is fairly consistent with the career changes we described. A problem with demand-side
explanations is that these factors cannot account for the other related changes. The increased age
at first marriage could have stemmed from more career investment, but the rise in sexual activity
among single women, beginning in 1970, would appear entirely unrelated.

V. Summary: A collage of evidence on career, marriage, and the pill
We have presented a suggestive collage of evidence for the impact of the pill on young
women’s career decisions and on marriage rates in general in the 1970s. The direct effect of the
pill decreased the cost to women of remaining unmarried while investing in a professional
career. The pill further reduced the cost of career investment for women by serving to increase
the age at first marriage for a large fraction of all young people. The power of the pill in
affecting women’s careers was magnified by its impact on the age at first marriage.
But not all increases in the age at first marriage and decreases in fertility have involved
genuine social change for women. There were, to be sure, prior moments of decreased marriage
and fertility in the demographic history of the American people. But none led to vast increases
in the fraction of women in professional occupations. Similarly, Japanese women have

-29-

experienced a substantial decline in fertility and an increase in the age at first marriage ever since
the early 1970s. Yet there has been little change in the economic status of women in Japan and,
until 1999, no legal oral contraceptives.
The pill is not necessary for demographic change. But a virtually foolproof, easy to use,
and female-controlled contraceptive having low health risks, little pain, and few annoyances does
appear to have been important in promoting real change in the economic status of women (see
also Birdsall and Chester 1987). Moreover, women in the United States were well positioned to
take advantage of the pill’s side benefit. By the time the pill was available to unmarried women,
about 28 percent of them were graduating from four-year institutions of higher education.43 In
most other rich countries, the fraction of young women capable of continuing to professional
schools was small since college graduation rates were low compared with the United States.
The most persuasive evidence for a role of the pill is that its initial diffusion among single
women coincided with the increase in the age at first marriage and with the increase in women in
professional degree programs. Other factors were involved in these changes, to be sure. No
great social movement is caused by one factor, certainly not something as small as a pill.

43

See Goldin (1997, appendix table 2.1) for data based on the Current Population Survey, series P-20.
The fraction graduating from college or university is about 28 percent for cohorts born in the late 1940s.

-30-

REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. 1996. “An Analysis of Out-ofWedlock Childbearing in the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (May): 277317.
Asbell, Bernard. 1995. The Pill: A Biography of the Drug That Changed the World. New York:
Random House.
Bailey, Beth. 1997. “Prescribing the Pill: Politics, Culture, and the Sexual Revolution in
America’s Heartland,” Journal of Social History 30 (Summer): 827-856.
Barbato, Louis, et al. 1968. “Dispensing of Birth Control Information, Devices and Medications
in College Health Services: A Panel Discussion,” Journal of the American College Health
Association 16 (February): 233-35.
Barbato, Louis. 1971. “Study of the Prescription and Dispensing of Contraceptive Medications at
Institutions of Higher Education,” Journal of the American College Health Association 19
(June): 303-306.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., and Bagnoli Mark. 1993. “Courtship as a Waiting Game,” Journal of
Political Economy 101 (February): 185-202.
Birdsall, Nancy, and Lauren A. Chester, 1987. “Contraception and the Status of Women: What is
the Link?” Family Planning Perspectives 19 (January-February): 14-18.
Dienes, C. Thomas. 1972. Law, Politics, and Birth Control. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois
Press.
Freeman, Jo. 1975. The Politics of Women’s Liberation: A Case Study of an Emerging Social
Movement and its Relation to the Policy Process. New York: Longman.
Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
Women. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldin, Claudia. 1997. “Career and Family: College Women Look to the Past.” In F. Blau and
R. Ehrenberg, Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Hollis, Gloria, and Karen Lashman. 1974. “Family Planning Services in U.S. Colleges and
Universities,” Family Planning Perspectives 6 (Summer): 173-75.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). 1982. National Survey of
Adolescent Female Sexual Behavior, 1976 (ICPSR 8043). Principal investigators: John F.
Kantner and Melvin Zelnick. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR.

-31-

Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). 1985. National Survey of
Family Growth, Cycle III, 1982 (ICPSR 8328). Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). 1990. National Health
Interview Survey, 1987: Cancer Risk Factor Supplement, Epidemiology Study (ICPSR 9341).
Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR.
Journal of the American Medical Association. various years. “Medical Education,” 240 (Dec.
1978), 246 (Dec. 1981), 256 (Sept. 1986), 258 (Aug. 1987), 260 (Aug. 1988), 262 (Aug.
1989), 268 (Sept. 1992), 280 (Sept. 1998).
Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman. 1996. “Roe v.
Wade and American Fertility.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.
5615 (June).
Ohio State University. 1968-1991. National Longitudinal Survey of Women 14-24 in 1968.
Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource Research (CD ROM).
Paul, Eve W., Harriet F. Pilpel, and Nancy F. Wechsler. 1974. “Pregnancy, Teenagers and the
Law, 1974,” Family Planning Perspectives 6 (Summer): 142-47.
Pilpel, Harriet F., and Nancy F. Wechsler. 1969. “Birth Control, Teenagers and the Law,” Family
Planning Perspectives 1 (Spring): 29-36.
Ruggles, Steven and Matthew Sobek. 1997. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, IPUMS-98
Version 2.0. Minneapolis, MN: Social History Research Laboratory, University of Minnesota,
Department of History. http://www.hist.umn.edu/ipums/
Ryder, Norman B. 1972. “Time Series of Pill and IUD Use: United States, 1961-1970,” Studies
in Family Planning 3 (October): 233-20.
Scrimshaw, Susan C.M. 1981. “Women and the Pill: From Panacea to Catalyst,” Family
Planning Perspectives 13 (November-December): 254-62.
Sarrel, Philip M., and Lorna J. Sarrel. 1971. “Birth Control Services and Sex Counseling at
Yale,” Family Planning Perspectives 3 (July): 33-36.
The Economist. “Oral Contraceptives: The Liberator.” December 31, 1999, p. 102.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1998. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1998.
Washington, D.C.
U.S. Department of Education. 1997. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
GPO.
U.S. Department of Education. 1998. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

-32-

GPO.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 1974. Family Planning, Contraception, and
Voluntary Sterilization: An Analysis of Laws and Policies in the United States, Each State and
Jurisdiction (as of September 1971). Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 1978. Family Planning, Contraception, and
Voluntary Sterilization: An Analysis of Laws and Policies in the United States, Each State and
Jurisdiction (as of October 1, 1976 with 1978 addenda). Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. various years. Students Enrolled for
Advanced Degrees, Fall [year]. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.
U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1999. Employment and Earnings. Vol. 46
(January). Washington, D.C.
Wall Street Journal, “The Pill on Campus,” January 19, 1970.
Watkins, Elizabeth Siegel. 1998. On the Pill: A Social History of Oral Contraceptives, 19501970. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Westoff, Charles F., and Raymond H. Potvin. 1967. College Women and Fertility Values.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Westoff, Charles F., and Norman B. Ryder. 1977. The Contraceptive Revolution. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Zelnik, Melvin, and John F. Kantner. 1972. “Sexual Experience of Young Unmarried Women in
the United States,” Family Planning Perspectives 4 (October): 9-18.
Zelnik, Melvin, and John F. Kantner. 1977. “Sexual and Contraceptive Experience of Young
Unmarried Women in the United States, 1976 and 1971,” Family Planning Perspectives 9
(March-April): 55-71.
Zelnik, Melvin, and John F. Kantner. 1989. 1971 U.S. National Survey of Young Women
[Machine Readable Data File]. Melvin Zelnik and John F. Kantner, principal investigators.
Data Archive on Adolescent Pregnancy and Pregnancy Prevention. Los Altos, CA:
Sociometrics Corporation distributors. 4,611 cases and accompanying documentation.
http://www.socio.com

-33-

Fraction of College Graduate Women Taking the Pill
at various ages (no births < 23 years old)
0.4

before age 21

0.3

between 18 and 20

0.2

0.1

before age 18
0.0
1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

Birth Year

Figure 1a: Fraction of College Graduate Women Taking the Pill at Various Ages
Fraction of College Graduate Women Taking the Pill
at various ages (no births < 23 years old)
0.5

before age 22
0.4

between 18 and 21

0.3

0.2

0.1

before age 18
0.0
1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

Birth Year

Figure 1b: Fraction of College Graduate Women Taking the Pill at Various Ages
Source: National Health Interview Survey, 1987: Cancer Risk Factor Supplement, Epidemiology
Study (ICPSR 1990).

-34-

Fraction Receiving Family Planning Services

0.6

before age 22
0.5

0.4

between 18 & 20

0.3

between 18 & 19

0.2

before age 18
0.1

0.0

1940

1945

1950

1955

Year of Birth

Figure 2: Fraction of College Graduate Women Receiving Family Planning Services at Various
Ages, among Those Not Married by Age 22
Source: National Survey of Family Growth, Cycle III, 1982 (ICPSR 1985).

-35-

Female 1st year Med/
B.A.s (in year t x 100)

Female 1st year Law/
B.A.s (in year t x 100)
Medical students

1.1
3
Law students
0.9
2
0.7

0.5

1

0.3
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 4a: First-Year Female Law and Medical Students as a Percentage of Female B.A.s

Medical, Law
1.0

Dental, MBA
0.75
Medical school
Law school
Dental school
Business school

0.8

0.60

0.6

0.45

0.4

0.30

0.2

0.15

0.0

0.00
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Entering Year

Figure 4b: Ratio of Female to Male First-Year Students: Law, Medicine, Dentistry, and Business

-36-

Sources: B.A. degrees: U.S. Department of Education (1998), table 244. First-year medical
students: Journal of the American Medical Association (various years). First-year law students
American Bar Association website http://www.abanet.org/legaled/femstats.html . Firstprofessional degrees in dentistry: U.S. Department of Education (1998), table 259. Earned
degrees in business: U.S. Department of Education (1997), table 281.
Notes: Data for first-year dental and business students are derived from first-professional degrees
lagged four years for dental students and three years for business students. The data, for years of
overlap, are similar to those on first-year students in U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare (various years). The procedure, moreover, produces similar values for the two
professional schools (medicine and law) for which we have first-year student time series.

-37-

0.7

1st Year Medical Students/
Applicants to Medical School
0.6

Males
0.5

Females
0.4

0.3
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 5a: First-Year Female and Male Medical Students as a Percentage of Applicants
(1st Year Female Medical Students)/
Female B.A.'s x 100

(Female Medical Applicants/
Female B.A.'s) x 100

First years/BAs
3
1.1

0.9
2

0.7

Applicants/BAs
1

0.5

0.3
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 5b: First-Year Female Medical Students and Applicants as a Percentage of Female B.A.s
Sources: See Figures 4a, 4b.

-38-

Fraction of College Graduate Women Married before
Various Ages (three-year centered moving average)

0.8
30 years
28 years

0.6

26 years

0.4
24 years

0.2
22 years
20 years

0.0
1930

1940

1950
Birth Year

1960

Figure 6: Fraction of College Graduate Women Married before Various Ages
Source: Current Population Survey, Fertility and Marital History Supplement, 1990 and 1995.

-39-

1970

Fraction of Never-Married Women Having Sex
before Various Ages: 3-Year Centered Moving Average
0.7

before 21
before 20

0.6

before 19

0.5

0.4

before 18

0.3

before 17

0.2

0.1
1940

1945

1950

1955

Cohort Birth Year

Figure 7: Fraction of Never-Married Women Having Sex before Various Ages, 3-Year Centered
Moving Average
Sources: All but the solid markers, National Survey of Family Growth 1982 (ICPSR 1985).
Solid markers for birth cohorts of 1952, 1952, and 1954, National Survey of Young Women
1971 (Zelnik and Kantner 1989). Solid markers for birth cohorts of 1957 and 1958, National
Survey of Adolescent Female Sexual Behavior 1976 (ICPSR 1982).

-40-

Table 1
Landmark Events and Decisions Regarding the Pill and Contraceptive Use
Year
1873
1916
1936
1937
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1956
1957
1957
1960
1961
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1965
1968
1969
1970
1970
1971
1972
1974

Event or Landmark Decision
Congressional passage of the “Act for the Suppression of Trade in, and Circulation of Obscene
Literature and Articles of Immoral Use,” also known as the ‘Comstock Law.’
In direct violation of the Comstock Law, Margaret Sanger opens, in Brooklyn, the first birth
control clinic.
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals modifies the fifty year-old Comstock Law to allow the
dissemination of birth control information and devices.
University of Pennsylvania Researchers discover the function of progesterone in inhibiting
ovulation.
Russell Marker synthesizes inexpensive cortisone for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
Margaret Sanger convinces the heiress Katherine McCormick to fund research on “the pill.”
Carl Djerassi at Syntex synthesizes norethindrone, an orally active progestational hormone.
Chemist Frank Colton at G. D. Searle and Company develops norethynodrel, chemically similar
to norethindrone and also a synthetic progesterone.
Katherine McCormick promises Gregory Pincus (researcher and Searle consultant) to fund his
project to develop a birth control pill through its completion.
Researchers John Rock and Gregory Pincus conduct the first tests using norethynodrel and
norethindrone to prevent ovulation.
Searle’s Colton awarded a patent on norethynodrel.
Large-scale trials begin to assess the drug’s effectiveness as a contraceptive.
Syntex’s Djerassi awarded a patent on norethindrone.
Searle buys a company to manufacture the steroids used in norethynodrel production.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves Syntex’s Norlutin (norethindrone) and
Searle’s Enovid (norethynodrel) for treatment of hormonal and other medical disorders.
FDA approves the use of norethynodrel (Enovid) as an oral contraceptive for women.
Searle begins to advertise Enovid as a contraceptive.
The first reports of thromboembolism attributed to the pill surface in Britain.
Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation enters the oral contraceptive market.
The Food and Drug Administration concludes there is no connection between Enovid and
thromboembolism.
Parke-Davis and Syntex enter oral contraceptive market.
The FDA declares no evidence for a positive or negative association between cervical cancer and
contraceptive pills.
The U.S. Supreme Court in Griswold v. Connecticut overturns a Connecticut law prohibiting the
use of contraceptives on the grounds that it violates a married individual’s right to privacy.
Papal encyclical is issued enjoining Catholics from using the pill.
Yale University begins one of the first college birth control programs in the Fall 1969.
Senator Gaylord Nelson holds hearings investigating the health risks of oral contraceptives.
FDA orders manufacturers to include an informational pamphlet on health risks with every
package of birth control pills.
On July 1, 1971 the 26th Amendment is ratified allowing those 18 years and older to vote. Most
states follow by lowering the “age of majority.”
The U.S. Supreme Court in Eisenstadt v. Baird overturns the Massachusetts law prohibiting the
sale of contraceptives to unmarried individuals.
In Wisconsin Federal District Court, Baird v. Lynch overturns a law prohibiting the sale of
contraceptives to unmarried individuals (Civ. No. 71-C-254, W.D. Wis.).

Sources: Asbell (1995), Dienes (1972), and Watkins (1998).

-41-

Table 2
Data Sets Containing Information on Contraceptive Use, 1955 to 1987
Data Set (abbreviation)

Year(s)

National Fertility Surveys
(NFS)

1965
1970
1975 followup

Number of
observations
5,617
6,752
3,403

National Survey of Young
Women (NSYW71)

1971

4,611

National Survey of
Adolescent Female Sexual
Behavior (NSAF76)

1976

2,193

National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS)

1987

12,747

National Survey of Family
Growth, Cycle III (NSFG)

1982

7,969

-42-

Sample characteristics
Currently married women, married
prior to age 25; retrospective
information on contraceptive use
was taken only for periods in which
respondent was married.
Young women, never married and
ever married, 15 to 19 years old.
Contains current state of residence.
Young women, never married and
ever married, 15 to 19 years old.
Does not contain current state of
residence.
Women born 1929 to 1969 (aged 18
to 67 years old). Contains
information on age at first pill use,
but none on age at first marriage.
Women 15 to 44 years old.
Contains information on age at first
family planning visit and age at first
marriage.

Table 3
State Laws Regarding Contraceptive Services to Minors and
the Age of Majority, 1969 to 1974

State
AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD

1969
21
19
21
18a
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
18a
21
21
21
21
18
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
18a
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
18a
21
21
21
21
21

Age of majority
1971
21
19
18
18a
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
18a
18
21
21
21
18
21
18
21
21
21
21
21
21
19
20
18a
21
21
18
21
18
18
21
18a
21
21
21
21
21

Earliest legal age to obtain contraceptive
services without parental consent
1969
1971
1974
21
17
17
19
19
14 or 19b
21
18
18
18
14
14
15
15
15
21
14
14
21
18
18
21
21
18
21
14
14
21
21
14
14
14
14
20
20
20
18
18
14
21
14
14
21
21
18
21
21
14 or 18b
21
21
14
18
18
14 or 18b
21
21
14
21
18
18
21
18
14
21
21
18
21
14
14
21
18
18
14
14
14
21
21
21
21
19
18
20
20
19
18
18
18
21
14
14
21
21
18
21
18
14 or 18b
21
16
16
21
18
18
21
18
18
21
21
14
18
18
14 or 18b
21
15
15
21
18
18
21
21
18
21
21
16
21
21
18

1974
21
19
18
18a
18
21
18
18
21
18
18
20
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
21
21
18
19
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
21
18
21
18

-43-

State
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY
Summary

1969
21
21
18a
21
21
21
21
21
21
states < 20:
7

Age of majority
1971
1974
18
18
21
18
18a
18a
18
18
21
18
18
18
21
18
18
18
21
19
states < 20:
states < 20:
18
43

Earliest legal age to obtain contraceptive
services without parental consent
1969
1971
1974
21
14
14
21
21
18
18
18
18
21
18
18
21
21
14
21
18
18
21
21
14 or 18b
21
18
18
21
21
14 or 19b
states # 16:
states # 16:
states # 16:
3
12
27c

a

Age of majority is 18 for females and 21 for males.
The state has a comprehensive family planning program that does not exclude the provision of
contraceptive services to minors, but there is either no mature minor doctrine in the state or no
clear decision by the state attorney general concerning the legality of such provision.
c
Seven states are ambiguous cases.
b

Sources:
1969: Pilpel and Wechsler (1969)
1971: U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1974).
1974: Paul, Pilpel, and Wechsler (1974). The coding of the laws is as of June 1974.
1974: U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1978).
Notes: “Obtaining contraceptive services” means the ability to get the birth control pill. Some
states had a different age for voluntary sterilization, and abortion laws occasionally differed as
well. We use an age of 14 when the law was interpreted to mean that any minor could receive
contraceptive devices without parental consent.
Notes specific to the 1971 coding for Table 4 for potentially ambiguous cases:
AL: Law allows high school graduates and married women to obtain contraception, but not any
female under the age of majority, therefore an age of 17 years old is coded.
AR: Age of majority is 18, but recent law allows all women can get state family planning
services except single women at college away from home who should go to private doctor
CT: Age of majority was reduced to 18 in 1972. An earlier law enabled any minor of 18 or older
to obtain health services.
KS: Legislation in 1966 allowed a physician to prescribe birth control to any woman at a public
clinic, but the law was not universal. See, however, the discussion in Bailey (1997) that
discusses the case of Lawrence, KS.
KY: A “mature minor” decision was effective in 1972.
ME: Physician must find “probable health hazard,” thus the law is not universal.
MD: Age of majority is 21 but consent rights are given to those 18 years and older for
contraceptive services.
MI: Age of majority is lowered to 18 in 1972.

-44-

MN: Law states that minors living apart from their parents can give consent to health services,
thus the age in 1971 is given as 18 since it does not provide blanket coverage for 14 to 17 year
olds.
NJ: Age of majority is lowered to 18 in 1973.
NY: Pharmacists may sell contraceptives to minors of 16 and older. The law was ambiguous
with regard to physicians and parental consent.
OH: Ohio has a mature minor doctrine established in 1956, but its relevance to birth control is
unclear in 1971.
PA: Minors 18 years and older (or high school graduates) may consent to any medical care.
VA: Age of majority is lowered to 18 and any individual under age 18 may consent to birth
control services, except abortion and sterilization, effective July 1972.
WI: The restriction on contraceptives to unmarried individuals was put in question after the
Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972) decision regarding a similar Massachusetts law.

-45-

Table 4
State Laws and Pill Use among Never-Married Female Youth
in the National Survey of Young Women, 1971
Dependent variable:
1 = ever taken the birth
control pill

Mean of dependent variable
State law (1 = non-restrictive
for minors)
Education variables:
8th grade
9th grade
10th grade
11th grade
12th grade

15 to 19 years old
(1)
All
0.0652
0.0200
(0.00808)

(2)
Sexually
activea
0.245
0.0727
(0.0258)

-0.0351
(0.0227)
-0.0338
(0.0194)
-0.0351
(0.0170)
-0.0460
(0.0143)
-0.0912
(0.0195)

-0.165
(0.0717)
-0.151
(0.0574)
-0.160
(0.488)
-0.144
(0.0406)
-0.155
(0.0481)

College
Currently attends school
Catholic
African-American
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Number of observations
R2
a

17 to 19 years old
(3)
All

17 to 19 years old and
attends college
(5)
(6)
All
Sexually
activea
0.145
0.406
0.0653
0.166
(0.0329)
(0.0748)

0.106
0.0355
(0.0180)

(4)
Sexually
activea
0.304
0.0955
(0.0346)

0.161
(0.0430)
-0.0704
(0.0407)
-0.0387
(0.0375)
0.0164
(0.0376)
0.0668
(0.0409)
-0.0613
(0.0776)
0.200
(0.0665)

-0.184
(0.0835)
-0.0242
(0.0334)
-0.0153
(0.0505)
0.0968
(0.0370)
-0.103
(0.0692)
0.106
(0.0749)

-0.270
(0.157)
-0.0676
(0.0793)
-0.215
(0.0945)
0.179
(0.0787)
-0.376
(0.278)
0.521
(0.195)

890
0.0619

647
0.0427

245
0.0868

-0.0784
(0.0158)
-0.0119
(0.00843)
0.0741
(0.0111)
0.0201
(0.0106)
-0.0242
(0.0164)
0.0170
(0.0143)

-0.0566
(0.0365)
-0.0236
(0.0287)
0.0541
(0.0280)
0.0448
(0.0311)
-0.0740
(0.0574)
0.0908
(0.0467)

0.0606
(0.0177)
-0.0658
(0.0189)
-0.0217
(0.0149)
0.0925
(0.0193)
0.0355
(0.0142)
-0.0340
(0.0304)
0.0529
(0.0266)

4211
0.0801

1314
0.0985

2226
0.0534

“Sexually active” means that the individual had ever had sexual intercourse.

Source: National Survey of Young Women, 1971 (NSYW71).
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Ordinary least squares estimates are given. Dummy
variables for single years of age are also included. Some women in cols. (5) and (6) were not
currently attending college. Non-restrictive state laws allowed minors to receive birth control
services and devices without parental consent. For state law information see Table 3.

-46-

Table 5
State Laws and the Age of First Marriage for College Women
(U.S. natives born from 1935 to 1957)

College Graduates
Dependent variable:
1 = married before age 23
Non-restrictive birth
control law by age 18a

(1)
All
!0.0196
(0.00737)

Legalized abortion by age
18b

(2)
All
!0.0166
(0.00782)

(3)
All
!0.0225
(0.00931)

(4)
Whites
!0.0207
(0.00817)

(5)
Whites
!0.0258
(0.00965)

Some College
or More
(6)
All
!0.0123
(0.00614)

!0.0153
(0.00939)

0.00183
(0.00968)

!0.0139
(0.00990)

0.00283
(0.0100)

!0.00755
(0.00746)

African-American

!0.108
(0.00763)

!0.108
(0.00763)

!0.107
(0.00762)

!0.107
(0.00528)

Other race

!0.0962
(0.0182)

!0.0959
(0.0182)

!0.0929
(0.0183)

!0.104
(0.0140)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

60,714
0.0458

60,714
0.0458

60,714
0.0469

55,392
0.0437

55,392
0.0447

130,335
0.0434

State of birth dummies
Year of birth dummies
State specific linear trends
Number of observations
R2

Source: 1980 Census of Population, IPUMS, 1% sample (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).
Notes: Huber-White robust standard errors allowing for clustered errors by state/year-of-birth
cells are in parentheses. College graduates are those with sixteen or more years of completed
schooling; some college or more means thirteen or more years of completed schooling.
a

The non-restrictive birth control dummy variable equals 1 for individuals born in a state that ,by the time
the individual was 18 years old, had a non-restrictive law allowing minors (older than age 15) to receive
birth control services and devices without parental consent. See Table 3.
b

The legalized abortion dummy equals 1 if abortion was legal in the individual’s state of birth by the time
the individual was 18 years old. In five states (AK, CA, HI, NY, and WA) abortion was legally available
starting in 1970 (thus affecting cohorts born after 1951). In the other states, abortion was made legally
available after Roe v. Wade in 1973 (affecting cohorts born after 1955). On abortion laws see Levine,
Staiger, Kane, and Zimmerman (1996, table 1).

-47-

