NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN OUTPUT LOSSES FOLLOWING INTERNATIONAL
FINANCIAL CRISES BE AVOIDED?

Michael P. Dooley

Working Paper 7531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7531
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

I am grateful to Guillermo Calvo and Ben McCallum for helpful comments. This paper was
prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series, “Financial Crisis and the Role of the IMF,”
November 19-20, 1999. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Michael P. Dooley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Output Losses Following International Financial Crises be Avoided?
Michael P. Dooley
NBER Working Paper No. 7531
February 2000
JEL No. F15, F2, F34
ABSTRACT
Recent financial crises in emerging markets have been followed by temporary but substantial
losses in output. This paper explores the possibility that threats of such losses are the dominant
incentive for repayment of international debt. In this environment private debtors and creditors have
strong incentives to design international contracts so that renegotiation is costly. Such contracts
generate dead weight losses and proposals for reform of the international monetary system that
modify explicit and implicit contractual arrangements and can be welfare improving under special
circumstances. However, such proposals might also weaken the incentives that make private
international debt possible.

Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
Social Science I
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@cats.ucsc.edu
http://zzyx.ucsc.edu/Econ/facpics/dooley.html

The government of Ecuador recently set in motion the first default of a sovereign
government to an important class of external creditors which was explicitly sanctioned by
the International Monetary Fund. The creditors were holders of one of Ecuador’s issues
of Brady bonds. Within days cross default clauses were activated on other bonds and
Ecuador was embroiled in a general rescheduling exercise. On September 27, 1999 an
IMF press release stated that the Managing Director of the Fund “would be willing to
recommend to the Executive Board the approval of Ecuador’s request for financial
assistance under a stand-by arrangement once agreed policy measures have been
implemented and provided Ecuador is judged to be making good faith efforts to reach a
collaborative agreement with its creditors.” How did an institution that was widely
viewed as being a bill collector for the commercial banks after the 1982 debt crisis take
on a role that appears designed to weaken the bargaining position of bond holders in
1999? Is it possible to set out a framework in which the Fund’s offer to finance a
government during its negotiations with private creditors is a welfare improving reform
of the international monetary system?
The welfare costs of recent crises in developing countries have been very heavy
and the debate on how performance of the international monetary system might be
improved has been intense. Recent contributions by Giannini (1998), Meltzer (1998),
Eichengreen (1999), Feldstein (1999), Rogoff (1999), Chari and Kehoe (1999), Fischer
(1999), and Goldstein (1999) address the basic issues surrounding government
interventions in international capital markets. Bhattacharya and Miller (1999) provide an
excellent summary of the recent literature. Policy recommendations drawn from this

2

work range from the abolition of the IMF to the establishment of a super agency that
would oversee bankruptcy proceedings for debtor governments. The purpose of this
paper is to suggest that this body of work may have drawn too heavily from the
experience of lenders of last resort in domestic financial markets. In particular, the model
developed in this paper suggests that sanctioned default or an equivalent policy
innovation is a necessary ingredient for an efficient international financial system.
We discuss IMF policies but not IMF preferences or behavior. We are not
concerned with the beliefs or abilities of the Fund’s management and staff. In fact we
believe that experts from both ends of the political spectrum who focus on the Fund as a
flawed institution, or an institution staffed by flawed individuals, are wasting their time.
The Fund is a financial intermediary among governments. The important implication is
that in acquiring “deposits” and making “loans” (buying and selling currencies in
fundspeak) the Fund’s management and staff cannot stray far from the conditions
established in bilateral official credit arrangements. While the Fund has gone to
remarkable lengths to obscure the fact that it is an intermediary, including the adoption of
an impenetrable accounting framework, the fact is that it borrows from a well-defined set
of creditor countries and lends to a well-defined set of debtor countries. If the Fund
attempted to borrow or lend on terms different from those available in bilateral
arrangements either the creditor or the debtor government would bypass the multilateral
institution. As with any financial institution the threat of disintermediation is a powerful
constraint on Fund behavior. It follows that the Fund does not make policy.
The Fund is, of course, not completely powerless. There is presumably some
externality generated by governments’ policies that makes an organization like the Fund

3

viable. Governments will put up with some level of irritation from the Fund staff and
management. But experience shows that only very minor irritations are tolerated. If there
are incentive or agency problems in official lending intermediated by the Fund, it is not a
problem generated by the incentives faced by international bureaucrats but by national
governments.
Several related points follow from this assumption. First, the Fund’s balance
sheet is not a sensible aggregate for analysis. The Fund does not create money or credit.
Every dollar loaned to a debtor government is matched by a dollar increase in the net debt
of some creditor government. Since a well-defined set of creditor governments own the
Fund, their bilateral financial relationships with debtor governments must be merged with
the Fund’s positions to make sense of the incentives involved. This turns out to be
important because private creditors behavior depends in part on their expectations about
the present value of official credit triggered by financial crises.
Second, the Fund’s role in the international monetary system can be completely
summarized by its participation in government-to-government lending. The Fund does
not appear to be powerful because it provides a seal of approval for debtor countries. It
appears to be powerful because it reflects the economic power of government-togovernment financial relationships. Governments announce through the Fund the terms
on which they will lend to other governments. These announcements are important to
private lenders because official and private lenders compete for repayment.
In Dooley (1995) it is argued that the adversarial relationship between official and
private creditors is the central problem for the international monetary system. Moreover,
this framework is useful in understanding the prolonged bargaining between governments

4

and private creditors that followed the 1982-debt crisis. In this paper we develop the idea
that the rules of the game for competition for repayment between official and private
creditors determines the structure and volume of private lending.
The analysis suggests that this structure of private lending is distorted and
generates costly financial crises. Moreover, a credible change in the behavior of the
official creditors could have important implications for the behavior of private creditors
and for the performance of the international monetary system. Private creditors watch
what the Fund does very carefully, not for wisdom about the credit worthiness of
countries, but for clues about the terms on which official creditors will lend to debtor
governments.

2. The Fund and sanctioned default
IMF sanctioned default has evolved gradually as a policy supported by creditor
governments. Its roots can be found in the long debate about the role of the Fund and
official creditors following the 1982 debt crisis. Throughout the 1980s the Fund quietly
approved adjustment programs--and has supported those programs with loans--for
countries that were in default to private creditors. Like Ecuador these have been small
countries and their treatment is unlikely to indicate how the creditor governments will
confront a situation that involves countries large enough to constitute a systemic threat.
The “too large to fail” problem that has not yet been resolved in national economies has
also not been resolved in international markets.
Nevertheless, our analytical framework suggests that sanctioned default on a
“case by case basis” is an almost inevitable step for the Fund and creditor countries to

5

take given the constraints and incentives generated by the international monetary system.
The analysis developed below suggests that the imposition of rescheduling terms on
private creditors may prove necessary in order to limit the frequency and costs of
financial crises.
Sanctioned default may or may not be effective in inducing private creditors to
accept a writedown of their claims. Sanctioned default does change the bargaining game
between debtor countries and their private creditors, but the change is subtle and may or
may not significantly improve the performance of the system. In order to evaluate this
issue we need an explicit model of the bargaining structure involving private creditors,
debtor governments and governments of creditor countries and their agents, the
international organizations.

3. What is wrong with international capital markets?
The debate on reform of the international monetary system lacks focus because
participants are unwilling to take a stand on the nature of the distortion that generates a
role for government intervention. An exception is the argument that there are no inherent
distortions so the appropriate reform is to abolish the IMF. This is a serious argument. If
a distortion cannot be identified and its empirical relevance established, a good policy
would be to do nothing and at least do no harm. In this paper we propose a distortion and
offer some suggestions for evaluating its empirical importance.
Schemes to improve the architecture of the international monetary system have
borrowed heavily from the literature on central banks’ role as lenders of last resort to
domestic financial systems.1 We believe the analogy has been pushed too far. There are

6

important differences in the economics behind government’s intervention in domestic
financial markets and governments’ intervention in international capital markets.
The key difference is that the economic incentives that shape private financial
arrangements that are prone to crises are different in domestic and international markets.
Within countries, financial intermediaries provide maturity transformation and a
payments system that is welfare improving but can generate costly crises. The possibility
of runs on banks and other financial intermediaries generates a role for government
intervention. Some types of government intervention, in turn, create a moral hazard
problem.
Similar problems have undoubtedly played a role in recent crises in emerging
markets. But in this paper we focus on an alternative mechanism for crises. In our
framework the international financial system is prone to crises because the “threat of
crisis” is the only effective incentive for repayment by sovereign debtors. The structure
of private international claims on residents of developing countries is an endogenous
response to this incentive structure. The important distortion associated with
international capital flows is that contracts that are designed to be costly to renegotiate in
order to rule out strategic sovereign default are also costly to renegotiate when default is
unavoidable.
As with crises generated by runs there is a clear role for government intervention
to mitigate the costs of the crises generated by the structure of international credits.
Moreover, it seems quite unlikely that governments can credibly promise not to respond
to a crisis once it is under way. There is no serious disagreement about the general point
that government intervention in financial markets, even if well motivated, distorts private

7

behavior both within national financial markets and in the international markets. The
problem, however, is not to eliminate moral hazard but to find the best way to balance the
costs of moral hazard with the benefits of stabilizing financial systems that are inherently
prone to crises.
This balancing act can only be evaluated in the context of a model. Is sanctioned
default an important and credible response to the moral hazard? To answer this question
we must first address several basic and unresolved issues in the theory of sovereign debt.
The most important question is why do private creditors expect sovereigns to repay? In
any sensible model private creditors have to expect to earn a risk adjusted rate of return
on their loans to developing countries equivalent to that available in international capital
markets. Since loans to private residents in developing countries have frequently become
loans to the government, creditors must expect the debtor government to repay with some
probability.
For sovereign debt the lack of collateral (or the means to seize it) means that some
alternative threat is necessary to provide an incentive for repayment. The typical threats
that have been modeled involve trade sanctions or prohibition of future borrowing.
The trouble with these enforcement mechanisms is that the former has never been
observed and the latter seems very weak relative to the amount of debt observed. As
Rogoff (1999) emphasizes, these issues are largely unresolved and are central to an
evaluation of changes in the international monetary system.
In this paper we focus on the one incentive that has actually been observed in the
past twenty years, namely the protracted loss in output in debtor countries that has
followed default. We assume that this is the dominant incentive for repayment for debtor

8

governments and for side payments by creditor governments. The working hypothesis is
that the loss in output is “caused” by the inability of debtors and creditors to quickly
renegotiate contracts. This creates a time interval during which residents of the country
in default are unable to borrow from one another or from nonresidents. One explanation
for the breakdown in financial intermediation in the debtor country is the inability of new
credits to be credibly senior to existing credits (Dooley, 1995). Since existing credits sell
at a substantial discount their contractual yield is also very high. Few or no new debtors
will be willing and able to finance investment at these high rates. The breakdown in
financial intermediation, particularly in domestic banking markets that dominate financial
intermediation in developing countries, is the enforcement technology that makes
international capital flows possible.
We assume that creditors cannot condition the loss of output ex ante by the
reasons for nonpayment. This will determine the nature of the contracts necessary to
support international debt. A common perception is that international credit contracts
have evolved by historical accident to make renegotiation difficult. Our analysis suggests
the opposite interpretation. In the absence of some legal authority with the right to seize
assets, default on an international contract must trigger some alternative punishment
technology.
Existing models of sovereign debt keep contractual arrangements in the
background. In Bulow and Rogoff (1989), for example, default gives the creditor the
right to reduce the value of domestic output in the debtor country. Since neither party
benefits from actually imposing the penalty, and since both parties know exactly how the
other values alternative strategies, the two parties to the debt negotiation alternate in

9

making offers that they know the other side will immediately accept. In fact, it is
difficult to construct a two party game where there is any delay to a negotiation. An
exception is a war of attrition in which uncertainty about the opponent’s preferences can
stall agreement.
In this paper we consider the case in which creditors can commit not to
renegotiate by designing contracts that are very difficult to renegotiate.2 This is a
common feature of international contracts. Equal sharing clauses allow individual
creditors to recover payments to other creditor countries in the creditor countries’ courts
if one tries to settle outside a general agreement. Restructuring debt requires unanimous
or almost unanimous approval among creditors. Eichengreen and Portes (1995) and
Eichengreen (1999) argue that modifying contracts is the most promising route for reform
of the current system. Three general improvements are suggested. First, contracts could
set out collective representation so that it is clear ex ante how bargaining coalitions are
formed after default. Second, a qualified majority of each class of creditors should be
able to approve binding changes in the contracts. Third, contracts should set out how
payments would be shared among creditors. This approach has been endorsed by the G10 Deputies (1996) the G-22 (1998) and by Stanley Fischer (1999) but criticized strongly
by the private sector (Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 1999). The bargaining model set out
below suggests that the critics of these proposals are on solid ground.
4. A model of sovereign debt
We can explore these ideas in the context of a simple accounting framework.3
Assume a world that lasts for three periods. In the first period a foreign creditor lends the
government K to buy assets where K is a dollar amount. The risk-free interest rate is

10

assumed equal to zero. The government uses K to import an asset that in the second
period yields x with probability 2 and zero with probability 1-2. This outcome is
observed by the creditor but cannot be verified.4 For this reason the payment specified in
the financial contract is not conditioned by the outcome and default is generated by
nonpayment.
The asset lasts for one more period but depreciates uniformly during the period
and yields a certain return y if utilized for the entire third period. The government agrees
to pay z in the second period. If the government pays less than z, a negotiation is
triggered and the productivity of the asset is impaired until a new agreement is reached
for sharing the residual value of the asset y.
During the third period the asset is not productive if a negotiation for sharing y is
in progress. The value of the asset declines during the third period from y to zero. This
specification of the punishment technology is appealing because it means that the
creditors are only able to interfere with the debtor’s ability to utilize the assets for only as
long as the assets last. This seems consistent with the sharp but temporary declines in
output observed following recent crises. The alternative interpretation that the creditors
can punish the debtor forever and without regard to the seriousness of the offence is less
appealing. One might think of a subsistence economy lifted temporarily to a higher level
of output by an infusion of foreign capital, but once the capital depreciates the creditor
has no way to push output below the initial level. An alternative interpretation is that
over time debtors and new creditors find a way to subordinate existing creditors.
If the government can pay, which occurs with probability 2, it will consider a
strategic default. The temptation to keep z, the contractual payment in period two, is

11

time needed for renegotiation is determined ex ante by the nature of the contracts. As
soon as this time expires the debtor and creditor immediately agree on a share of
whatever remains of y that goes to each.
If we ignore the possibility of strategic default, the dead weight loss in output
observed following defaults would appear to be a needless consequence of the failure of
coordination among creditors. But as condition 1 clearly shows, the threat of a costly
negotiaon is necessary to support any level of positive international debt. Indeed the loss
benefits neither the creditor nor the debtor in the state nature where bad luck has made
the debtor unable to pay. We now turn to this state of the world.
If the government cannot pay all of its creditors, which happens with probability
(1-2), there is a similar negotiation. The problem is that the contracts have been designed
to impose a fixed cost before a meaningful negotiation can start. After taking all this into
account, the creditor must expect to make a fair (zero) rate of return
(2) 2 (z) + (1-2) cytb - K = 0
where cytb is the share of y that goes to the creditor following an unavoidable default.
Note that gy, cy, ts and tb are a complicated function of the structure of debt and
that ts will generally not be equal to tb but they are probably related. Thus, a country with
a very small chance of bad luck would choose a debt structure that generated costly
renegotiation following a strategic default. But that debt structure will also generate
costly renegotiations following an unavoidable default.
The problem for the government is to maximize its net revenue from investment
subject to the constraints set out in 1 and 2. The general form of the government’s net
revenue function is:

13

(3) 2 (x + y - z) + (1 - 2) gytb = R

Substituting (2) into (3), we arrive at:

(4) R = 2x + y - K - (1-2) ytb

The first three terms on the RHS of (4) are the first best expected return on the asset if
there is no default. The fourth term is the dead weight loss from the negotiation that
follows an unavoidable default. In the context of this model an effective reform of the
international monetary system is one that reduces this loss but at the same time supports
the same or a higher amount of debt.

5. Insurance
Suppose now that the debtor government allows private investors to borrow from
nonresidents with an implicit government guarantee. Payoffs for the debtor and creditor
are no longer directly associated with the productivity of the investment. The important
distortion is that the penalty for strategic default for the private debtor is her share of the
loss in output that is triggered by a strategic default. Suppose that the private investor
borrows from the foreign creditor and invests in a foreign asset. This is often called

14

capital flight and has been an important empirical regularity preceding recent crises in
Asia and elsewhere.5
In period 2 the investor has the ability to repay but considers default. The private
penalty is the debtor’s share of the decline in output generated by the contractual
arrangements. But if the government cannot tax offshore investments the private debtor’s
share in this loss can be close to zero.
Nevertheless, the threat of the dead weight loss remains important to the creditor.
Because the government guaranteed the credit, following a private strategic default, the
debt is now the debt of the government. In this case the threat is not to interfere with the
use of the investment but with the output of all residents of the debtor country. Recall
that our hypothesis is that the loss in output is caused by a breakdown of financial
intermediation within the debtor country. This impairs the usefulness of the entire
domestic capital stock, not just that small part financed by foreign borrowing. As in the
simple case developed above there is a powerful incentive for the debtor government to
avoid default if it can.
But what resources does the government have with which to make payments?
The standard answer is the present value of future tax receipts. But this could be a very
small share of the present value of future domestic output. This government has already
demonstrated that it cannot control expenditures in the form of losses on implicit
liabilities. In order to borrow from the market against future tax revenues the
government would somehow have to convince creditors that it would not have to use
future taxes for future bailouts. It follows that solvent countries can be represented by
insolvent governments.

15

In Dooley (2000) an empirical estimate of the resources available to credit
constrained governments is proposed. This consists of liquid assets such as foreign
exchange reserves and lines of credit from nonmarket sources such as creditor
governments and international organizations. In the model set out in that paper the
capital inflow/crisis sequence is initiated by a positive shock to the pool of resources that
makes insurance credible.
The moral hazard problem is not associated in any special way with lines of credit
from the IMF but as shown in Table 1, credits from international organizations and
creditor governments have been quantitatively important components of resources
available to bail out private creditors.
Most observers have questioned the plausibility of the view that bad luck could
have caused recent crises in Asia. There were some macroeconomic shocks such as
exchange rate overvaluations but they seem to have been quite mild. But in our
framework “bad luck” is not limited to macroeconomic shocks or policy errors. When
the insurance crisis occurs, the government exhausts its assets and then has no choice but
to default on any remaining liabilities. If everyone knew exactly who and what would be
insured the government would pay out just the right amount and there would be a crisis
but no need to renegotiate any contracts, in fact, no default and no loss in output.
But what are the chances that the attack will exactly exhaust the government's assets with
no default on individual contracts?
This seems to me remote because there are several opportunities for
miscalculation. The insurance pool might be smaller than expected, for example, the
central bank may have sold reserves forward and not accounted for this reduction in net

16

international reserves. The expected assistance from the IMF and other official creditors
may be smaller than expected or delivered too slowly. The liabilities may have been
larger than expected, for example, deposits at branches of Korean banks may have been a
surprising drain on the insurance pool. Finally, an attack on another country may have
reduced assistance available to the country in question, a situation that would account for
contagion in our framework.
An important implication of this argument is that we should see crises followed
by very different losses in output depending on the nature of the surprise. If the
government has more resources than investors thought there should be very little
renegotiation and a quick recovery. Relatively rapid recovery in Mexico and Korea
might reflect positive surprises while Indonesia might be an example of a negative
surprise. Careful empirical work will be needed to sort the evidence.

6. Bailing in the private sector.
We are (at last) prepared to evaluate sanctioned default in the context of a model
of international debt and crises. As a first cut, assume the sanctioned default is a surprise
to both debtors and creditors. This is a special case since we evaluate the effect on the
dead weight loss but do not return to the basic model and see how the level of debt is
affected. Even in this special case the effects of such a policy move will depend on a
number of assumptions. We define a sanctioned default as an agreement between the
Fund and the debtor government that provides official credit for some interval during
which the debtor government agrees to negotiate with private creditors and to implement
an adjustment program but not to service private debt.

17

One way to interpret such a policy in the context of our model is that the Fund
replaces private creditors for some interval delaying the breakdown in domestic financial
intermediation and the associated real costs. As Jeffery Sachs (1993) points out debtor
countries cannot “file for bankruptcy and obtain a standstill on debt servicing. Under a
standstill, creditors must refrain from trying to collect the debt, pending a collective
solution to the indebtedness problem. Moreover, the law provides for the enterprise to
borrow new working capital funds even after filing for bankruptcy, in order to ensure the
continued operation of the firm.” We are skeptical that a supranational legal authority
will ever be able to provide similar to countries. But sanctioned default might provide
similar protection.
If, as we assumed above, the ability of private creditors to impose real costs on
the debtor government erodes over time, even temporary assistance by official creditors
would mitigate the costs of default for the debtor country. If the private creditor's power
to punish does not erode over time private creditors can wait out the official sector and
the game is much less changed.
A complete analysis of the systemic effects of sanctioned default requires that we
return to the basic model. A very interesting question emerges. Can the Fund distinguish
between strategic and bad luck defaults? If they can, and if private creditors believe they
will do so, the same private contracts will continue to be an effective deterrent to strategic
defaults. In effect the Fund is eliminating the dead weight loss that follows a bad luck
default. Private creditors should be quite happy about this since by eliminating the dead
weight loss following an unavoidable default their expected returns rise.

18

A difficult question is raised by the possibility that private strategic behavior in
the form of capital flight creates a situation in which the debtor government has no choice
but to default. Cooper (1992) anticipated this issue in observing that one of the factors
that made creditor governments hesitate to intervene after the 1982 crisis was that capital
flight accounted for a large share of the debt of developing countries in Latin America. It
seems clear that the Fund would have to refrain from assisting debtor governments in this
situation even though the costs fall entirely on innocent bystanders.
Even if the Fund cannot distinguish between strategic and bad luck defaults the
sanctioned default might be a useful policy. By making sanctions against countries
following private strategic defaults ineffective, there will be no basis for loans subject to
such behavior. This does not mean that there will be no international capital flows but
only those private flows will require an alternative mechanism for creditors to monitor
what is done with their money. Direct investment is an obvious alternative mechanism.

7. Alternative interpretations and liquidity crises
In the above framework we assumed that conditions one and two always hold ex
ante and that creditors do not force a solvent debtor to default. A more complete model
would take into account the possibility that creditors might find it difficult to coordinate a
rollover. This would look like a solvent default in that, following a good outcome in
period 2, the debtor is unable to make the payment unless creditors agree to provide
additional credit. The case for official lending to avoid default and unnecessary losses in
output is in this case overwhelming. It is not surprising that advocates of an international
lender of last resort interpret crises in this context.

19

We cannot hope to review all the origins of financial crises that have been offered
in the literature, but it is crucial to distinguish the model developed above from the
alternative that has dominated recent discussions. The alternative analysis is based on
liquidity crises similar to those set out in the Dymond-Dybvig model of bank runs.6
The bank run model suggests that crises and losses are avoidable if private
creditors can be induced to behave in their collective interests. The model developed
above suggests that crises are the aspect of the current international monetary system that
makes international lending possible. Moreover, the costs of cleaning up after a crisis
will necessarily involve losses either for taxpayers (in either the creditor or debtor
countries) or creditors. The allocation of the loss is an important part of crisis
management.
The bank run analogy also suggests that changes in the rules of the game that alter
contracts ex ante, or impose coordination ex post, will help solve the problem. This
approach might be a useful way to interpret debt crises. But this idea may have led the
analysis in the wrong direction.
In contrast, if crises are the result of distorted private credit markets, the lack of
coordination among private creditors following a crisis is an endogenous response to the
incentive structure. There are good reasons for private creditors to structure their claims
so that they are very difficult to renegotiate. Coordination problems among private
creditors following the crisis, and the associated economic costs for the debtor and
creditor governments, is the feature of the system that makes the promise of repayment of
private debt credible in these distorted markets.

20

It follows that treating the symptom, the difficulty of renegotiating sovereign
debt, will not improve the performance of the international monetary system. Effective
reform will have to address the far more difficult task of altering the incentives faced by
private debtors and creditors.

8. The evidence
The two theoretical models are probably never encountered in their pure form. A
system prone to Diamond-Dybvig runs will have a lender of last resort or deposit
insurance. The existence of this government intervention generates moral hazard and
real economic losses quite independent of liquidity crises. Nevertheless, to make sense
of the tradeoffs involved it is useful for now to pretend that these are unrelated causes of
crises.
There is no question that recent banking and balance of payments crises have
generated huge losses in output in debtor countries and noticeable losses in output in
creditor countries. But it is unfortunate that close examination of recent crises does not
help much in distinguishing between these very different views of the origins of crises.
As Fischer (1999) makes clear, poor management of a liquidity crisis can generate losses
on credits that would have been repaid in the absence of a crisis. It follows that observed
losses are consistent with distorted credit markets or with poorly managed liquidity
crises.
An important objection to the idea that creditor moral hazard has been an
important ingredient in recent crises in emerging markets is the observation that
quantitatively important and easily identified subsets of creditors have suffered very

21

heavy losses. While the relevant class of unprotected creditor varies across countries, in
every case holders of equity claims on emerging markets have suffered very heavy losses.
These creditors it is argued could not have believed that they were protected by a lender
of last resort.
The facile answer to this objection is simply that not all investors have to be
protected by insurance in order for the behavior of investors who are most likely to be
protected to be distorted. But this begs the question of why investors who do not expect
to be insured participate at all in markets that are very likely to be led to a crisis by the
behavior of insured investors. Clearly, it is argued, the crisis was a surprise to the
investors that were not insured and therefore also very likely a surprise to those investors
that ex post benefited from governments’ intervention to mitigate the costs of the crisis.
As argued in Dooley (2000), a crisis is not the inevitable end game in a situation
where insurance is driving capital inflows to a developing country. An equity investor
that diversified her holdings across all the emerging markets might expect with certainty
that some would suffer crises and the associated losses for equity holders. But it may not
be possible to predict which individual countries would fail to come to grips with the
distorted capital flow and limit it either through regulation or taxation. This suggests that
a rational investor that expected a crisis with some probability less than one would be
willing to hold uninsured investments if the return was high enough to compensate for the
effects of crises.
If crises were expected, we should find very large differentials in returns for
insured and uninsured investments before crises. This pattern of returns is clearly evident
in the emerging markets during the capital inflow episode that started around 1990. Bank

22

deposits in emerging markets paid very small premia over similar deposits in industrial
countries. Emerging market bonds paid higher returns consistent with their place in line
for insurance. The extraordinary rates of return on emerging market equity leading up to
crises has been interpreted as evidence that the markets were gripped by irrational
enthusasiam. When the enthusiasm evaporated the bubble burst and the crisis resulted.
Our interpretation is just the opposite. The puzzle is not why equity prices reached such
high levels but why were they so low at the start of the capital inflow episode? Our
hypothesis is that equity values rose toward a level consistent with a successful
integration of emerging markets into the international financial system. But investors
expected some and perhaps even most of these transitions to fail. When price earnings
ratios returned to their historical levels large losses on the failures would be offset by the
extraordinary gains from the successful markets.
Dooley and Shin (1999) provides a detailed case study of Korea in order to
evaluate the plausibility of the view that moral hazard was the dominant cause of the
crisis. We conclude that the Korean balance of payments crisis was fully consistent with
the view that insurance motivated private investors and generated the crisis. The Korean
banks did not take open foreign exchange positions but did very rapidly expand their
lending activities into high-risk assets. The banks also considerably increased their
exposure to maturity mismatches but did not pay depositors a significant premium.
Moreover, depositors did not shun banks that were known to have very weak balance
sheets. The regulatory structure failed because it did not consolidate foreign branches of
Korean banks with the domestic balance sheet. Banks were willing to bet the bank
because the franchise value of the banks fell long before the crisis suggesting that these

23

institutions had little to lose by exploiting insurance. Deposit rate premia paid by Korean
banks were quite modest and did not increase as the crisis approached. Finally, the
bailout of foreign depositors in Korean banks was very nearly complete, suggesting that
both the banks and their depositors were rational in accepting a modest risk premium
before the crisis.

9. Conclusions
Financial arrangements that allow quick and efficient resolution of sovereign
defaults seem to be in every ones’ interest. If recent crises in emerging markets are
similar to bank runs, a redesign of the external liabilities of debtor countries could be an
effective reform. But if private international financial arrangements depend on the threat
of output losses, reform is much more difficult. The model developed in this paper
suggests that if the threat of loss in output is an important incentive for repayment,
redesign of private contracts might reduce international lending to zero. Moreover, while
it is possible that government to government lending following crises can be welfare
improving, the conditions under which this is the case are quite special. The model also
suggests that creditor governments could reduce the costs of bad luck defaults by
imposing a legally binding reduction in the present contractual value of private claims on
the sovereign. Jeffery Sachs has advocated this approach since shortly after the 1982
crisis and recently Chari and Kehoe (1999) provide a persuasive argument that this would
be an effective policy reform. But we are still a long way from a political consensus that
this is a viable alternative.

24

---------------, (2000) “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets.” Economic Journal,
forthcoming.
---------------, and Shin, “Private Inflows when Crises are Anticipated : A Case Study
of Korea. Mimeo 1999.
Eaton, Jonathan. 1990. Debt relief and the international enforcement of loan contracts.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (Winter): 43-56.
Eichengreen, Barry, (1999). Toward a New International Financial Architecture: A
Practical Post Asia Agenda, Washington DC, Institute for International Economics.
------------------------,and Richard Portes, (1995), Crisis? What crisis? Orderly Workouts
for Sovereign Debtors. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Feldstein, Martin. 1998. Refocusing the IMF: Foreign Affairs 77 (March/April): 20-33.
Fischer, Stanley. 1999. “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort”, Paper.
International Monetary Fund.
Folkerts-Landau, David and Peter Garber, (1999), “The New Financial Architecture: A
Threat to the Markets? Global Emerging Markets ,Deutsche Bank.
G-10 (1996), The Resolution of Sovereign Liquidity Crises, Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.
G-22 (1998), Report of the Working Group on International Financial Crises,
Washington D.C.: World Bank (October).
Gertler, M. and K. Rogoff, (1990). "North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic
Capital Market Inefficiencies," Journal of Monetary Economics, 26 (2), Oct., 245-266.
Giannini, Curzio, (1998), “Enemy of None but a Friend to All? An International
Perspective on the Lender of Last Resort Function,” IMF Staff Papers
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, (1998), “Foundations of Incomplete Contracts,” NBER
Working Paper # 6726.
Meltzer Allan, (1998) Whats Wrong with the IMF? What Would be Better?” In Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago Asia : An Analysis of Financial Crisis.
Miller, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, (1999) “Bankruptcy Protection against Macroeconomic
Shocks: The Case for a ‘Super Chapter 11’,” World Bank/IMF/WTO Conference on
Capital Flows, Financial Crises, and Policies, April.

26

Rogoff, Kenneth, (1999) “International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial
Instability,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13, (2) pp. 21-42.
Sachs, Jeffrey 1995. “Do we need an international lender of last resort?” Frank Graham
Lecture, Princeton University.
Schultz, George; Simon, William; and Wriston, Walter. 1998. Who needs the IMF? The
Wall Street Journal, February 3.
Schwartz, Anna J. 1998. Time to terminate the ESF and the IMF. Paper, New York
University;

1

See Goldstein (1999) for a review and evaluation of various proposals.
See Hart and Moore (1998) for a discussion of the importance of the ability to commit to not renegotiate
contracts.
3
The structure of this game borrows from a model of corporate finance developed by Bolton and
Scharfstein (1985). Bhattacharya and Miller (1999) develop an explicit model of bargaining between
official and private creditors but so not consider strategic default
4
See Bolton and Scharfstein (1996 ) for a discussion of this assumption in the context of a corporate
finance model.
5
See Dooley (1999) for estimates of capital flight from Asian emerging markets prior to recent crises.
6
See Chang and Velasco (1999).
2

27

Table 1: Capital Flows and Liquid Assets for Selected Emerging Markets

Period
China

1990-98:4

Brazil

1990-98:2

Argentina

Change in
Private
Liabilities to
Nonresidents1
202.8

Net Private
Capital
Inflows2

External
Debt 19893

Increase in
Official
Reserve
Assets4

Rescue
Package 5

60.5

44.9

131.2

n.a.

162.3

147.9

111.3

62.1

41.5

1990-98:2

126.1

69.4

64.7

23.3

n.a.

Korea

1990-97:2

120.2

66.1

33.1

15.4

52.8

Mexico

1990-94:1

114.4

95.7

95.6

19.6

47.0

Thailand

1990-96:2

68.7

86.3

23.5

29.3

17.2

Russia

1994-97:2

41.9

-30.5

79.0

5.3

23.0

Indonesia

1990-97:3

44.8

48.0

53.1

15.9

40.0

Malaysia

1990-97:3

42.2

40.7

18.6

17.7

n.a.

India

1990-98:4

37.3

60.3

62.5

23.5

n.a.

Turkey

1990-98:3

29.7

34.9

41.6

14.7

n.a.

Chile

1991-98:3

28.3

31.4

18.2

12.0

n.a.

Hungary

1991-98:4

28.0

23.1

20.6

8.0

n.a.

1

Source: IFS 78 b e d + 78 b g d + 78 b u d.
Source: IFS and IIF. 78 a ; d z f - 79 d b d z f.
3
Source: World Bank, Global Development Report.
4
Source: IFS, 1L.D2F.
5
Source: BIS, 69th , 70th Annual Report.
2

28

29

