NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL GAINS REALIZATIONS OF THE
RICH AND SOPHISTICATED

Alan J. Auerbach
Jonathan M. Siegel

Working Paper 7532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7532
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

This paper was presented at the AEA meetings, January 7-9, 2000. We are grateful to Larry Ozanne, Gerry
Auten, Len Burman, and Bill Randolph for helpful advice and comments. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Alan J. Auerbach and Jonathan M. Siegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Gains Realizations of the Rich and Sophisticated
Alan J. Auerbach and Jonathan M. Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 7532
February 2000
JEL No. H31, G11
ABSTRACT
This paper attempts to bring theoretical and empirical research on capital gains realization behavior
closer together by considering whether investors who appear to engage more in strategic tax avoidance
activity also respond differently to tax rates. We find that such investors exhibit significantly smaller
responses to permanent tax rate changes than other investors. Put another way, a larger part of their
response to capital gains tax rates reflects timing, consistent with their closer adherence to tax avoidance
strategies emphasizing arbitrage based on tax rate differentials. This finding holds for two alternative
specifications of realization behavior, one of which suggests larger permanent responses to capital gains tax
rates than those of previous panel studies.

Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Jonathan M. Siegel
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
siegel@econ.Berkeley.edu

The literature on capital gains realizations reflects an inadequate integration of theory and
empirical research. While theory has emphasized strategies to convert ordinary income into
capital gains, to minimize capital gains realizations, and to generate capital losses, empirical
research has utilized simple models to relate capital gains realizations to capital gains tax rates,
finding large responses that are difficult to interpret in light of theoretical predictions. One step
toward integration has been to distinguish long-run responses from the timing responses to shortterm tax rate variation, with estimates based on aggregate time series (Auerbach 1988) and panel
data (Leonard Burman and William Randolph 1994) identifying the latter as the primary source
of responsiveness. Still, we are far from understanding the determinants of capital gains
realizations. In our own study of a panel of taxpayers (Auerbach, Burman, and Siegel 2000), we
found that only a relatively small group – concentrated among the wealthy and “sophisticated”
(as described below) – appeared to be engaged in tax-avoidance strategies, evidenced by
generating net capital losses in a persistent manner. Here, we attempt to bring theory and
evidence closer together by considering whether these investors also respond differently to tax
rates. In particular, we find that they exhibit significantly smaller responses to permanent tax
rate changes than other investors. Put another way, a larger part of their response to capital gains
tax rates reflects timing, consistent with their closer adherence to tax avoidance strategies
emphasizing arbitrage based on tax rate differentials.
I. Empirical Model
Taxpayers do not decide to realize capital gains directly, but rather make decisions to sell
capital assets, each of which has embedded a taxable gain or deductible loss. While a more
direct modeling of this sale decision is desirable, this approach has not been generally feasible
with available data. In this paper, we follow the prior research by estimating a reduced-form

equation for net capital gains. We use the empirical model of Burman and Randolph (1994),
which specifies the semilog relationship:
(1)

E log G = X

0

+ γ 1τ p + γ 2 (τ t − τ p ) + γ 3 (τ t − τ t −1 )

where E is the expectation operator and G is a taxpayer’s net long-term capital gains at time t.
The vector X consists of non-tax variables, τp is the long-run (or “permanent”) marginal tax rate
on gains, and τt is the current marginal tax rate on capital gains. Equation 1 decomposes the
response of gain realizations to tax rates into three parts: a long-run relationship to the level of
rates and two transitory timing effects. The long-run marginal tax rate can be thought of as what
the taxpayer expects his marginal tax rate to be in a typical year, independent of transitory
circumstances. The deviation of the current tax rate from that long-run expected rate relates to
the tax cost of timing a realization in the current year versus waiting to sell in a later year. If
either of these two tax rates affects realizations, then prior tax rates will have influenced the
stock of unrealized gains available for current year realization, and thus merit inclusion.
The vector X includes several variables that may also affect realizations, including
current-year income and an estimate of permanent income, an imputed measure of taxpayer
wealth, measures that capture the composition of wealth, and the few demographic variables
available in our data – age, marital status, and family size. We also use annual dummy variables,
which remove changes in realizations that arise from capital market returns, economic
conditions, and tax law changes that are common to the sample. Thus, we measure responses to
tax rate changes only to the extent that these changes are not common across individuals.
Finally, we include dummy variables for four geographical regions as controls for possible
differences in economic conditions and portfolio characteristics.

2

To estimate the parameters of equation 1 with actual tax return data, we must allow for
the possibility that some taxpayers with accumulated gains find it optimal or necessary to realize
no gains at all in a given year (or to realize net losses, which are not taxed symmetrically to
gains). As all of the variables that affect the level of gains realizations, including tax rates,
potentially affect whether the taxpayer decides to sell any accumulated net gains, we model the
decision to realize net gains together with the decision of the level to realize as follows1:
(2)

(3)

R* = X

0

log G = X

+ α 1τ p + α 2τ t + α 3τ t −1 + ε 1
0

+ β1τ p + β 2τ t + β 3τ t −1 + ε 2

G=0

if R * > 0
otherwise

where R* is a latent index determining whether net gains are realized, ε1 and ε2 are normallydistributed error terms, and the tax rate terms have been algebraically rearranged from equation 1
to enter directly.
The expected long-run tax rate on gains, τp, is not directly observable. The choice of a
proxy for that expectation is the crucial assumption for decomposing the tax response of
realizations into its transitory and long-run components. In our first specification, we follow the
same method utilized by Burman and Randolph (1994). Their primary means of identifying
cross-sectional differences in long-run rates was to use the variation of income tax rates across
U.S. states, under the reasonable assumption that taxpayers generally expect to remain in their
current state of residence somewhat permanently. The expected long-run rate is fitted by the
regression of τt on the exogenous variables in the model and τst, the combined maximum federal
and state marginal tax rate on gains in the taxpayer’s state. Although not all taxpayers will
regularly be in the top state tax bracket, almost all state tax schedules reach their maximum rates
at modest taxable income levels, and the interstate variation in top rates summarizes most of the

3

overall variation in state rates. The tax system’s progressivity makes the marginal tax rate on the
last dollar of capital gains, τt, a function of current gains realizations as well as other endogenous
income and deduction items. This endogeneity of τt necessitates an instrumental variables
approach. We use as an instrument the “first-dollar” rate, τ0t, the rate that applies on the
taxpayer’s first dollar of net gains before accounting for current realizations or other
endogenously determined income and deduction items.
Our estimation follows a four-step procedure based on the methodology pioneered by
James Heckman (1976) and further developed by Lung-Fei Lee, G. S. Maddala, and R. P. Trost
(1980): i) fitted values for τp are estimated from a regression of τt on τst , X, and τt-1, while fitted
values for τt are estimated by regressing τt on τ0t, τst, X, and τt-1; ii) using the fitted values from
step i, the criterion function in equation 2 is estimated on the full sample by probit maximum
likelihood; iii) the fitted values for τp and τt are reestimated as in step i for the subsample of
taxpayers realizing gains, including the estimate of the inverse of the Mills ratio from step ii as
an additional regressor; iv) using the fitted values from step iii, equation 3 is estimated on the
subsample of realizers by ordinary least squares, using the inverse of the Mills ratio from step ii
as an additional regressor. Burman and Randolph (1994) showed that the tax parameters are
consistently estimated by this procedure, even though fitted values are substituted for τt and τp in
the criterion function as well as the level equation. Since the precise asymptotic variance of this
estimator is unknown, we estimate standard errors using bootstrap resampling methods.
II. Data
The data are from the Internal Revenue Service’s 1985-based Sales of Capital Assets
(SOCA) panel. Nearly 13,000 tax returns were sampled from 1985 IRS records, and followed
over the subsequent years until 1994. We pooled all observations with one-year lagged and one4

year future records available, leaving a sample of 81,283 from 1986 to 1993. In addition to
complete records of income and deduction items from Form 1040, the taxpayer’s year-of-birth
was merged from social security records. The data set includes detail from schedule D and other
forms on individual assets sold.2 The initial IRS sampling was stratified to over-represent highincome and wealthy taxpayers. Over 40 percent of the sample have imputed wealth above $1
million in 1982 dollars; close to 14 percent have wealth above $10 million. These individuals
may be quite different from the population at-large in their realization behavior. But they realize
a large fraction of the capital gains observed nationally, and are thus an important population to
understand when examining gains realization behavior.
This time period is particularly useful for identification of the long-run tax response,
which relies on interstate tax rate variations. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 increased federal
marginal tax rates on capital gains for most taxpayers by eliminating the partial excludability of
gains from taxable income. This also caused increases in the effective state tax rate on gains in
the many states that used federal definitions of income. Furthermore, several states increased
taxes in 1991, as they were experiencing diminished collections during recession. One result of
these changes was an increased variation in capital gains tax rates across states, particularly since
several states remained without income taxes at all through the period. Overall, the mean
sample-weighted top state tax rate on gains increased from 3.0 to 5.3 percent from 1986 to 1993,
and the standard deviation of those rates increased from 2.1 to 3.8.
Tax rates for each taxpayer in each year were calculated using a detailed federal tax
calculator built for use with this data set. As state tax rate calculators were not available, we
appended effective top marginal capital gains tax rates by state to all positive marginal federal
rates. The first-dollar tax rate instrument, τ0t, was computed with the calculator after first setting

5

to zero all potentially endogenous sources of income and deduction items.3 The maximal rate on
capital gains, τst, is the sum of federal and state rates on gains for a taxpayer with $5 million in
taxable income.
Current income is defined as positive income from exogenous sources. To measure
permanent income, we first regressed each taxpayer’s panel average of positive constant dollar
income4 (including capital gains) on the taxpayer’s 1985 level of income other than gains, share
of income from capital, and demographic characteristics. For each observation, we combined
lagged values of the same regressors with the estimated coefficients to fit a value for permanent
income. We imputed current year wealth by capitalizing capital income flows for the previous
year. The capitalized-dividends portion of wealth is also separately defined as stock wealth and
included in the estimations. This measure may underestimate the wealth of taxpayers with
business and rental property that generate schedule E losses but accumulate returns as capital
gains. For this reason, lagged schedule E losses are included in the estimations, with the
definition of these losses adjusted to include disallowed passive losses after 1986. All dollar
denominated variables, including net long-term capital gains, enter as logarithms of their
constant-dollar values.
III. Estimation Results – Primary Specification
Estimates of the criterion function in equation 2, and the level equation 3, are listed in the
first two columns of Table 1, with the coefficients of elements of the vector X suppressed to save
space. Note that since the current and lagged tax rates enter the equations directly, the estimated
coefficients must be transformed to obtain the parameters that define the types of tax response in
equation 1. In particular, the long-run response parameter γ1, equals the sum of the coefficients

6

on the long-run, current, and lagged tax rates. The combined transitory response, γ2 + γ3, equals
the coefficient on the current rate alone.
The coefficients on the current tax rate in both equations imply that taxpayers will be
much more likely to realize gains, and realize in higher amounts, when their tax rates are below
long-run and prior levels. The coefficient on the lagged tax rate is comparatively small in both
equations but still significant at the 95 percent level, and the positive sign indicates the expected
effect. The coefficients on the long-run rate are positive and almost as large in absolute value as
those on the current rate, indicating that most of the measured response is attributed to temporary
timing, rather than sensitivity to long-run levels. This finding is qualitatively similar to those of
two previous studies based on nearly the same methodology but different data: Burman and
Randolph (1994), who used a different IRS panel for 1980-83; and Cathleen Koch and
Christopher Giosa (1999), who used the same SOCA data as ours for 1986-89.
Long-run and transitory effects of tax rates on both the propensity to realize and the level
of gains can be summarized by the elasticity of expected capital gains with respect to the tax
rate.5 The estimated long-run elasticity is -0.34, with a standard error of 0.13. The precision of
this elasticity estimate is greater than for those in the aforementioned similar studies, in part a
benefit of a larger sample size and the sample period’s wider spread of state tax rates. We can
reject with a very high confidence level that the long-run elasticity is zero, but we also can
exclude values much above -0.5. The estimated transitory elasticity is a substantial -4.9. The
coefficient on the Mills ratio is positive and significantly different from zero. This suggests that
it is important to account for the sample selection in this model, and that the error terms in the
two equations are positively correlated.

7

IV. An Alternative Instrumental Variables Specification
A potential criticism of the approach taken above is that distinguishing permanent from
transitory components of tax response is accomplished by restricting the information set used to
predict long-run rates. In particular, the current first-dollar tax rate on gains, which is an
instrument for the current rate, is excluded as a predictor of the long-run rate. A taxpayer with a
current tax rate below our estimate of his expected long-run level may be there because of
temporary circumstances, but also may be there because we have overestimated his expected
long-run rate. In the latter case, the current first-dollar tax rate τ0t would provide information
about the long-run rate, and by excluding it the from the prediction equation of τp, we may be
labeling as “transitory” a response that is in part not. Another shortcoming is that the expected
long-run tax rate is fitted by an equation that predicts current, rather than future marginal tax
rates. This imposes the assumption that taxpayers are not aware of systematic changes that will
affect tax rates in the future. Aggregate evidence from 1986 would seem strongly to refute this
assumption, and indeed it may make sense to assume that all statutory changes are anticipated in
advance.
Working with panel data, we can respond to these criticisms. On the left side of the
regression used to estimate fitted values for the expected long-run rate, we replace the current
marginal rate, τt, with the one-year-ahead marginal rate, τt+1. This also allows us to include the
current first-dollar tax rate, τ0t, among the predictors of the long-run rate, since we no longer
have τt on the left side of both prediction equations in the first stage. We also add the one-yearahead maximum statutory rates (τst+1) to the taxpayer’s information set. This new specification is
an unrestricted instrumental variables estimator, where τt+1 and τt are each regressed on the all of
the exogenous variables in the model, as well as all of the excluded instruments: τ0t, τst, and τst+1.

8

This constitutes a major change in the way we are predicting the expected long-run rate, and
corresponds more closely to the time series specification adopted in Auerbach (1988).
Otherwise, estimation follows the same four-step process outlined above.
Estimates in this second specification look quite different from the first, and are presented
in the second set of columns of Table 1. The coefficients on the current tax rate remain negative,
and large in absolute value, but the coefficient on the long-run rate is much smaller than before.
This suggests that a larger part of the observed sensitivity to tax rates is, in fact, response to the
overall long-run level, and not just current deviation from that level.6 This conclusion is
apparent in the estimate of -1.73 for the long-run elasticity. The measured transitory elasticity is
somewhat lower than before, at -4.35.
The difference between these estimates and the prior ones highlight that the information
set assumed known in predicting the expected long-run rate is crucial for determining how much
of the tax rate response is assigned as long-run. Which approach is preferable, though, is not
clear. Using current variation in state tax rates to identify permanent tax rate variation may be
too restrictive, but tax rates from one year ahead may also not adequately capture long-run
conditions. Circumstances that lead to temporary changes in tax rates – such as business losses,
medical and charitable deductions, and capital losses – may often change rates for more than one
year, especially if various carryover provisions are used. We found similar results to these when
we used the average rate for the future two years in place of the next year’s rate, but that horizon
may also be subject to the same caveats. Given our uncertainty, we consider each specification
when examining the behavior of the population subgroups of interest here.

9

V. Examining Important Subgroups
The wealthiest taxpayers are likely to be the most savvy about strategies to avoid or
reduce tax liability, especially regarding capital gains. They also may be less subject to liquidity
constraints than other taxpayers, may face lower transaction costs for buying and selling assets,
and may plan to consume a different proportion of their assets during their lifetime. In sum, they
may behave quite differently from most others with regard to capital gains realizations.
The first panel of Table 2 presents mean elasticities from our two model specifications,
estimated for taxpayers with imputed wealth above $10 million. For both specifications, the
hypothesis that these taxpayers obey the same model as the non-wealthy is easily rejected at the
99 percent level. In the first specification, the overall responsiveness of realizations to current
tax rates is much greater for the wealthy, but this response is entirely transitory, with the longrun elasticity estimated close to zero. A hypothesis that wealthier taxpayers have a long-run
elasticity as negative as other taxpayers is rejected at the 90 percent level.7 For the alternative,
full IV specification, we also find that the wealthy group has a lower long-run response than
others, rejecting the same hypothesis at the 99 percent level.
An individual taxpayer’s ability strategically to avoid realizing capital gains may depend
on an ability to use short sales and other sophisticated hedges. Familiarity with such transactions
may also indicate a more general sophistication about the techniques of tax avoidance. The
SOCA data have coded the asset type of each gain or loss, including options, commodities,
futures, and short sales of stock. As shown in Auerbach, Burman, and Siegel (2000), the
identifiable group of people who engage in these transactions are much more likely to conform
to the theoretical predictions of models of tax avoidance.

10

The lower panel of Table 2 presents estimates of the model for these “sophisticated”
investors only. These are the taxpayers that report the sale of at least one option, commodity, or
futures contract, or engage in a short-sale transaction at any time during the panel years. This is
a much larger group than the wealthy taxpayers just examined, and includes almost 45 percent of
the observations in the sample. We find the sophisticated group to have a long-run elasticity
close to zero for the primary specification, and reject at 90 percent that their elasticity is as high
as other taxpayers. In the alternative specification, we also find the sophisticated investors to
have a long-run elasticity well below other taxpayers, and reject at 99 percent that they are as
responsive to long-run rates, although this response is still quite large at -0.97.
VI. Conclusions
We have not succeeded in identifying the “right” model of capital gains realizations.
Indeed, we have cast some doubt on the elasticities identified in previous work. However, we
have also shown that, regardless of the specification used, groups more likely to adhere to the
theoretical predictions of the tax avoidance literature – in particular, to generate net capital losses
and remain in such a state over time – also have a lower long-run response to tax rate changes,
exercising relatively more timing for those capital gains realized. This connection, we hope, is
the first step in a process that will bring greater integration of the theoretical and empirical
strands of the capital gains literature.

11

References
Auerbach, Alan J. “Capital Gains Taxation in the United States: Realizations, Revenue and
Rhetoric.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988, (2), pp. 595-631.
_____, Burman, Leonard E., and Siegel, Jonathan M. “Capital Gains Taxation and Tax
Avoidance: New Evidence from Panel Data,” in J. Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
2000, forthcoming.
Auten, Gerald and Joulfaian, David. “How Income Taxes Affect Capital Gains Realizations:
Evidence from a Long Panel” unpublished paper, July 1999.
Burman, Leonard E. and Randolph, William C. “Measuring Permanent Responses to Capital
Gains Tax Changes in Panel Data.” American Economic Review, September 1994, 84(4),
pp. 794-809.
Heckman, James J. “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models.”
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, Fall 1976, 5(4), pp. 475-92.
Koch, Cathleen, M., and Giosa, Christopher P. “The Response of Capital Gains Realizations
to the 1986 Tax Reform Act,” unpublished paper, April 1999.
Lee, Lung-Fei, Maddala, G.S., and Trost, R.P. “Asymptotic Covariance Matrices of TwoStage Probit and Two-Stage Tobit Methods for Simultaneous Equations Models with
Selectivity.” Econometrica, March 1980, 48(2), pp. 491-503.

12

Notes
1

More efficient estimates would result if we excluded certain regressors from either equation, but we are unable to

justify any such exclusion, either theoretically or econometrically.
2

Further detail on the characteristics of this data set can be found in Auerbach, Burman, and Siegel (2000).

3

Endogenous tax return variables include capital gains, losses, and loss carryovers, interest, dividends, schedule E

losses, ordinary gains and losses, and deductions for charitable contributions, investment interest, and state taxes.
4

The income concept used everywhere in this paper includes all the positive components of income reported on a

tax return, and is designed to be invariant to changes in tax law. It is similar to the IRS’s 1979 income concept,
except that, in an effort to more closely approximate economic income, negative components in income such as
capital losses and schedule E losses are excluded.
5

The long-run elasticity, from Burman and Randolph (1994), is τ pi [β 1 + β 2 + β 3 + (α 1 + α 2 + α 3 ) ⋅ λ (hi + σ 12 )] ,

where λ(x) is the inverse Mills ratio function, hi is the expected value of the criterion function (equation 2) for
individual i, and σ12 is the covariance of the error terms in the two equations (and is estimated by the coefficient on
the inverse Mills ratio in the last-step regression). The transitory elasticity has a similar form, with β1, β3, α1, and

α3 excluded. As each elasticity varies across individuals, the table reports the sample mean elasticities.
6

Gerald Auten and David Joulfaian (1999) report similar findings.

7

Taxpayers with wealth below $10 million have an estimated long-run elasticity of -0.451 and a transitory elasticity

of -4.933.

13

Table 1. Determinants of Net Long-Term Gains Realized
Panel Sample, 1986-1993
(1)
(2)
Identification of
Current tax rate, with
Future Tax Rate
Permanent Tax
Exclusion Restrictions
(Full IV)
Rate
(Burman-Randolph)
Mean Elasticities
Long-Run
-0.335
-1.725
(0.130)
(0.137)
Transitory
-4.907
-4.352
(0.270)
(0.730)
Criterion Fn.

Level Eqn.

Criterion Fn.

Level Eqn.

0.011
(0.005)
-0.020
(0.002)
0.008
(0.002)

0.189
(0.015)
-0.219
(0.012)
0.015
(0.007)
4.520
(0.380)

-0.003
(0.006)
-0.016
(0.006)
0.013
(0.001)

0.019
(0.031)
-0.188
(0.031)
0.094
(0.006)
6.825
(0.307)

No. observations
81283
41470
Bootstrap-estimated standard errors in parentheses.

81283

41470

Marginal Tax Rates
permanent
current
lagged
inverse mills ratio

Table 2. Mean Elasticities: Key Subsamples
Panel Sample, 1986-1993
Specification:
(1)
(2)
Wealth > $10 million
Long-Run
0.047
-1.171
(0.314)
(0.323)
Transitory
-11.315
-6.016
(4.429)
(2.323)
No. observations
10988 8609
10988 8609
“Sophisticated”
Long-Run
-0.071
-0.996
(0.152)
(0.253)
Transitory
-5.111
-5.235
(0.415)
(1.121)
No. observations
37913 26580
37913 26580
Bootstrap-estimated standard errors in parentheses.

