                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HAVE FALLING TARIFFS AND TRANSPORTATION COSTS
                          RAISED U.S. WAGE INEQUALITY?


                                         Jonathan E. Haskel
                                         Matthew J. Slaughter


                                         Working Paper 7539
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7539

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




For financial support we thank the U.K. Economic and Social Research Council for grants R000236653 and
R000222730 and we thank the Russell Sage Foundation. For research assistance we thank Ylva Heden; for
data help we thank Andrew Bernard and Robert Feenstra. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Jonathan E. Haskel and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Have Falling Tariffs and Transportation Costs Raised U.S. Wage Inequality?
Jonathan E. Haskel and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 7539
February 2000
JEL No. F16, J31

                                             ABSTRACT

    A number of studies have tried to gauge the effect of international trade on the rising U.S. skill
premium by examining whether product prices in unskill-intensive sectors have fallen relative to
prices in skill-intensive sectors. However, these studies do not estimate what share of domestic
product-price changes is due to trade barriers. This paper attempts to address this issue by analyzing
not the sector bias of price changes but rather the sector bias of price changes induced by changes
in U.S. tariffs and transportation costs. We find that in both the 1970s and 1980s, level cuts in tariffs
and transportation costs levels were concentrated in the unskill-intensive sectors. If pass-through of
trade barriers to product prices is uniform across all sectors, then this suggests falls in tariffs and
transportation costs were mandating a rise in the U.S. skill premium. But despite this suggestive
evidence, we estimate that the price changes induced by tariffs or transportation costs mandated a
rise in the skill premium that was mostly statistically insignificant. Thus, we do not find strong
evidence that falling tariffs and transport costs, working through price changes, mandated rises in
inequality.


Jonathan E. Haskel                                      Matthew J. Slaughter
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Queen Mary and Westfield College                        Dartmouth College
University of London                                    309 Rockefeller Hall
London E1 4NS ENGLAND                                   Hanover, NH 03755
and CEPR                                                and NBER
j.e.haskel@qmw.ac.uk                                    slaughter@dartmouth.edu
                                                                   1

1. Introduction

     A number of studies have tried to estimate the effect of international trade on the U.S. skill premium

by examining whether product prices in unskill-intensive sectors have fallen relative to prices in skill-

intensive sectors (see Slaughter, 1999 for a survey). These studies are based on the intuition of the

Stolper-Samuelson theorem, which links changes in a country’s domestic product prices to changes in

its factor prices (see Deardorff, 1994 for a survey). The thrust of the theorem is that the skill premium

tends to rise if price increases are concentrated in skill-intensive industries, i.e., if price increases are

“sector biased” towards skill-intensive sectors.

     A potential limitation of these “product price” (or “mandated wage”) studies is they do not estimate

what share of domestic-price changes is due to some exogenous aspect of international trade. Of

course, if the United States were a small open economy then any change in U.S. tradable prices would

be caused by changes in world trading conditions. Many price studies have implicitly or explicitly

assumed this. It is likely, however, that U.S. tradable prices depend both on trade-related forces and

on domestic forces (e.g., oligopolistic interaction). Hence the sector bias of price changes may convey

no information about the sector bias, and so wage effects, of trade-related forces.1

     This paper attempts to address this limitation by analyzing not the sector bias of price changes but

rather the sector bias of price changes induced by changes in U.S. tariffs and transportation costs. This

allows us to ask a more precisely focused question, “have changes in U.S. tariffs and transportation

costs changed the U.S. skill premium?” This is a narrower question than that of many existing product-

price studies, but by focusing on two plausibly exogenous aspects of international trade it is arguably

better-defined.2

     The details of the study are set out below, but briefly, our empirical work is based on the production

side of Heckscher-Ohlin theory for a single country.3 This model has motivated most existing product-

1
  Freeman (1995, p. 29), for example, writes: "Perhaps the biggest problem with these [product-price] studies is that they ignore
potential determinants of changes in sectoral prices.... Finding relative price declines in sectors that intensively use less-skilled
labor may be necessary to establish a trade effect that operates through prices, but it is not sufficient to establish a trade effect in
a world where many forces influence relative prices."
2
  As Deardorff and Hakura (1994, p. 81) have commented, “How does a reduction in trade barriers affect wages? This
interpretation [of the question ‘How does trade affect wages?’] is motivated most directly by the theorems of trade theory. Since
barriers may be plausibly taken as exogenous, barring political economy considerations, it is a sensible question.”
3
  The model assumes that an economy contains many industries of differing skill intensity and that intersectoral factor mobility
ensures zero abnormal profits. It is important to stress that we consider only the production side of only a single country. Thus
                                                               2

price studies, for it provides a method for measuring the factor-price effects of the sector bias of

product-price changes. However, no mandated-wage study has related these product prices to tariffs

and transportation costs. Following Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and Haskel and Slaughter (1999), we

first estimate the relationship between changes in U.S. domestic product prices and changes in tariffs,

transportation costs, and other underlying forces. This allows us to calculate the portion of product-

price changes due to changes in our trade barriers. We then estimate wage changes due to the sector

bias of these trade-barrier-induced product-price changes.4

    Our empirical analysis uses four-digit SIC data covering all of U.S. manufacturing from 1974

through 1988. We find that in both the 1970s and 1980s level cuts in tariffs and transportation costs

were concentrated in the unskill-intensive sectors. If pass-through of trade barriers to product prices is

uniform across all sectors, then this suggests changes in tariffs and transportation costs were mandating a

rise in the U.S. skill premium. But despite this suggestive evidence, the price changes induced by tariffs

or transportation costs mandated a rise in the skill premium that was mostly statistically insignificant.

Thus, we do not find strong evidence that falling tariffs and transport costs, working through price

changes, mandated rises in inequality.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we set out the mandated-wage

methodology. Section 3 describes our data, and section 4 sets out our results. Section 5 concludes,

with a discussion relating our results to existing product-price studies.

2. Sector Bias and the Mandated-Wage Methodology

    The production side of the HO model assumes an economy with sectors of different factor intensity

(at the same relative factor prices) and factors with complete mobility across sectors. Aggregate

demand for skilled workers relative to unskilled workers (henceforth, aggregate relative labour demand)

changes whenever factors flow across sectors. For example, if factors flow to a skill-intensive sector


our framework does not imply many results of HO trade theory such as factor price equalization (FPE) (Samuelson, 1948), i.e.,
that each factor receives the same wage world-wide. These results require additional cross-country assumptions such as identical
production technologies and sufficiently similar tastes. Our analysis neither imposes any assumptions on cross-country
technology similarity nor any assumptions on the consumption side.
4
  See Haskel and Slaughter (1999) for a similar analysis of tariff changes for the United Kingdom. Feenstra and Hanson (1999),
using U.S. data, regress the sum of price and TFP changes on computerization and outsourcing and then use the predicted values
to generate the effects of these two variables on relative wages working through technology and prices together. Also, Hanson
and Harrison (1999) regress price changes on tariff changes and import-license changes for Mexico, but they do not use these
estimates to estimate wage effects as in the mandated-wage studies.
                                                                        3

then aggregate relative labour demand rises. These factor flows are endogenously caused by changes in

intersectoral profitability, which in turn are caused by changes in product prices or technology. Hence

factor prices adjust to any shocks to aggregate relative labour demand to restore, if the economy is

competitive, zero profits in all sectors.

    This process can be formalized by supposing the economy produces I different tradable goods,

each of which requires some combination of J primary factors and I intermediate inputs. Assuming zero

profits in each sector i, we write


                        ∑a                 ∑b p                             i = 1... I
                  G                                        G
                pi =           ji   wj +          ii   i                                 (1)
                        j ∈J               i ∈I


where piG is the domestic gross-output price in sector i; wj is the unit cost of the jth input; aji is the

(endogenously determined) employment of input j per unit of output in sector i; and bii is the amount of

intermediate input i required to produce a unit of good i. There are I equations in (1), one for each

sector where production occurs. Note that with intersectoral factor mobility, wages wj in (1) are not

indexed by sector i. In the special case of a small open economy, piG is also the world price. Totally

differentiating (1) with respect to time gives


                ∆log pit + ∆log TFPit =                ∑V      jit   ∆log w jt           (2)
                                                       j∈J


where ∆logpit =[∆logpitG-ΣViit∆logpitG] is the change in value added prices, Vjit is the share of factor j

in total costs in sector i at time t; and ∆logTFPit is the growth in total factor productivity for sector i.

The final term in (2), ∆logwjt, is the wage change for factor j, which again is economy-wide since all

factors are mobile across sectors.

    Equation (2) shows how economy-wide factor prices (∆logwjt) adjust to changes in product prices

(∆logpit) or technology (∆logTFPit) to restore zero profits in all sectors. In (2), the wage effect of price

changes depends on their sector bias. Price increases in a sector tend to raise (reduce) the relative

wages of factors employed relatively intensively (unintensively) in that sector, where intensity is defined
                                                                              4

by Vijt. This sector-bias intuition linking product prices and wages is the essence of many versions of

the Stolper-Samuelson theorem (Deardorff, 1994).5

       Equation (2) is the foundation for the product-price studies described in the introduction (see

Baldwin and Cain, 1997 and Leamer, 1998 for a more detailed motivation). A regression of ∆logpit on

the factor shares Vijt yields estimates of economy-wide factor-price changes consistent with zero profits

in the face of changes in product prices. Almost all product-price studies have treated product prices as

exogenous. Following Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and Haskel and Slaughter (1999), we treat them as

endogenous. To implement this, we proceed in two stages. First we regress price changes on a set of

causal factors, Zpri, which are assumed to drive price changes over some period:

                ∆log pit =            ∑Z         pri, it δ pri, t + ε it                                 (3)
                                     pri ∈Spri


where εit is a random error. We try several different specifications of Zpri. Along with our key forces

of U.S. tariffs and transportation costs, we will also include in Zpri world output, exchange rates, capital-

labor ratios, and four-firm concentration ratios.
                                                                                               $ , on
       In the second stage we regress the contribution to ∆logpit of each underlying variable, δZ pri


cost shares

               δ$ pri Z pri , it =      ∑V         jit   γ jt , pri + εit ′                              (4)
                                         j∈J


The coefficients γjt,          pri     give the wage changes mandated by the sector bias of each structural force

working through ∆logpit. For example, including tariff changes in (3) determines the amount of product-

price variation accounted for by tariff changes. Having that amount be the regressand in (4) then

determines the wage changes mandated by the sector bias of tariff changes working through product

prices.

       Before proceeding to the estimates, there are four points worth noting. First, how do the structural

forces Zpri fit into our overall model? The logic of sector bias derives from three key assumptions: zero

abnormal profits, differing skill intensities across sectors, and factor mobility across sectors. Thus, the

question becomes whether our structural forces are inconsistent with these assumptions.


5
    For the sector-bias intuition linking technology changes to wages, see Findlay and Grubert (1959).
                                                         5

    Our trade-related variables, tariffs and transportation costs, are perfectly consistent with these

assumptions. The baseline HO model is often presented with trade barriers driving a wedge between

domestic and world prices. Thus tariffs and transportation costs are consistent with our model. The

world-output variable aims to capture some of the determinants of world prices.

    Our industry-concentration variables, capital-labor ratios and four-firm concentration ratios, try to

capture elements of imperfect competition. Whether this is consistent with the underlying model

depends on how imperfect competition operates. Helpman and Krugman (1985) extend the HO model

where one sector is monopolistically competitive with entry. This sector still earns zero profits, and

price changes still have Stolper-Samuelson wage adjustments (pp. 190-194).             Hence imperfect

competition can still be consistent with zero profits.

    What about imperfect competition with positive profits? If factor prices incorporate rents, this

violates the assumption that each factor earns the same price in all sectors. Hence estimates of

economy-wide factor-price changes from (4) might be uninformative about actual industry factor-price

changes if the latter are driven by changes in industry-specific rents. Concerning wages, a large

literature has documented interindustry wage differentials for workers with the same measurable skills

and has argued that rent sharing explains these differentials (e.g., Katz and Summers, 1989). But since

we analyze changes in economy-wide wages, what matters is whether changes in industry wages are

driven mainly by economy-wide changes common to all sectors or by changes in industry differentials.

To check this, we computed industry wage differentials as the deviation of industry wages from the

economy-wide average and then decomposed decade changes in industry wages into changes in

average wages and changes in differentials. Changes in differentials account for only about 15% of

industry wage changes. Thus, differentials clearly exist in levels, but changes in industry wages are

driven largely by changes in economy-wide wages, not in differentials. This is consistent with evidence

(e.g., Katz and Summers, 1989) that interindustry wage differentials are stable over time.

    A second issue is the nature of the link between trade barriers and product prices in (3) and (4). In

(3), the estimated coefficients δpri do not vary by industry: this assumes the same pass-through rate

from trade barriers to product prices across all industries. However, Feenstra (1989) models how

pass-through rates depend on industry structure, and finds the pass-through of tariff changes to U.S.
                                                              6

consumer prices varies across product groups. To allow pass-through rates to depend on market

structure we interact our trade barriers with market-structure variables.

      More generally, this issue of common pass-through highlights that our estimates of wage changes

mandated by trade-barrier-induced price changes depend crucially on our estimates of δpri. For each

trade barrier, our regressand in (4) is that barrier itself multiplied by its δpri coefficient. A poor estimate

of δpri means a poor estimate of wage changes mandated by trade barriers. For example, assuming no

Metlzer paradoxes, we expect pass-through to be positive (independent of whether it is common across

industries): increases in trade barriers should lead to increases in domestic product prices. But if (3) is

badly specified, e.g., due to omitted-variables bias, estimated δpri might be negative.

      It therefore seems informative to regress our raw trade-barrier changes on factor-cost shares:

             ∆TARIFFit =      ∑V        jit   γ ′jt + ε1,it                                     (5)
                              j ∈J


and
         ∆TRANSit =    ∑V     jit   γ ′′jt + ε2 ,it                                                   (6)
                       j ∈J


We interpret the coefficient estimates in (5) and (6) to describe the sector bias of changes in tariffs and

transportation costs, respectively. Assuming that these changes tend to be negative (i.e., that trade

barriers are generally falling), larger (smaller) coefficients on the skilled-labor cost share than on the

unskilled-labor cost share indicate trade-barrier cuts are concentrated in the unskill-intensive (skill-

intensive) sectors. For each trade barrier this provides qualitative information about the direction of

wage changes mandated by these cuts, meditated through product-price changes, if there is a single,

positive pass-through rate δpri for that barrier. Thus (5) and (6) provide a qualitative indication of wage

pressures mandated by trade-barrier changes under this assumption.

      A third issue is the role of factor supplies. In the model, national factor supplies are one of the

forces determining I, the equilibrium range of products produced. Changes in factor supplies can affect

wages if they change the range of producing sectors (and thus change which sectors enter (1) and (2)).

Even if the product mix does not change, changes in factor supplies are absorbed through changes in the

quantities of output, which in turn can affect wages if product prices change.
                                                      7

    Finally, for simplicity our framework has no nontraded sector. In fact, a nontraded sector can easily

be incorporated. With nontraded sectors, so long as the number of tradable goods at least equals the

number of primary factors, national wages are still determined by the zero-profit conditions of the

tradable sectors only. Importantly, in this case nontraded industries need not be included in the

empirical estimation. Nontraded product prices are endogenously determined by nontraded production

technology and by national wages. Technical progress in nontradables does not affect wages; instead, it

lowers nontraded prices.



3. Data, Specification, and Econometrics

    The analysis in equations (3) through (6) requires industry-year data on trade barriers, product

prices, and factor cost shares. Tariff data come from Magee (1998), transportation-cost data from

Feenstra (1996), and most other data from the NBER Productivity Data Base (1997). Our full data set

covers four-digit SIC (revision 1972) manufacturing industries 1974 through 1988, the first and last

years of our tariff data. We date the 1970s from 1974 through 1979 and the 1980s from 1979 through

1988. Like earlier mandated-wage studies, we choose several-year changes to be consistent with the

long-run nature of the HO framework. We choose 1979 as the break point between decades because

it marks the turning point in the U.S. skill premium for our data (and for other skill measures as well).

    Since trade barriers are central to our study, they bear particular discussion. For each industry-

year, tariff rates measure total tariff duties collected as a share of imports valued free on board (f.o.b.).

In a few cases, the Magee (1998) tariffs are not reported below the three-digit SIC level; accordingly,

these tariffs are set equal across the constituent four-digit industries. We interpret variation in these

tariffs as indicators of changes in statutory commercial policy.

    There are three potential problems with this interpretation. First, as is well known, our tariff

measure is biased downwards since imports subject to high or prohibitive tariffs receive little or no

weight. It is not clear how this would affect the variation of interest, namely, the sector bias of tariff-rate

variation. Second, changing composition of imported products within four-digit industries can alter our

tariff measure without any changes in statutory commercial policy. However, Irwin (1998) reports very

high correlations between tariff measures like ours and fixed-weight measures. Finally, if tariffs are
                                                                  8

specific rather than ad valorem then our tariff measure can change with import-price changes without

any changes in statutory commercial policy.6 Crucini (1994) and Irwin (1998) demonstrate this issue

mattered greatly for U.S. tariffs in the century before 1970. But Irwin (1998) reports that specific tariffs

accounted for only 34 percent of the lines in U.S. tariff code in 1973 and that the Tokyo Round of the

GATT, concluded in 1979, converted many U.S. specific tariffs to ad valorem tariffs. In addition,

Lawrence and Slaughter (1993) and Baldwin and Cain (1997) report no clear sector bias to U.S.

import-price changes in the 1980s. Overall, despite these potential difficulties we interpret our tariff

measure to be informative about statutory commercial policy.7

     Parallel to the tariff measures, transportation costs are calculated as the difference between imports

valued cost, insurance, freight and imports valued f.o.b., all as a share of imports valued f.o.b.. Thus,

our transportation costs capture the actual cost of shipping and insuring goods. Like our tariffs, these

transportation costs face potential problems of downward bias and aggregation. We do not regard

these problems as prohibitive, as these costs are highly correlated with bilateral trade flows (Hummels,

1999).

     Most of our other data come from the NBER Productivity Data Base, an industry-year panel based

on U.S. Censuses of Production and Annual Surveys of Manufacturing. These data report prices and

quantities of output, non-production labor, production labor, capital, and intermediate inputs (for details

see Bartelsman and Gray, 1996). ∆logTFPit is calculated using data on both labour types, capital, and

intermediate inputs. We calculated ∆logpit, changes in value-added prices, as defined earlier. Because

we analyze long changes, cost shares in gross output, Vjit, are averages between the first and last years

of each decade. We assumed that capital payments equal the value of gross output less the total wage

bill and input costs; we do not have good enough data to define capital’s payments independently. To

construct labor cost shares we use manufacturing-wide (i.e., not industry-specific) wages.

     Following many other studies using this data set, we classify non-production workers as more-

skilled and production workers as less-skilled. Our measure of U.S. wage inequality is the non-

6
  When the tariff is specific ($t per item), then our tariff measure is (t×q)/(p×q) where p is the price of the imported good and q its
quantity. The tariff measure then changes with changes in t or in p.
7
  Ideally we would also analyze nontariff barriers, but we do not know of any broad enough source of data. Harrison (1994) and
Pritchett (1996) document disturbingly low empirical correlations among various trade-policy measures. For theoretical analysis
of appropriate trade-policy measures see Anderson and Neary (1996, 1999).
                                                                9

production/ production wage premium in U.S. manufacturing.8 In the 1970s nominal non-production

wages rose by 46.4% and production wages by 48.2%, implying a 1.8% fall in the skill premium. In the

1980s the respective wage increases were 67.2% and 60.5%, a 6.7% increase in inequality. If trade-

barrier cuts helped drive these changes, theory predicts the cuts to be concentrated in skill-intensive

sectors in the 1970s and unskill-intensive sectors in the 1980s.

     We report results for five specifications of the stage-one equation (3), each of which uses a different

set of structural forces based on different assumptions about price-setting in the U.S. economy. These

regressions do not explicitly follow from any structural model, so they should be regarded as reduced-

form specifications. By estimating several specifications we hope to obtain consistent evidence on the

key magnitudes of interest.

     The first specification follows the textbook HO model of a small open economy with perfect

competition whereby U.S. product prices are world prices plus any wedge introduced by trade barriers

such as U.S. tariffs or transportation costs. Making use of the panel nature of the data by pooling both

decades, this suggests the following regression


    ∆ log pit = δ1 ∆TARit + δ 2 ∆TCit + µkt + λt + εit                                                                    (3a)


where ∆TARit is the change in tariffs; ∆TCit is the change in transportation costs; λt is a time dummy for

the 1970s, µkt are three-digit industry dummies, allowed to vary in each of the two decade cross-

sections; and εit is an error term (which we allow to be heteroskedastic). We do not have data on four-

digit changes in world product prices, so the µkt proxy for these changes by allowing price variation both

across industries and over time (in each decade, world-price changes are assumed constant across all

four-digit industries within each three-digit industry).

     Our second specification modifies (3a) by adding in some further controls for world supply and

demand. This gives




8
 This occupational measure is the only skills measure available in these data (a) over a long time period (b) with congruent trade
and technology indicators, and (c) at a disaggregated level. On average, non-production workers are more educated than
production workers (see Berman et al, 1994), so these occupation data do distinguish skill groups at least to some extent.
                                                    10
     ∆ log pit = δ1 ∆TARit + δ 2 ∆TCit + δ 3 ∆EXRATEit + δ4 ∆WORLDVAgt + δ5 ∆TFPit
                                                                                                                            (3b)
                                                                             + µkt + λt + εit

∆logTFPit proxies world technological change: the United States performs a sizable share of total

world R&D (Keller, 1999), and the recent pattern of U.S. skill-biased technological change has been

broadly matched in many other countries (Berman, et al, 1998). EXRATEit is a multilateral real

exchange rate where country weights are based on bilateral U.S. exports.9 WORLDVAgt is industry

world output.10

      Our third specification still assumes perfect competition but allows the United States to be large, i.e.,

allows U.S. supply and demand to affect world prices. This suggests that we interact each industry’s

barriers with a measure of how large the U.S. is in that industry worldwide.

      ∆ log pit = δ1 ∆TARit + δ11 ( ∆TARit × USOUTSHgt ) + δ 2 ∆TCit + δ 21 ( ∆TCit × USOUTSHgt )
                                                                                                                              (3c)
                            + δ 3 ∆EXRATEit + δ4 ∆WORLDVAgt + δ5 ∆TFPit + µkt + λt + εit


Here, USOUTSHRgt is the share of U.S. output in total industry output, which is then interacted with

∆TARit and ∆TCit. The extent of trade-barrier pass-through to an industry’s domestic price may

depend on how large the U.S. economy is in that industry worldwide: e.g., larger industries might have

less-than-complete pass-through thanks to their ability to lower world prices.

      Next, following the evidence in Feenstra (1989) we consider whether trade-barrier pass-through

depends on market structure. First, we measure market structure using initial-year capital-labor ratios,

denoted (K/L)it, as higher capital intensity may inhibit entry (Bain, 1948)

      ∆ log pit = δ1 ∆TARit + δ11 ( ∆TARit × ( K / L) it ) + δ 2 ∆TCit + δ 21 ( ∆TCit × ( K / L) it )
                                                                                                                              (3d)
                        + δ 3 ∆EXRATEit + δ4 ∆WORLDVAgt + δ5 ∆TFPit + µkt + λt + εit


where (K/L)it is in levels for each decade’s initial year and is interacted with ∆TARit and ∆TCit.

Equation (3d) captures the idea that less-competitive industries with higher values of (K/L)it may show




9
  We thank Andrew Bernard for these data. We obtained virtually identical results using an import-weighted exchange rate.
10
  Note the subscript g indicates this variable is more aggregated than four-digit SIC industries: it varies only by three-digit ISIC
industries, roughly 28 total in manufacturing (United Nations, 1996).
                                                            11

less pass-through from barrier cuts to domestic prices. As an alternative measure of concentration we

try the industry four-firm concentration ratio,11 CONCit, again interacted with ∆TARit and ∆TCit, giving

              ∆ log pit = δ1 ∆TARit + δ11 ( ∆TARit × CONCit ) + δ2 ∆TCit + δ21 ( ∆TCit × CONCit )
                                                                                                                       (3e)
                                + δ 3 ∆EXRATEit + δ4 ∆WORLDVAgt + δ5 ∆TFPit + µkt + λt + εit

     Equations (3a) through (3e) are all first-stage regressions. Each first-stage regression leads to two
second-stage regressions (4), one using the fitted values of tariff changes as the regressand and the other
using the fitted values of transportation-cost changes as the regressand. For example, from (7a) we can

compute δ$ 1∆TARit . Following (4), we then regress this on the factor shares for skilled labor, unskilled

labor and capital: δ$ 1∆TARit = γ sVsit + γ uVuit + γ k Vkit + ε it . The coefficients γs, γu and γk give the

economy-wide changes in skilled, unskilled, and capital prices needed to restore zero profits in the face
of the tariff-induced price changes. In specifications (3c) through (3e), the second-stage regressand

includes the interacted term, e.g., for tariffs in (3c) it is δ$ 1 ∆TAR + δ$ 11 ( ∆TAR × USOUTSH gt ) . We

estimate all second-stage regressions separately for each decade.
     Before reporting the results, the following points are worth noting. First, it might argued that that
prices and trade barriers are jointly determined; in particular, that price declines trigger protectionist
calls for tariff increases. This predicts a negative correlation between tariffs and prices which is the
opposite of the positive effect of barriers on prices. Hence, endogeneity will bias downwards the
tariffs-to-prices causal link.
     Second, our first-stage regressions do not contain measures of either U.S. nontariff barriers or
world product prices. We know of no broad data on these other trade-related forces (see note 7). To
some extent, our three-digit industry dummies control for them. If changes in nontariff barriers are
positively correlated with ∆TARit and ∆TCit, then the estimated effects of ∆TARit and ∆TCit overstate
the exact contributions of tariffs but pick up the contribution of “total” trade barriers. For world price
changes, to the extent they are not picked up by the industry dummies the coefficients on ∆TARit and
∆TCit are biased if the deviation of world four-digit prices from their three-digit mean is correlated with
∆TARit and ∆TCit.



11 These concentration ratios come from various Censuses of Manufacturers. To measure starting-year concentrations as closely
as possible, for the 1970s we use the average in 1972 and 1977 and for the 1980s the average in 1977 and 1982.
                                                12
     Third, a number of recent papers have considered the theoretical effect of skill-biased technical
change on product prices. In the HO model product prices can be affected by any type of technical
change, and since ∆TFPit measures both factor-biased and neutral technical change (Berndt and
Wood, 1982) we enter this in (3) rather only skill-biased technical change.
     Fourth, in (3) through (6) we weight observations by industry employment averaged over the
decade; output-weighted or unweighted results were very similar. In (3) we tested all coefficients to see
if they varied over the two cross-sections, but none did so significantly. Finally, in (4) the regressands
are generated using estimated coefficients from (3); we correct our standard errors following Feenstra
and Hanson (1999).12 See the Data Appendix for more data description.

4. Results

4a. Changes in Trade Barriers and Their Sector Bias

     Table 1 sets out employment-weighted summary statistics for the levels of trade barriers in 1974,

1979 and 1988. In 1974 tariff rates averaged 7.82% and transport costs 6.72%; by 1988 these

averages were down to 4.07% and 4.97%. Over both decades average barriers fell steadily, as did

their standard deviation in all cases but one. Since there are a number of sectors with large rates, the

medians are below the means.13

     Table 2 presents employment-weighted changes in tariffs and transportation costs. The top four

rows show level changes. Consistent with Table 1, barrier levels were falling in both decades—more so

in the 1980s. The middle four rows show percentage changes.14 These look dramatically different from

the level changes. Row 5 for the 1970s shows a mean percentage increase in tariff rates of 262.01%

yet a median percentage fall of 7.1%. The difference is accounted for by petroleum refining, which had

12
   We wish to obtain the “true” standard errors in a regression of the actual part of ∆lnpit accounted for by each structural force
(∆TAR for example) on the Vs. The first stage regression returns the estimated part of ∆lnpit accounted for by each structural
force, δ$ ∆TAR for tariffs for example. Hence the variance/covariance matrix of the errors from the second stage regression of
        1      it


δ$ 1 ∆TAR it on the Vs are a combination of errors from the true regression and those from the first stage regression. Feenstra and
Hanson (1999) therefore propose recovering the true error variance from the estimated variance/co-variance matrix of errors from
the regression of δ$ ∆TAR on the Vs less (a transformation of) the estimated variance/co-variance matrix of errors from the first-
                    1     it


stage regression use to calculate δ$ 1 ∆TAR it . This problem is that this subtraction can render the true variance as negative and
hence we may be unable to calculate the “true” standard errors.
13
   Note there are a small number of industries which had no trade-barrier data in Magee (1998) and Feenstra (1996). We omit
these industries from our subsequent analysis.
14
   Percentage changes were calculated as level changes divided by the initial level. In some years transport costs and tariffs are
zero. If initial-year rates were zero we set the change to be +200. If rates were zero in both years we set the change to be 0.
                                                                13

a percentage tariff increase of 36,962.62%, thanks to an increase in its tariff rate from 0.0004 in 1974

to 0.1439 in 1979. This case of a massive percentage increase generated by a modest level increase

from a near-zero base-year level explains the other extreme values in Rows 5 through 8. To dampen

these extreme rises, in Rows 9 through 12 we report “arc” proportional changes, defined as the

difference in the levels divided by the average of the levels. These proportional changes bound the

“birth” of a barrier at +200% and the “death” at 200%.15 Consistent with the level changes at the top

of Table 2, the mean and median arc changes are uniformly negative and also are larger in the 1980s.

     Table 2 raises the question of whether level or proportional changes in trade barriers are

economically meaningful. An argument in favor of level changes is the following. Suppose initial tariff

rates were 100% in the unskill-intensive sectors but only 0.1% in the skill-intensive sectors. Now

suppose tariffs were eliminated. Would these tariff cuts have any sector bias? In level terms, yes: the

deeper tariff cuts would be in the unskill-intensive sectors. But in proportionate terms, no: all sectors

would experience a 100% tariff decline. It seems reasonable to suppose this trade liberalization would

tend to lower the price of unskill-intensive products relative to skill-intensive products (and thus

mandate a rise in wage inequality). In light of this reasoning our analysis will focus on level changes in

trade barriers; for completeness, we will also report the key findings from percentage changes as well.

We note that the related study of Hanson and Harrison (1999) also analyzes level changes in trade

barriers.

     We are not aware that the sector bias of either initial levels of or changes in U.S. tariffs and

transportation costs has been documented. For our initial year, 1974, Figure 1 plots the level of

industry trade barriers on industry skill intensity measured as the skilled/unskilled unemployment ratio.

The clear message of Figure 1 is that U.S. tariffs and transportation costs were initially highest in the

unskill-intensive sectors, particularly sectors in textiles (SIC 22), apparel (23), and footwear (31) for

tariffs.16 Along with Table 2 that showed barriers were, on average, falling in the 1970s and 1980s,

Figure 1 suggests the largest level cuts were in the unskill-intensive sectors.

15
     The arc proportional change is {(ratet+1-ratet )/[(0.5)(ratet+1+ratet )]}*100. A death (ratet+1=0) is -200% and a birth
(ratet =0) is 200%. If both rates were zero we set the arc change to be 0. These arc changes are similar to measures of job creation
and destruction used in Davis, et al (1998).
16
   To examine the sector bias of barrier levels more formally we also regressed the levels of tariffs and transport costs on the cost
shares for 1974, 1979 and 1988. In every case tariffs and transport costs were significantly concentrated in unskilled-intensive
                                                                  14

     Figure 2 and Table 3 show this to be the case. Figure 2 plots 1970s and 1980s level barrier

changes against initial-year skilled/unskilled employment ratios, along with lines of best fit for an

employment-weighted regression of level changes on employment ratios. In both decades falls in both

tariffs and transport costs were concentrated in the unskill-intensive sectors, with the linear relation

significantly positive at 10% or better.17 Table 3 reports results for equations (5) and (6), which regress

level barrier changes on factor cost shares. In all four specifications we find the coefficient on Vs is

significantly larger than that on Vu: level cuts in barriers were concentrated in the unskill-intensive

sectors.18

     In sum, these findings suggest that recent declines in U.S. trade barriers were concentrated in the

unskill-intensive sectors. This sector bias would tend to mandate a rise in the U.S. skill premium,

meditated through product-price changes, if there were a single, positive pass-through rate from these

barriers to prices. This would have worked against the actual decline in the U.S. skill premium during

the 1970s but with the actual rise in the 1980s. To examine the mandated wage changes more

systematically, we now present our results for equations (3) and (4).

4b. Two-Stage Analysis of Changes in Trade Barriers and the Skill Premium

     Table 4 sets out our estimates of (3a)-(3e). We estimate these by forming a panel of observations

for the two cross-sections, 1974-79 and 1979-88. Each equation includes a time dummy and three-

digit industry dummies, with observations weighted by average industry employment. The error term is

estimated robustly to account for repeated industry observations.

     Column 1 shows estimates of (3a), the specification with just ∆TARit and ∆TCit. Both are correctly

signed with ∆TARit significant at the 14% level. In column 2 we estimate (3b), adding ∆EXRATEit,

∆WORLDVAgt and ∆lnTFPit. This leaves the coefficients on ∆TARit and ∆TCit unaffected but the

precision of ∆TCit is raised (now significant at the 18% level). Column 3 estimates (3c), interacting

sectors (1974 tariff coefficient on skilled cost share –29.32 (t=4.30), unskilled cost share 57.56 (9.18), transport cost –29.48
(5.04) and 5.98 (1.48); 1979 tariff –23.61 (3.69), 50.25 (9.01), transport costs –22.58 (3.64), 6.46 (1.49); 1988 tariffs –23.36
(4.23), 38.89 (8.16) and transport costs –16.11 (3.55), 1.48 (0.38)).
17
   In Figure 2a the estimated coefficient is 0.650, robust t-statistic of 2.586; in Figure 2b the estimated coefficient is 0.450, robust
t-statistic of 1.676; in Figure 2c the estimated coefficient is 0.886, robust t-statistic of 3.304; and in Figure 2d the estimated
coefficient is 0.826, robust t-statistic of 2.276.
18
   Using percentage changes in (5) and (6) we find weak evidence that percentage cuts in barriers were concentrated in the unskill-
intensive sectors: in all four cases Vs is larger than Vu, but not significantly so. The evidence on arc changes is broadly similar,
although arc cuts in 1980s tariffs are insignificantly concentrated in the skill-intensive sectors.
                                                     15

∆TARit and ∆TCit with the share of US industry output in world industry output (USOUTSHit). Both

the interacted terms are insignificant (the P-value for the joint significance of the interacted terms is

reported in the table), and collinearity with the ∆TARit and ∆TCit terms seems to have rendered them

insignificant, too. In column 4 we use the log capital/labor ratio as the interacted variable, but these are

again jointly insignificant. Finally, column 5 uses the four-firm concentration ratio and obtains similarly

insignificant results.

    What do we learn from Table 4? At best, tariffs and transport costs have a borderline significant

effect on prices. In no specification do these barriers have a significant effect at standard levels. This

parallels Hanson and Harrison (1999), who find no robust correlation between trade barriers and

domestic prices in Mexico. But to estimate wage changes mandated by barriers working through

prices, we need to estimate the second-stage equation (4).

    Tables 5 and 6 report estimates of (4). Table 5 uses tariff changes as the regressand and Table 6

transportation-cost changes, and both tables report ten different estimates: five different regressands

based on five different first-stage regressions of equation (3) from Table 4, each estimated separately on

the 1970s and 1980s. To read these tables, consider the top left column in Table 5. It says that in the

1970s tariff cuts, working through product prices as estimated by the specification in column (1) of

Table 4, mandated a 3.2% rise in the nominal skilled wage and a 4.0% fall in the unskilled wage. This

implies a mandated rise in the skill premium of 7.2 percentage points, which was insignificantly different

from zero (t=1.45) at standard significance levels. All other columns are read in the same manner.

    There are two important messages to Tables 5 and 6. First, the mandated changes in nominal

wages are all much smaller than actual changes. As mentioned earlier, nominal unskilled wages rose by

48.2% and 60.5% over the 1970s and 1980s, and skilled wages by 46.4% and 67.2%. The mandated

wage changes in Tables 5 and 6 are much smaller, particularly for transportation costs. Changes in

barriers account for very little of the actual change in wage levels.

    Second, in both decades and across all specifications, both tariffs and transportation costs

mandated rises in the U.S. skill premium through their effect on product prices—but in all but two cases

these mandated rises are insignificantly different from zero at the 10% significance level. In both

decades tariffs mandated an inequality rise of about two to seven percentage points and transportation
                                                                 16

costs a rise of a bit under one percentage point. This contrasts with an actual fall in the skill premium of

1.8 percentage points in the 1970s followed by a rise of 6.7 percentage points in the 1980s. Thus the

1970s estimates suggests that falling barriers were working against actual wage changes, and that other

forces more than dominated this effect. The 1980s estimates suggests that falling barriers were

contributing to rising inequality, but again, these estimates are mostly insignificantly different from zero.

     We tested the robustness of the results in Tables 3 through 6 in a number of ways. We used

proportionate changes in trade barriers rather than level changes; we dropped “outlier” industries (e.g.,

computers and office products); we used output weights rather than employment weights; and in (4) we

used initial-period cost shares rather than decade averages.19 All checks yielded the same qualitative

finding: mostly insignificant mandated changes in the U.S. skill premium.



5. Conclusion

     Most studies measuring Stolper-Samuelson effects of trade on the U.S. skill premium by looking at

changes in product prices have not estimated what share of price variation is due to some exogenous

aspect of international trade. In this paper we have tried to estimate the Stolper-Samuelson effects of

changes in U.S. tariffs and transport costs building on the mandated-wage framework of earlier

product-price studies.

     First, we documented that during both the 1970s and 1980s declines in these barriers were

concentrated in unskill-intensive sectors. This provides qualitative evidence that changes in tariffs and

transportation costs were mandating a rise in the U.S. skill premium if pass-through of trade barriers to

product prices is uniform across all sectors. Second, we quantified these mandated wage changes by

estimating (a) how much barrier cuts have affected prices and (b) how much this induced effect on

prices has changed relative wages. Here we find that the rise in the skill premium mandated by price

changes induced by tariffs or transportation costs was mostly statistically insignificant. Thus, there is not

strong evidence that falling tariffs and transportation costs mandated rises in inequality working through

price changes.

19
  Wage changes will presumably affect factor shares over each decade, and thus our calculations of average cost shares. What is
crucial in our framework, however, is the cross-section variation in industry factor shares. Their cross-section variation is, in fact,
extremely stable over decades, so any induced cross-section variation from changes in wages seems extremely small.
                                                     17

    Our results broadly match earlier price studies of the 1980s which found no strong evidence that

product-price increases were skill-sector biased: Lawrence and Slaughter (1993), Baldwin and Cain

(1997), and Leamer (1998). Our approach differs from these studies in that we try to estimate what

share of price variation is due to trade barriers. But our conclusion of no strong trade effects matches

theirs. In our analysis, even though we document deeper trade-barrier cuts in the unskill-intensive

sectors, these cuts may simply not have been large enough to greatly affect prices. Alternatively, as

Hanson and Harrison (1999) discuss, four-digit industry prices may be too aggregated to reveal price

pressures from trade-barrier cuts.

    Our results suggest a number of possible avenues for future work. First, it would be desirable to

obtain more data on non-tariff barriers and other impediments to trade. Second, the overall contribution

of trade to wage inequality depends also on the sector bias of any induced effect of trade barriers on

technical change. This may be worth examining.

    Finally, our evidence that trade-barrier levels are highest in unskill-intensive sectors suggests there

may be scope for future trade liberalizations to pressure U.S. unskilled wages. Figure 3 visualizes this:

it plots the sector bias of hypothetical tariff cuts that in 1988, our last year of data, would have

eliminated all U.S. tariffs. Free-trade tariff cuts would have been deeper in the unskill-intensive

industries (the line of best fit for an employment-weighted regression of level changes on skill intensity is

significantly positive at the 1% level). This evidence is only suggestive, but future research may want to

explore this.
                                                     18
                                            Data Appendix


Industry Tariffs

These data come from Magee (1998). For each four-digit SIC industry in each year, Magee calculated
the tariff rate as total duties collected as a share of the total customs value of imports. The original
duties and imports data come from Feenstra (1996) according to the import-SIC industry classification
and were concorded to the 1972 revision of the domestic SIC. All nominal values were converted to
1982 dollars using the economy-wide CPI for all consumers. These data start in 1974 because data on
duties collected is not readily available for earlier years. Both the tariff data and full documentation for
these          data       are         available        at       the        following         web        site:
ftp://ftp.ssds.ucdavis.edu/pub/Econ/Feenstra/UStariff/.


Transportation Costs

These data come from data files in Feenstra (1996) which report for each four-digit SIC industry in
each year imports (in millions of dollars) in terms of both c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight) values and
customs value. For each observation we constructed transportation costs as (imports c.i.f. value -
imports customs value) as a share of the customs value of imports. By construction, these costs should
be some value above zero. For the few observations reporting a c.i.f. valuation smaller than the
customs valuation, we set transportation costs equal to zero.


World Value Added

These data come from United Nations (1996). For each industry-year in these data, we calculated the
U.S. share of total world value added. These data were available only at the three-digit ISIC level; we
mapped them into the four-digit 1972 SIC codes.


Other Industry-Level Data

All other industry-level data used in constructing factor-cost shares, price changes, etc., come from the
Manufacturing Productivity Data Base of the NBER (1997). These data are available on line at
http://www.nber.org. For a detailed description see Bartelsman and Gray (1997).
                                                19
                                          References

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary, "A New Approach to Evaluating Trade Policy," Review of
Economic Studies, January 1996, 107-125.

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary, "The Mercantilist Index of Trade Policy," NBER Working
Paper #6870, January 1999.

Bain, Joe S., Barriers To New Competition: Their Character and Consequences in Manufacturing
Industries, 1948.

Baldwin, Robert E. and Glen G. Cain, "Shifts in U.S. Relative Wages: The Role of Trade, Technology,
and Factor Endowments," NBER Working Paper #5934, February 1997.

Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray, “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database,” NBER
Technical Working Paper #205, October 1996.

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Stephen Machin. 1998. "Implications of Skill-Biased Technological
Change: International Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics November, 1245-1280.

Berndt, Ernst R. and David O. Wood, "The Specification and Measurement of Technical Change in
U.S. Manufacturing," in Advances in the Economics of Energy and Resources, Volume 4, JAI Press,
1982, pp. 199-221.

Crucini, Mario J., “Sources of Variation in Real Tariff Rates: The United States, 1900-1940,”
American Economic Review 84, June 1994, pp. 732-743.

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction, 1998.

Deardorff, Alan and Dalia Hakura “Trade and Wages: What Are the Questions?”, in Jagdish Bhagwati
and Marvin Kosters (eds) Trade and Wages: Leveling Wages Down?, Washington, D.C.: American
Enterprise Institute, 1994, pp. 36-75.

Feenstra, Robert C., "Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates Under Imperfect
Competition: An Empirical Test," Journal of International Economics, 1989, 25-45.

Feenstra, Robert C., "U.S. Imports: Data and Concordances," NBER Working Paper #5515 plus data
CD-ROM (data also available on-line at http://www.nber.org), March 1996.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, "Productivity Measurement and the Impact of Trade and
Technology on Wages: Estimates For the U.S., 1972-1990," NBER Working Paper #6052, revised in
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1999, pp. 907-940.

Findlay, Ronald and Harry Grubert, "Factor Intensities, Technological Progress, and the Terms of
Trade," Oxford Economic Papers, 1959, Volume 11, pp. 111-121.
                                                20

Freeman, Richard B., "Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer
1995, pp. 15-32.

Hanson, Gordon H., and Ann Harrison, “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequali
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52, 1999, pp. 271-288.

Harrison, Ann, "Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing
Countries," Journal of Development Economics, 1996, 419-447.

Haskel, Jonathan E., and Matthew J. Slaughter, "Trade, Technology, and U.K. Wage Inequality,"
NBER Working Paper #6978, revised version December 1999.

Hummels, David, "Transportation Costs and International Integration in Recent History," mimeograph,
February 1999.

Irwin, Douglas A., "Changes in U.S. Tariffs: The Role of Import Prices and Commercial Policies,"
American Economic Review, September 1998, pp. 1015-1026.

Keller, Wolfgang, “How Trade Patterns and Technology Flows Affect Productivity Growth,” NBER
Working Paper #6990, March 1999.

Lawrence, Robert Z., and Matthew J. Slaughter, "International Trade and American Wages in the
1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?" in Martin Neil Baily and Clifford Winston (eds)
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 2, 1993, pp. 161-211.

Leamer, Edward E., "In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Linkages Between International Trade and
Lower Wages" in Susan M. Collins (ed), Imports, Exports, and the American Worker, Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1998, pp. 141-202.

Magee, Chris, "U.S. Tariffs at the SIC Level, 1974-1988," on-line data set downloadable from
ftp://ftp.ssds.ucdavis.edu/pub/Econ/Feenstra/UStariff/, 1998.

National Bureau of Economic Research, Manufacturing Productivity Data Base, 1997.

Pritchett, Lant, "Measuring Outward Orientation:     Can It Be Done?", Journal of Development
Economics, May 1996.

Slaughter, Matthew J., "What Are the Results of Product-Price Studies and What Can We Learn From
Their Differences?" in Robert C. Feenstra (ed), International Trade and Wages, National Bureau of
Economic Research Conference Volume, forthcoming 1999.

United Nations, UNIDO Database, 1996.
                                                                                                            21
                                                       Figure 1a: U.S. Tariff Rates in 1974
          40
                                   22


                         22 22

                     2322    2123
                        232323
                            22
                           23223
                               3
          30                23
                                   32
                             22 2222
                         2323
                              23 23
                        23      23
                          22                      20
                                3922 32
                                                  20
                         23         23
                              30
          20              2323          23
                                        2222
                        31 32
                          2323
                            39
                           23        34       39
                                        31
                               22
                                          383939                                         38
                                             39
                        223124 3232           38
                        23 23 22 23 2323
                                  23
                              39 32 22                          38    28
                      2122 22          3222
                                          323636 36 28
                                                    22 36                 32
                      222020 20 2022
                      22
                                        39
                                        31 22
                                                      35
                                                          39                                     28
                          3139        32    28     20                    28
                                   23323921
                                      36       39         22                             20 20
          10                           35
                                       24  26
                                          32         36
                          31              36               3436                        34
                                    3623
                                      27  343434
                                               36   363538
                                                         36 38 34
                                                               262036 24 38 28 38    38      2828                          38
                                24333333
                                      2624
                                         34
                                          303524
                                              34
                                              3033 34 38 35
                        24 32 2633      20
                                       36    39
                                              3636      3534 3538 3534 28 35 28                                       27
                       23 32  313136202632
                                        262626
                                       3636  26
                                            36
                                            34
                                              34  33
                                                  27
                                                  36
                                                    35
                                                    39
                                                   34
                                                    3426
                                                     26
                                                      34
                                                       36
                                                      39
                                                      36
                                                      34   35    39 36 35   34
                                                                            35     36         38
                       2436252425
                            24   25 34
                                  2535
                                    2435
                                       25  37
                                        2539
                                        3625  32
                                             25
                                            3625
                                               2533   3636
                                                  36 35   34
                                                          2534
                                                         25    36          3535 35                                                                    20
                            31   34
                                 37
                                  31  35  3333
                                            34
                                            33        35 3935    27 3535 35 35
                                                                 3535
                          243123 36    20
                                        3733   27 27 3535
                                                  363020 34 28
                                                     20       20363535
                                                                    36           3520 35 35
                                                                                          37 35                   36                           37
                            20 34     26
                                      29
                                       34 20
                                         33   32 30   20                        35                     28          28 35
                                223328   3333
                                         32
                                      3633
                                             20343220 28
                                                 2035            20       28          28
                                                                                            37
                                                                                               28
                         20
                          20
                          20 32    2022
                                     322432
                                          20
                                          32    3727 342028 37
                                                20
                          22      27 33
                                      34
                                       33
                                      372720 20
                                          24   37
                                               37 20 282020 20
                                                                                    36
                                                                                   28             20                                 37   27
                                 34   37
                                       37
                                        353733
                                  32 34 26 33 32       33       20               2828                                                                      20
                     24 2424       26 20  26
                                         3228352035
                                          26
                                          30
                                          33        282920 29
                                                             33
                                                              28
                                                             32           2829
                                                                             20                         29       28             27
           0

                 0                                                .5                                                  1                         1.5             2
                                                                                                   Industry Skill Intensity


                              Figure 1b: U.S. Transportation-Cost Rates in 1974
                                                            20
                                        29
          30                                                                                                                                          20   20




                                         32
                              32 32




                            39

          20                       34
                                       3232 20                    20
                              24 32                    20
                                                           28
                                      28
                         2424
                           22 24 24 24                        34          24
                                   32                                                   20
                      24             20
                                       26
                                       36
                                  2332 273230
                                 21
                                 20                       20 32
                         203120         2432 32
                                       32
                           2439 22          28
                                               342034
                                              39     3434 34            34
                     2322   32 32
                         2320                      3639      2028                2828
                           20  3125
                                  32     3125
                                           3236 36
                                                25 36
          10              22 2526
                            2322
                           23
                                  25
                                   25242525
                                    2034 26
                                              25
                                               25    282625253620           32
                                                                            28
                                            26
                        24
                         22
                         23 23
                           31 223
                             2422
                               23
                              24     203731
                                3 2323     30
                                           32
                                            22 30
                                              3937               20
                               39 32
                              22   33333334
                                      32
                                      33   32343433 34 39                                     35
                        23 22 39   2326       20 20  28       28                            20         28
                           31 3133  23 243922 273035
                                        36                                 2828
                                                                                            28
                         2331 3327  22
                                     2220 32
                                         2220
                                            22
                                           21
                                           3333 3933
                                                   322020
                                                       36 2926               29                          29       28
                                                                                                                   27
                         2323
                          20      37
                               23 2323  34
                                       2627
                                          33
                                         26  26
                                            2626   27
                                                 2035 26   28       35                                                                    27
                           2323
                                     34
                                         23
                                        32 33
                                           36
                                           20
                                          33
                                           203320
                                             33
                                            37  34     20 2035 36 3535 20
                                                    2020                                       2820
                          22
                          24
                             23 34 2223
                                     2223
                                      22 3634
                                        39
                                             34
                                             36 36 35                    35 3535 28
                       22 36        2622 37 28
                                             392737272234
                                                       35
                                                      36          3535
                                                                  27 35 2820 35
                        23 2031       34
                                       35
                                       35
                               2231 3326 382636
                                             35        29
                                               35 3535 22
                                               36        35    20
                                                                3436
                                                                   20        35      28 35     28
                       21 23
                       22                                   353535
                                                                 38 35
                                                                     35
                                     2337
                                        33
                                         2024 39
                                           38   37 35  3538343828               35
                                                                                 3536                            28
                         31 3436       34
                                       36
                                        37
                                         3537 39363335  333434 38 28 38 2835 38         38
                                                                                    38 35                               38
                                     3636        36 36 35
                                                        3636           35             34                          36 35
                                             343333363638
                                                       20 36 3636 36         34
                                     35363633 3234
                                                       32 33 39 36
                                                       39                         36
                                           39           33 39          37                373738                                      37        37
                         22 30  22 35    20 30             34                        28         28                              27
           0

                 0                                                .5                                                  1                         1.5             2
                                                                                                   Industry Skill Intensity


Notes: In each figure each observation is a four-digit SIC industry; for brevity, we report only the two-digit SIC code for each
industry. Industry skill intensity is the relative employment of nonproduction to production workers. Tariff rates are duties
collected as a share of the customs value of imports; transportation costs are (imports c.i.f. value - imports customs value) as a
share of the customs value of imports. For readability we omitted two low-tariff skill-intensive industries: SIC 2721 (skill
intensity of 4.52) and SIC 2731 (skill intensity of 2.86). Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), and the NBER (1997).
                                                                                                                                  22
                                                                  Figure 2: The Sector Bias of Tariff and Transportation-Cost Level Changes
                                                                  Figure 2a: 1970s Level Changes in Tariff Rates                                                            Figure 2b: 1970s Level Changes in Transportation Costs

                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                      Change in Industry Trans Cost
Change in Industry Tariff Rate




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                              0


                                                                                                                                                                       0


                                 -10

                                                                                                                                                                       -5




                                 -20                                                                                                                                  -10
                                                                  0              .5              1                 1.5            2                                         0              .5              1                1.5      2
                                                                                       Industry Skill Intensity                                                                                  Industry Skill Intensity
                                                                  Figure 2c: 1980s Level Changes in Tariff Rates                                                            Figure 2d: 1980s Level Changes in Transportation Costs

                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                      Change in Industry Trans Cost
Change in Industry Tariff Rate




                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                 -10                                                                                                                                  -10




                                 -20                                                                                                                                  -20
                                                                  0              .5              1                 1.5            2                                         0              .5              1                1.5      2
                                                                                       Industry Skill Intensity                                                                                  Industry Skill Intensity




                                                                          Figure 3: The Sector Bias of Free-Trade Tariff Cuts from 1988 Levels
                                                                      0




                                                                  -10
                                 Change in Industry Tariff Rate




                                                                  -20




                                                                  -30




                                                                  -40


                                                                          0               .5               1                1.5                                                  2
                                                                                                 Industry Skill Intensity


    Notes: In each figure each observation is a four-digit SIC industry; circle sizes indicate industry average employment over the
    relevant decade. Each figure also contains the regression line of barrier changes on industry skill intensity, weighted by average
    employment, where industry skill intensity is the relative employment of nonproduction to production workers. In every panel
    the line is significantly positive at at least the 10% level (see text). Tariff rates are duties collected as a share of the customs value
    of imports; transportation costs are (imports c.i.f. value - imports customs value) as a share of the customs value of imports. For
    readability we omitted two skill-intensive industries: SIC 2721 (skill intensity of 4.52) and SIC 2731 (skill intensity of 2.86).
    Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), and the NBER (1997).
                                                                     23
             Table 1: Summary Statistics, Levels of Tariffs and Transportation Costs
               Variable                  Observations           Mean            Median         Std. Dev.         Minimum          Maximum

        Tariff Rates, 1974                     433               7.82             5.82             7.55             0.00            37.69
        Tariff Rates, 1979                     435               6.80             5.24             6.69             0.00            34.64
        Tariff Rates, 1988                     435               4.07             3.01             4.92             0.00            42.12

 Transport-Cost Rates, 1974                    433               6.72             6.51             4.72             0.00            31.53
 Transport-Cost Rates, 1979                    435               6.24             5.42             4.48             0.00            31.28
 Transport-Cost Rates, 1988                    435               4.97             4.30             5.68             0.00            139.53
Notes: These are employment-weighted summary statistics. Tariff rates are duties collected as a share of the customs value of imports;
transportation costs are (imports c.i.f. value - imports customs value) as a share of the customs value of imports.
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), and the NBER (1997).




            Table 2: Summary Statistics, Changes in Tariffs and Transportation Costs
               Variable                   Observations           Mean            Median         Std. Dev.        Minimum          Maximum

 Level Tariff Changes, 1970s                    433              -0.77            -0.37            1.72            -17.02             7.47
 Level Tariff Changes, 1980s                    434              -2.40            -2.07            2.58            -16.47            20.41

   Level T-C Changes, 1970s                     433              -0.34            -0.26            2.30            -30.53            10.57
   Level T-C Changes, 1980s                     434              -1.15            -0.89            4.75            -14.73           121.68

Percent Tariff Changes, 1970s                   433             262.01            -7.12         3,094.47           -98.47         36,961.62
Percent Tariff Changes, 1980s                   434             -10.51           -36.62           461.62          -100.00         12,477.99

 Percent T-C Changes, 1970s                     433             65.99             -3.19           464.56          -100.00          3,265.88
 Percent T-C Changes, 1980s                     434             433.93           -18.10          3887.57          -100.00         40,483.53

   Arc Tariff Changes, 1970s                    433              -8.25            -7.38            36.82          -194.00           200.00
   Arc Tariff Changes, 1980s                    434             -50.13           -44.84            61.29          -200.00           200.00

    Arc T-C Changes, 1970s                      433              -5.81            -3.23            57.56          -200.00           200.00
    Arc T-C Changes, 1980s                      434             -12.55           -19.90            57.52          -200.00           200.00
Notes: These are employment-weighted summary statistics. Underlying all these changes, the tariff rates are duties collected as a share of
the customs value of imports; transportation costs are (imports c.i.f. value - imports customs value) as a share of the customs value of
imports. Level changes for each decade are constructed as the barrier's level at the end of the decade minus its level at the start of the
decade. Percent changes for each decade are constructed as level changes divided by the initial-period level for that barrier. Arc changes for
each decade are constructed as are arc-elasticities: these are level changes divided by the average level for that barrier over the decade.
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), and the NBER (1997).
                                                                24




                                          Table 3
             The Sector Bias of Tariff and Transportation-Cost Level Changes:
                                 Estimates of (5) and (6)
                         (Dependent Variable: ∆TAR it and ∆TCit)


                                                          1974-1979                                1979-1988
                                       ∆ Tariffs         ∆ Tran Costs           ∆ Tariffs          ∆ Tran Costs
                       Vs                5.305                8.662               0.439                 6.113
                                        (2.957)              (3.201)             (0.103)              (1.634)

                       Vu               -6.622                0.087              -11.963               -5.284
                                        (5.175)              (0.065)             (5.473)              (2.085)

                       Vk               -2.723                -5.031              -1.532                1.511
                                        (1.732)              (1.977)             (0.856)              (0.502)

                   (Vs -Vu)              28.21                 8.07                5.12                 4.98
                                          0.00                 0.00                0.02                 0.03

                  R-Squared              0.126                0.036               0.155                 0.016
                Observations              433                  433                 435                   435




Notes: Cell entries are parameter estimates (and t-statistics for robust standard errors) for estimates of equations (5) and (6). The
final row in each column reports the F-test for whether the coefficients are equal on the skilled and unskilled cost shares. For
brevity the constant term is omitted. All regressions reported here are employment-weighted regressions; cost shares for each
factor are constructed as that factor's share of industry shipments (using manufacturing-wide wages to construct these shares).
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), and the NBER (1997).
                                                               25




                                           Table 4
                     Stage-One Price Regressions: Estimates of (3a) to (3e)
                                 (Dependent Variable: ∆lnpit)

                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
                ∆TARit                                0.006      0.003       -0.003       -0.001      0.002
                                                      (1.47)     (1.43)      (0.27)       (0.24)      (0.48)
                ∆TCit                                 0.000      0.001       0.000        0.005       0.001
                                                      (0.17)     (1.36)      (0.01)       (2.28)      (0.21)
                ∆WORLDVAgt                                       0.016       0.019        0.019       0.016
                                                                 (0.11)      (0.12)       (0.12)      (0.10)
                ∆TFPit                                           -0.708      -0.709       -0.711      -0.701
                                                                 (12.49)     (12.51)      (12.64)     (11.62)
                ∆EXRATEit                                        -0.058      -0.059       -0.052      -0.059
                                                                 (0.97)      (0.99)       (0.87)      (0.97)
                ∆TARit × USOUTSHgt                                           0.020
                                                                             (0.63)
                ∆TCit × USOUTSHgt                                            0.002
                                                                             (0.05)
                ∆TARit × (K/L) it                                                         0.000
                                                                                          (1.68)
                ∆TCit × (K/L) it                                                          0.000
                                                                                          (2.07)
                ∆TARit × CONCit                                                                       0.000
                                                                                                      (0.14)
                ∆TCit × CONCit                                                                        0.000
                                                                                                      (0.07)

                R-squared                             0.757      0.915       0.915        0.917       0.918
                P value for joint insignificance                             0.82         0.10        0.98
                of interacted variables
                Observations                          868        849         849          849         833

Notes: Cell entries are parameter estimates (and absolute heteroskedastic-robust t-statistics) for estimates of equations (3a)
through (3e). Specifications pool differences for 1974-79 and 1979-88 and include a time dummy and three digit fixed effects (not
reported). Results are clustered around four-digit industries to account for common industries in the pooling. Estimation uses
employment weights. The P value is for the joint insignificance of the interacted variables; a value over 0.05 suggests we can
accept the null of joint insignificance with 95% confidence.
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), NBER (1997), UNIDO (1996) Census of Manufactures (various years), and Andrew
Bernard. See text for details of variable construction.
                                                                26




                                        Table 5
         Stage-Two Sector-Bias Regressions: Estimates of (4) for Tariffs
   (Dependent Variable: part of ∆lnpit induced by ∆TAR it calculated from Table 4)

                                                               1970s
                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
             Vs                                     0.032         0.019        0.016         0.026         0.011
                                                    (1.00)        (0.93)       (0.64)        (0.76)        (0.36)
             Vu                                     -0.040        -0.023       -0.029        0.0001        -0.016
                                                    (2.19)        (2.10)       (2.60)        (0.01)        (1.43)
             Vk                                     -0.016        -0.009       -0.011        -0.019        -0.005
                                                    (1.49)        (1.40)       (1.57)        (1.30)        (0.39)

             R-squared                              0.13          0.13         0.10          0.02          0.12
             Observations                           424           424          424           424           424

             Mandated rise in skill premium         7.2 pp        4.2 pp       4.7 pp        2.6 pp        2.7 pp
                                                    (t=1.45)      (t=1.35)     (t=1.27)      (t=0.65)      (t=0.74)



                                                               1980s
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
              Vs                                     0.003        0.002         -0.020       0.053         0.002
                                                     (0.21)       (0.24)        (0.19)       (1.18)        (0.05)
              Vu                                     -0.072       -0.042        -0.030       0.019         -0.026
                                                     (1.51)       (1.47)        (0.51)       (0.53)        (0.99)
              Vk                                     -0.009       -0.005        -0.014       -0.029        -0.006
                                                     (1.19)       (1.03)        (2.27)       (0.97)        (0.27)

              R-squared                              0.02         0.15          0.09         0.07          0.12
              Observations                           425          425           425          425           425
              Mandated rise in skill premium         7.5 pp       4.4 pp        1.0 pp       3.4 pp        4.6 pp
                                                     (t=2.00)     (t=1.88)      (t=0.06)     (t=1.01)      (t=0.61)

Notes: Cell entries are parameter estimates (and absolute t-statistics) for estimates of equation (4). Each column here corresponds
to the similarly-numbered column for one of the first-stage regressions from Table 4. In each column the last row reports the
mandated rise in the skill premium, calculated as the coefficient on Vs minus the coefficient on Vu (“pp” stands for percentage
points). The t-statistic is for the test of whether this mandated rise in inequality is significantly different from zero. “n/a”
denotes we are unable to calculate the particular standard error by our process correcting for the generated regressand, see
footnote 12. All results are for employment-weighted regressions.
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), NBER (1997). See text for details of variable construction.
                                                                27




                                       Table 6
   Stage-Two Sector-Bias Regressions: Estimates of (4) for Transportation Costs
    (Dependent Variable: part of ∆lnpit induced by ∆TCit calculated from Table 4)


                                                              1970s
                                                     (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)
              Vs                                     0.001           0.006      0.007         -0.008        0.007
                                                     (0.21)          (1.19)     (n/a)         (0.48)        (0.24)
              Vu                                     0.0001          0.0002     0.0004        -0.009        0.001
                                                     (n/a)           (0.31)     (0.10)        (1.60)        (n/a)
              Vk                                     -0.001          -0.004     -0.003        0.008         -0.003
                                                     (0.24)          (1.66)     (1.21)        (1.08)        (0.25)

              Observations                           433             433        433           433           433
              R-squared                              0.04            0.04       0.03          0.02          0.03
              Mandated rise in skill premium         0.1 pp          0.6 pp     0.7 pp        0.1pp         0.6pp
                                                     (n/a)           (t=1.08)   (n/a)         (t=0.08)      (n/a)



                                                              1980s
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
             Vs                                      0.001        0.004         0.003        0.005        0.005
                                                     (0.22)       (0.61)        (0.26)       (0.18)       (0.12)
             Vu                                      -0.001       -0.004        -0.003       -0.021       -0.003
                                                     (0.14)       (1.04)        (0.49)       (1.72)       (1.54)
             Vk                                      0.0002       0.001         0.002        0.012        0.001
                                                     (0.39)       (0.69)        (1.73)       (1.40)       (0.09)

             Observations                            435          435           435          435          435
             R-squared                               0.02         0.02          0.02         0.05         0.02
             Mandated rise in skill premium          0.2 pp       0.8 pp        0.1 pp       2.6 pp       0.8 pp
                                                     (t=0.16)     (t=0.77)      (t=0.33)     (t=1.26)     (t=0.19)

Notes: Cell entries are parameter estimates (and absolute t-statistics) for estimates of equation (4). Each column here corresponds
to the similarly-numbered column for one of the first-stage regressions from Table 4. In each column the last row reports the
mandated rise in the skill premium, calculated as the coefficient on Vs minus the coefficient on Vu (“pp” stands for percentage
points). The t-statistic is for the test of whether this mandated rise in inequality is significantly different from zero. “n/a”
denotes we are unable to calculate the particular standard error by our process correcting for the generated regressand, see
footnote 12. All results are for employment-weighted regressions.
Sources: Feenstra (1996), Magee (1998), UNIDO (1996). See text for details of variable construction.
