                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INSTITUTIONS FOR HIGH-QUALITY GROWTH:
                      WHAT THEY ARE AND HOW TO ACQUIRE THEM


                                             Dani Rodrik


                                         Working Paper 7540
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7540

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2000




This paper was prepared for the International Monetary Fund's Conference on Second-Generation Reforms,
Washington, DC, November 8-9, 1999. I thank Mohsin Khan, Saleh Nsouli, and conference participants for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutions for High-Quality Growth:
What They are and How to Acquire Them
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 7540
February 2000
JEL No. O10

                                           ABSTRACT

   This paper opens with a discussion of the types of institutions that allow markets to perform
adequately. While we can identify in broad terms what these are, there is no unique mapping between
markets and the non-market institutions that underpin them. The paper emphasizes the importance
of "local knowledge," and argues that a strategy of institution building must not over-emphasize best-
practice "blueprints" at the expense of experimentation. Participatory political systems are the most
effective ones for processing and aggregating local knowledge. Democracy is a meta-institution for
building good institutions. A range of evidence indicates that participatory democracies enable
higher-quality growth.


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
(617) 495 9454
fax: (617) 496 5747
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                           INSTITUTIONS FOR HIGH-QUALITY GROWTH:

                         WHAT THEY ARE AND HOW TO ACQUIRE THEM



                                                                         Sakenn pe prie dan sa fason
                                                                     (Everyone can pray as he likes.)

                                                                           -- Mauritian folk wisdom1

I. Introduction

          The comparative experience with economic growth over the last few decades has taught

us a number of important lessons. One of the more important of these is the importance of

private initiative and incentives. All instances of successful development are ultimately the

collective result of individual decisions by entrepreneurs to invest in risky new ventures and try

out new things. The good news here is that we have found homo economicus to be alive and

well in the tropics and other poor lands. The idea of "elasticity pessimism"--the notion that the

private sectors in developing countries would fail to respond quickly to favorable price and other

incentives--has been put to rest by the accumulating evidence. We find time and again that

investment decisions, agricultural production, or exports turn out to be quite sensitive to price

incentives, as long as these are perceived to have some predictability.

          The discovery that relative prices matter a lot, and that therefore neo-classical economic

analysis has much to contribute to development policy, led for a while to what was perhaps an

excessive focus on relative prices. Price reforms--in external trade, in product and labor markets,

in finance, and in taxation--were the rallying cry of the reformers of the 1980s, along with

macroeconomic stability and privatization. By the 1990s, the shortcomings of the focus on price

reform were increasingly evident. The encounter between neo-classical economics and


1
    Taken from Miles (1999).
                                                         2


developing societies served to reveal the institutional underpinnings of market economies. A

clearly delineated system of property rights, a regulatory apparatus curbing the worst forms of

fraud, anti-competitive behavior, and moral hazard, a moderately cohesive society exhibiting

trust and social cooperation, social and political institutions that mitigate risk and manage social

conflicts, the rule of law and clean government--these are social arrangements that economists

usually take for granted, but which are conspicuous by their absence in poor countries.

        Hence it became clear that incentives would not work or generate perverse results in the

absence of adequate institutions. Some of the implications of this were recognized early on, for

example in discussions on rent seeking in the trade policy context (where corruption was the

main issue) or in the discussions on common-property resources (where lack of adequately

defined property rights was the problem). But the broader point that markets need to be

supported by non-market institutions in order to perform well took a while to sink in. Three sets

of disparate developments conspired to put institutions squarely on the agenda of reformers. One

of these was the dismal failure in Russia of price reform and privatization in the absence of a

supportive legal, regulatory, and political apparatus. A second is the lingering dissatisfaction

with market-oriented reforms in Latin America and the growing realization that these reforms

have paid too little attention to mechanisms of social insurance and to safety nets. The third and

most recent is the Asian financial crisis which has shown that allowing financial liberalization to

run ahead of financial regulation is an invitation to disaster.

        The question before policy makers therefore is no longer "do institutions matter?"2 but

"which institutions matter and how does one acquire them?" Following Lin and Nugent (1995,



2
 See Lin and Nugent (1995) for an excellent review of the huge literature on institutions as it relates to economic
development specifically. This literature has been enriched recently by a growing body of empirical cross-national
work that quantifies the growth-promoting effects of superior institutions. See Hall and Jones (1999) on "social
                                                           3


2306-2307), it is useful to think of institutions broadly as "a set of humanly devised behavioral

rules that govern and shape the interactions of human beings, in part by helping them to form

expectations of what other people will do." I begin this paper with a discussion of the types of

institutions that allow markets to perform adequately. While we can identify in broad terms what

these are, I shall argue that there is no unique mapping between markets and the non-market

institutions that underpin them. The plausible variation in institutional setups is larger than is

usually presupposed. 3

         I then turn to the more difficult question of how one thinks about appropriate strategies

for institution building. I emphasize the importance of "local knowledge," and argue that a

strategy of institution building must not over-emphasize best-practice "blueprints" at the expense

of local experimentation. I make the case that participatory and decentralized political systems

are the most effective ones we have for processing and aggregating local knowledge. We can

think of democracy as a meta-institution for building good institutions.

         The penultimate section of the paper provides a range of evidence indicating that

participatory democracies enable higher-quality growth: they allow greater predictability and

stability, are more resilient to shocks, and deliver superior distributional outcomes. The

concluding section offers some implications for the design of conditionality.



II. Which Institutions Matter?


infrastructure," Knack and Keefer (1995, 1996) on bureaucratic quality and social capital; Temple and Johnson
(1998) on "social capability"; Rodrik (forthcoming) on institutions of conflict management. Recent work by
Haufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) has developed aggregate indicators of six different aspects of
governance--voice and accountability, political instability and violence, government effectiveness, regulatory
burden, rule of law, and graft--showing that all of these are significantly associated with income levels in the
expected manner.
3
 I refer the reader to Unger (1998) for a broader discussion of this point and of its implications. I have benefited
greatly from talking with Roberto Unger on some of these issues.
                                                  4


       Institutions do not figure prominently in the training of economists. The standard Arrow-

Debreu model with a full set of complete and contingent markets extending indefinitely into the

future seems to require no assistance from non-market institutions. But of course this is quite

misleading even in the context of that model. The standard model assumes a well-defined set of

property rights. It also assumes that contracts are signed with no fear that they will be revoked

when it suits one of the parties. So in the background there exists institutions that establish and

protect property rights and enforce contracts. We must, in other words, have a system of laws

and courts to make even "perfect" markets function.

       Laws in turn have to written and they have to be backed up by the use of sanctioned

force. That implies a legislator and a police force. The legislator's authority may derive from

religion, family lineage, or access to superior violence, but in each case she needs to ensure that

she provides her subjects with the right mix of "ideology" (a belief system) and threat of violence

to forestall rebellion from below. Or the authority may derive from the legitimacy provided by

popular support, in which case she needs to be responsive to her constituency's (voters') needs.

In either case, we have the beginnings of a governmental structure that goes well beyond the

narrow needs of the market.

       One implication of all this is that the market economy is necessarily "embedded" in a set

of non-market institutions. Another is that not all of these institutions are there to serve the

needs of the market economy first and foremost, even if their presence is required by the internal

logic of private property and contract enforcement. The fact that a governance structure is

needed to ensure that markets can do their work does not imply that the governance structure

serves only that end. Non-market institutions will sometimes produce outcomes that are socially

undesirable, such as the use of public office for private gain. They may also produce outcomes
                                                   5


that restrict the free play of market forces in pursuit of a larger goal, such as social stability and

cohesiveness.

        The rest of this section discusses five types of market-supporting institutions: property

rights; regulatory institutions; institutions for macroeconomic stabilization; institutions for social

insurance; and institutions of conflict management.



(a) Property rights

        While it is possible to envisage a thriving socialist market economy in theory, as the

famous debates of the 1920s established, today's prosperous economies have all been built on the

basis of private property. As North and Thomas (1973) and North and Weingast (1989), among

many others have argued, the establishment of secure and stable property rights have been a key

element in the rise of the West and the onset of modern economic growth. It stands to reason

that an entrepreneur would not have the incentive to accumulate and innovate unless s/he has

adequate control over the return to the assets that are thereby produced or improved.

        Note that the key word is "control" rather than "ownership." Formal property rights do

not count for much if they do not confer control rights. By the same token, sufficiently strong

control rights may do the trick even in the absence of formal property rights. Russia today

represents a case where shareholders have property rights but often lack effective control over

enterprises. Town and village enterprises (TVEs) in China are an example where control rights

have spurred entrepreneurial activity despite the absence of clearly defined property rights. As

these instances illustrate, establishing "property rights" is rarely a matter of just passing a piece

of legislation. Legislation in itself is neither necessary nor sufficient for the provision of the

secure control rights. In practice, control rights are upheld by a combination of legislation,
                                                    6


private enforcement, and custom and tradition. They may be distributed more narrowly or more

diffusely than property rights. Stakeholders can matter as much as shareholders.

       Moreover, property rights are rarely absolute, even when set formally in the law. The

right to keep my neighbor out of my orchard does not normally extend to my right to shooting

him if he actually enters it. Other laws or norms--such as those against murder--may trump

property rights. Each society decides for itself the scope of allowable property rights and the

acceptable restrictions on their exercise. Intellectual property rights are protected assiduously in

the United States and most advanced societies, but not in many developing countries. On the

other hand, zoning and environmental legislation restricts the ability of households and

enterprises in the rich countries to do as they please with their "property" to a much greater

extent than is the case in developing countries. All societies recognize that private property

rights can be curbed if doing so serves a greater public purpose. It is the definition of what

constitutes "greater public purpose" that varies.



(b) Regulatory institutions

       Markets fail when participants engage in fraudulent or anti-competitive behavior. They

fail when transaction costs prevent the internalizing of technological and other non-pecuniary

externalities. And they fail when incomplete information results in moral hazard and adverse

selection. Economists recognize these failures and have developed the analytical tools required

to think systematically about their consequences and possible remedies. Theories of the second

best, imperfect competition, agency, mechanism design, and many others offer an almost

embarrassing choice of regulatory instruments to counter market failures. Theories of political

economy and public choice offer cautions against unqualified reliance on these instruments.
                                                            7


           In practice, every successful market economy is overseen by a panoply of regulatory

institutions, regulating conduct in goods, services, labor, asset, and financial markets. A few

acronyms form the U.S. will suffice to give a sense of the range of institutions involved: FTC,

FDIC, FCC, FAA, OSHA, SEC, EPA, and so on. In fact, the freer are the markets, the greater is

the burden on the regulatory institutions. It is not a coincidence that the United States has the

world's freest markets as well its toughest anti-trust enforcement. It is hard to envisage in any

country other than the United States a hugely successful high-tech company like Microsoft being

dragged through the courts for alleged anti-competitive practices. The lesson that market

freedom requires regulatory vigilance has been driven home recently by the experience in East

Asia. In South Korea and Thailand, as in so many other developing countries, financial

liberalization and capital-account opening led to financial crisis precisely because of inadequate

prudential regulation and supervision. 4

           It is important to recognize that regulatory institutions may need to extend beyond the

standard list covering anti-trust, financial supervision, securities regulation and a few others.

This is true especially in developing countries where market failures may be more pervasive and

the requisite market regulations more extensive. Recent models of coordination failure and

capital market imperfections 5 make it clear that strategic government interventions may often be

required to get out of low-level traps and elicit desirable private investment responses. The

experience of South Korea and Taiwan in the 1960s and 1970s can be interpreted in that light.

The extensive subsidization and government-led coordination of private investment in these two



4
 See also the recent paper by Johnson and Shleifer (1999) that attributes the more impressive development of equity
markets in Poland compared to the Czech Republic to the stronger regulations in the former country upholding
minority shareholder rights and guarding against fraud.
5
    See Stiglitz and Hoff (1999) for a useful survey and discussion.
                                                   8


economies played a crucial role in setting the stage for self-sustaining growth (Rodrik 1995). It

is clear that many other countries have tried and failed to replicate these institutional

arrangements. And even South Korea may have taken a good thing too far by maintaining the

cozy institutional linkages between the government and chaebols well into the 1990s, at which

point these may have become dysfunctional. Once again, the lesson is that desirable institutional

arrangements vary, and that they vary not only across countries but also within countries over

time.



(c) Institutions for macroeconomic stabilization

        Since Keynes, we have come to a better understanding of the reality that capitalist

economies are not necessarily self-stabilizing. Keynes and his followers worried about shortfalls

in aggregate demand and the resulting unemployment. More recent views of macroeconomic

instability stress the inherent instability of financial markets and its transmission to the real

economy. All advanced economies have come to acquire fiscal and monetary institutions that

perform stabilizing functions, having learned the hard way about the consequences of not having

them. Probably most important among these institutions is a lender of last resort--typically the

central bank--which guards against self-fulfilling banking crises.

        There is a strong current within macroeconomics thought, represented in its theoretically

most sophisticated version by the real business cycles (RBC) approach--that disputes the

possibility or effectiveness of stabilizing the macroeconomy through monetary and fiscal

policies. There is also a sense in policy circles, particularly in Latin America, that fiscal and

monetary institutions--as currently configured--have added to macroeconomic instability, rather

than reduced it, by following pro-cyclical rather than anti-cyclical policies (Hausmann and Gavin
                                                  9


1996). These developments have spurred the trend towards central bank independence, and

helped open a new debate on designing more robust fiscal institutions.

       Some countries (Argentina being the most significant example) have given up on a

domestic lender of last resort altogether by replacing their central bank with a currency board.

The Argentine calculation is that having a central bank that can occasionally stabilize the

economy is not worth running the risk that the central bank will mostly destabilize it. Argentine

history gives plenty of reason to think that this is not a bad bet. But can the same be said for

Mexico or Brazil, or for that matter, Turkey or Indonesia? What may work for Argentina may

not work for the others. The debate over currency boards and dollarization illustrates the

obvious, but occasionally neglected fact that the institutions needed by a country are not

independent of that country's history.



(d) Institutions for social insurance

       A modern market economy is one where change is constant and idiosyncratic (i.e.,

individual-specific) risk to incomes and employment is pervasive. Modern economic growth

entails a transition from a static economy to a dynamic one where the tasks that workers perform

are in constant evolution and movement up and down in the income scale is frequent. One of the

liberating effects of a dynamic market economy is that it frees individuals from their traditional

entanglements--the kin group, the church, the village hierarchy. The flip side is that it uproots

them from traditional support systems and risk-sharing institutions. Gift exchanges, the fiesta,

and kinship ties--to cite just a few of the social arrangements for equalizing the distribution of

resources in traditional societies--lose much of their social insurance functions. And the risks
                                                 10


that have to be insured against become much less manageable in the traditional manner as

markets spread.

       The huge expansion of publicly provided social insurance programs during the 20th

century is one of the most remarkable features of the evolution of advanced market economies.

In the United States, it was the trauma of the Great Depression that paved the way for the major

institutional innovations in this area: social security, unemployment compensation, public works,

public ownership, deposit insurance, and legislation favoring unions (see Bordo et al., 1998, 6).

As Jacoby (1998) notes, prior to the Great Depression the middle classes were generally able to

self-insure or buy insurance from private intermediaries. As these private forms of insurance

collapsed, the middle classes threw their considerable political weight behind the extension of

social insurance and the creation of what would later be called the welfare state. In Europe, the

roots of the welfare state reached in some cases to the tail end of the 19th century. But the

striking expansion of social insurance programs, particularly in the smaller economies most open

to foreign trade, was a post-World War II phenomenon (Rodrik 1998). Despite a considerable

political backlash against the welfare state since the 1980s, neither the U.S. nor Europe has

significantly scaled back these programs.

       Social insurance need not always take the form of transfer programs paid out of fiscal

resources. The East Asian model, represented well by the Japanese case, is one where social

insurance is provided through a combination of enterprise practices (such as lifetime

employment and enterprise-provided social benefits), sheltered and regulated sectors (mom-and-

pop stores), and an incremental approach to liberalization and external opening. Certain aspects

of Japanese society that seem inefficient to outside observers—such as the preference for small-

scale retail stores or extensive regulation of product markets—can be viewed as substitutes for
                                                 11


the transfer programs that would otherwise have to be provided (as it is in most European

nations) by a welfare state. Such complementarities among different institutional arrangements

within a society have the important implication that it is very difficult to alter national systems in

a piecemeal fashion. One cannot (or should not) ask the Japanese to get rid of their lifetime

employment practices or inefficient retail arrangements without ensuring that alternative safety

nets are in place. Another implication is that substantial institutional changes come only in the

aftermath of large dislocations, such as those created by the Great Depression or the Second

World War.

       Social insurance legitimizes a market economy because it renders it compatible with

social stability and social cohesion. At the same time, the existing welfare states in Western

Europe and the United States engender a number of economic and social costs--mounting fiscal

outlays, an "entitlement" culture, long-term unemployment--which have become increasingly

apparent. Partly because of that, developing countries, such as those in Latin America that

adopted the market-oriented model following the debt crisis of the 1980s, have not paid

sufficient attention to creating institutions of social insurance (Rodrik 1999). The upshot has

been economic insecurity and a backlash against the reforms. How these countries will maintain

social cohesion in the face of large inequalities and volatile outcomes, both of which are being

aggravated by the growing reliance on market forces, is a question without an obvious answer at

the moment. But if Latin America and the other developing regions are to carve a different path

in social insurance than that followed by Europe or North America, they will have to develop

their own vision--and their own institutional innovations--to bridge the tension between market

forces and the yearning for economic security.
                                                 12


(e) Institutions of conflict management

       Societies differ in their cleavages. Some are made up of an ethnically and linguistically

homogenous population marked by a relatively egalitarian distribution of resources (Finland?).

Others are characterized by deep cleavages along ethnic or income lines (Nigeria?). These

divisions hamper social cooperation and prevent the undertaking of mutually beneficial projects.

Social conflict is harmful both because it diverts resources form economically productive

activities and because it discourages such activities by the uncertainty it generates. Economists

have used models of social conflict to shed light on questions such as: why do governments

delay stabilizations when delay imposes costs on all groups? (Alesina and Drazen 1991); why do

countries rich in natural resources often do worse than countries that are resource-poor? (Tornell

and Lane 1999); why do external shocks often lead to protracted economic crises that are out of

proportion to the direct costs of the shocks themselves? (Rodrik forthcoming).

        All of these can be thought of as instances of coordination failure in which social

factions fail to coordinate on outcomes which would be of mutual benefit. Healthy societies

have a range of institutions that make such colossal coordination failures less likely. The rule of

law, a high-quality judiciary, representative political institutions, free elections, independent

trade unions, social partnerships, institutionalized representation of minority groups, and social

insurance are examples of such institutions. What makes these arrangements function as

institutions of conflict management is that they entail a double "commitment technology:" they

warn the potential "winners" of social conflict that their gains will be limited, and assure the

"losers" that they will not be expropriated. They tend to increase the incentives for social groups

to cooperate by reducing the payoff to socially uncooperative strategies.
                                                 13


II. How Are "Good" Institutions Acquired?

       As I argued in the preceding section, a market economy relies on a wide array of non-

market institutions that perform regulatory, stabilizing, and legitimizing functions. Once these

institutions are accepted as part and parcel of a market-based economy, traditional dichotomies

between market and state or laissez-faire and intervention begin to make less sense. These are

not competing ways of organizing a society's economic affairs; they are complementary elements

that render the system sustainable. Every well-functioning market economy is a mix of state and

market, laissez faire and intervention.



(a) Accepting institutional diversity

       A second major implication of the discussion is that the institutional basis for a market

economy is not uniquely determined. Formally, there is no single mapping between the market

and the set of non-market institutions required to sustain it. This finds reflection in the wide

variety of regulatory, stabilizing, and legitimizing institutions that we observe in today's

advanced industrial societies. The American style of capitalism is very different from the

Japanese style of capitalism. Both differ from the European style. And even within Europe,

there are large differences between the institutional arrangements in, say, Sweden and Germany.

       It is a common journalistic error to suppose that one set of institutional arrangements

must dominate the others in terms of overall performance. Hence the fads of the decade: with its

low unemployment, high growth, and thriving culture, Europe was the continent to emulate

throughout much of the 1970s; during the trade-conscious 1980s, Japan became the exemplar of

choice; and the 1990s have been the decade of U.S.-style freewheeling capitalism. It is
                                                        14


anybody's guess which set of countries will capture the imagination if and when a substantial

correction hits the U.S. stock market. 6

        The point about institutional diversity has in fact a more fundamental implication. The

institutional arrangements that we observe in operation today, varied as they are, themselves

constitute a subset of the full range of potential institutional possibilities. This is a point that has

been forcefully and usefully argued by Roberto Unger (1998). There is no reason to suppose that

modern societies have already managed to exhaust all the useful institutional variations that

could underpin healthy and vibrant economies. Even if we accept that market-based economies

require certain types of institutions, as listed in the previous section,

        such imperatives do not select from a closed list of institutional possibilities. The

        possibilities do not come in the form of indivisible systems, standing or falling together.

        There are always alternative sets of arrangements capable of meeting the same practical

        tests. (Unger, 1998, 24-25)

We need to maintain a healthy skepticism towards the idea that a specific type of institution--a

particular mode of corporate governance, social security system, or labor market legislation, for

example--is the only type that is compatible with a well-functioning market economy.



(b) Two modes of acquiring institutions

        How does a developing society acquire functional institutions--functional in the sense of

supporting a healthy, sustainable market-based system? An analogy with technology transfer is

helpful. Think of institution acquisition/building as the adoption of a new technology that allows

society to transforms its primary endowments (land, raw labor, natural resources) into a larger

6
 Perhaps Europe will be back in fashion. As these words were being written, the New York Times published a
major feature article with the title "Sweden, the Welfare State, Basks in a New Prosperity" (October 8, 1999).
                                                         15


bundle of outputs. Let us call this new technology a "market economy," where we understand

that the term encompasses all of the non-market institutional complements discussed previously.

Adoption of a market economy in this broad sense moves society to a higher production

possibilities frontier, and in that sense is equivalent to technical progress in economist's parlance.

         But what kind of a technology is a market economy? To over-simplify, consider two

possibilities. One possibility is that the new technology is a general purpose one, that it is

codified, and that it is readily available on world markets. In this case, it can be adopted by

simply importing a blueprint from the more advanced economies. The transition to a market

economy, in this vision, consists of getting a manual with the title "how to build a market

economy" (a.k.a. the "Washington Consensus") and following the directions: remove price

distortions, privatize enterprises, harden budget constraints, enact legal codes, and so on.

         A different possibility is that the requisite technology is highly specific to local

conditions and that it contains a high degree of tacitness. Specificity implies that the institutional

repertoire available in the advanced countries may be inappropriate to the needs of the society in

question--just as different relative factor prices in LDC agriculture require more appropriate

techniques than those that are available in the rich countries. Tacitness implies that much of the

knowledge that is required is in fact not written down, leaving the blueprints highly incomplete. 7

For both sets of reasons, imported blueprints are useless. Institutions need to be developed

locally, relying on hands-on experience, local knowledge, and experimentation.



7
  An example from South Korea's history with technology acquisition nicely illustrates the tacitness of technology.
The Korean shipbuilder Hyundai started out by importing its basic design from a Scottish firm. But it soon found
out that this was not working out. The Scottish design relied on building the ship in two halves, because the original
manufacturer had enough capacity to build only half a ship at a time. When Hyundai followed the same course, it
found out that it could not get the two halves to fit. Subsequent designs imported from European consulting firms
also had problems in that the firms would not guarantee the rated capacity, leading to costly delays. In the end,
Hyundai was forced to rely on in-house design engineers. This case is discussed in Amsden, 1989, 278-89.
                                                        16


        The two scenarios are of course only caricatures. Neither the blueprint nor the local-

knowledge perspective captures the whole story on its own. Even under the best possible

circumstances, an imported blueprint requires domestic expertise for successful implementation.

Alternatively, when local conditions differ greatly, it would be unwise to deny the possible

relevance of institutional examples from elsewhere. But the dichotomy--whether one

emphasizes the blueprint or the local knowledge aspect of the process--clarifies some key issues

in institution building and sheds light on important debates about institutional development.

Consider the debate on Chinese gradualism.

        One perspective, represented forcefully in work by Sachs and Woo (forthcoming),

underplays the relevance of Chinese particularism by arguing that the successes of the economy

are not due to any special aspects of the Chinese transition to a market economy, but instead are

largely due to a convergence of Chinese institutions to those in non-socialist economies. In this

view, the faster the convergence, the better the outcomes. "[F]avorable outcomes have emerged

not because of gradualism, but despite gradualism" (Sachs and Woo, forthcoming, 3). The

policy message that follows is that China should focus not on institutional experimentation but

on harmonizing its institutions with those abroad. 8 The alternative perspective, perhaps best

developed in work by Qian and Roland, is that the peculiarities of the Chinese model represent

solutions to particular political or informational problems for which no blueprint-style solution

exists. Hence Lau, Qian, and Roland (1997) interpret the dual-track approach to liberalization as

a way of implementing Pareto-efficient reforms: an alteration in the planned economy that

improves incentives at the margin, enhances efficiency in resource allocation, and yet leaves

none of the plan beneficiaries worse off. Qian. Roland, and Xu (1999) interpret Chinese style

8
 Note however that the harmonization that Sachs and Woo (forthcoming) foresee is with the institutions in the rest
of East Asia, not those of the U.S. or Western Europe.
                                                            17


decentralization as allowing the development of superior institutions of coordination: when

economic activity requires products with matched attributes, 9 local experimentation is a more

effective way of processing and using local knowledge.

           Sachs, Woo and other members of the convergence school worry about the costs of

Chinese-style experimentalism because they seem to say "well, we already know what a market

economy looks like: it is one with private property and a unified system of prices--just get on

with it." Qian et al, on the other hand, find much to praise in it because they think the system

generates the right incentives for developing the tacit knowledge required to build and sustain a

market economy, and therefore they choose not to be bothered by some of the economic

inefficiencies that may be generated along the way. These two contrasting visions of where the

real action is in the transition to a market economy have been pervasive in our discussions of

policy and have played a determining role in shaping our preferences for

gradualism/experimentalism versus shock therapy.

           Although my sympathies in this debate are with the experimentalists, I can also see that

there are dangers with experimentalism. First, one needs to be clear between self-conscious

experimentalism, on the one hand, and delay and gradualism designed primarily to serve

privileged interests, on the other. The dithering, two steps forwards, one step backwards style of

reform that prevails in much of the former Soviet Union and in many Sub-Saharan African

countries is driven not so much by a desire to build better institutions as it is by aversion to

reform. This has to be distinguished from a programmatic effort to acquire and process local




9
    Think again of the problem of fitting the two halves of a ship described in an earlier footnote.
                                                        18


knowledge to better serve local needs. The gradualism that countries like Mauritius 10 or South

Korea11 have exhibited over their recent history is very different than the "gradualism" of

Ukraine or Nigeria.

        Second, it is obviously costly--in terms of time and resources--to build institutions from

scratch when imported blueprints can serve just as well. Experimentalism can backfire if it

overlooks opportunities for institutional arbitrage. Much of the legislation establishing a SEC-

like watchdog agency for securities markets, for example, can be borrowed wholesale from those

countries that have already learned how to regulate these markets the hard way--by their own

trial and error. The same goes perhaps for an anti-trust agency, a financial supervisory agency, a

central bank, and many other governmental functions. One can always learn from the

institutional arrangements prevailing elsewhere even if they are inappropriate or cannot be

transplanted. Some societies can go further by adopting institutions that cut deeper--in social

insurance, labor markets, fiscal institutions. Perhaps one reason that a "big bang" worked for

Poland is that this country had already defined its future: it wanted to be a "normal" European

society, with full membership in the European Union. Adopting European institutions wholesale

was not only a means to an end; it was also the ultimate objective the country desired.

        The difficult questions, and the trade-offs between the blueprint and the experimentalist

approaches, arise when the attainable objectives are not so clear cut. What kind of a society do

the Chinese want for themselves, and can realistically hope to achieve? How about the


10
   See Wellisz and Saw (1993), Rodrik (1999b, chap. 3), and the discussion in the next sub-section on two-track
reforms in Mauritius.
11
  South Korea is often portrayed as a case where autonomous and insulated technocrats took a series of decisions
without local input. Evans (1995) has usefully emphasized the "embedded" nature of bureaucratic autonomy in
Korea, in particular the dense network of interactions between the bureaucracy and segments of the private sector
that allowed for the exchange of information, the negotiation and renegotiation of policies, and the setting of
priorities.
                                                   19


Brazilians, Indians, or Turks? Local knowledge matters greatly in answering these questions.

Blueprints, best practices, international codes and standards, harmonization can do the trick for

some of the narrowly "technical" issues. But large-scale institutional development by and large

requires a process of discovery about local needs and capabilities.



(c) Participatory politics as a meta-institution

        The blueprint approach is largely top-down, relying on expertise on the part technocrats

and foreign advisors. The local-knowledge approach, by contrast, is bottom down and relies on

mechanisms for eliciting and aggregating local information. In principle, these mechanisms can

be as diverse as the institutions that they help create. But I would argue that the most reliable

forms of such mechanisms are participatory political institutions. Indeed, it is helpful to think of

participatory political institutions as meta-institutions that elicit and aggregate local knowledge

and thereby help build better institutions.

        It is certainly true that non-democratic forms of government have often succeeded

admirably in the task of institution building using alternative devices. The previously mentioned

examples of South Korea (with its "embedded" bureaucratic autonomy) and China (with its

decentralization and experimentalism) come immediately to mind. But the broad, cross-national

evidence indicates that these are the exceptions rather than the rule. Nothing prevents

authoritarian regimes from using local knowledge; the trouble is that nothing compels them to do

so either.

        The case of Mauritius illustrates nicely how participatory democracy helps build better

institutions that lay the foundation for sustainable economic growth. The initial conditions in

Mauritius were inauspicious from a number of standpoints. The island was a monocrop
                                                         20


economy in the early 1960s and faced a population explosion. A report prepared by James

Meade in 1961 was quite pessimistic about the island's future, and argued that "unless resolute

measures are taken to solve [the population problem], Mauritius will be faced with a catastrophic

situation" (Meade 1961, 37). Mauritius is also an ethnically and linguistically divided society

and its independence in 1968 was preceded by a series of riots between Muslims and Creoles.

         Mauritius' superior economic performance has been built on a peculiar combination of

orthodox and heterodox strategies. To an important extent, the economy's success was based on

the creation of an export processing zone (EPZ) operating under free-trade principles, which

enabled an export boom in garments to European markets and an accompanying investment

boom at home. Yet the island's economy has combined the EPZ with a domestic sector that was

highly protected until the mid-1980s. 12 Mauritius is essentially an example of an economy that

has followed a two-track strategy not too dissimilar to that of China. This economic strategy was

in turn underpinned by social and political arrangements that encouraged participation,

representation and coalition-building. Rather than discouraging social organization,

governments have encouraged it. In the words of Miles (1999), Mauritius is a "supercivil

society," with a disproportionately large number of civil society associations per capita.

         The circumstances under which the Mauritian EPZ was set up in 1970 are instructive, and

highlight the manner in which participatory political systems help design creative strategies for

building locally adapted institutions. Given the small size of the home market, it was evident

that Mauritius would benefit from an outward-oriented strategy. But as in other developing

countries, policy makers had to contend with the import-substituting industrialists who had been

propped up by the restrictive commercial policies of the early 1960s prior to independence.

12
   Gulhati (1990, Table 2.10) reports an average effective rate of protection in 1982 for manufacturing in Mauritius
of 89%, with a range of -24% to 824%.
                                                21


These industrialists were naturally opposed to relaxing the trade regime.

       A Washington economist would have advocated across-the-board liberalization, without

regard to what that might do the precarious political and social balance of the island. Instead, the

Mauritian authorities chose the two-track strategy. The EPZ scheme in fact provided a neat way

around the political difficulties. The creation of the EPZ generated new opportunities of trade

and of employment, without taking protection away from the import-substituting groups and

from the male workers who dominated the established industries. The segmentation of labor

markets early on between male and female workers--with the latter predominantly employed in

the EPZ--was particularly crucial, as it prevented the expansion of the EPZ from driving wages

up in the rest of the economy, thereby disadvantaging import-substituting industries. New profit

opportunities were created at the margin, while leaving old opportunities undisturbed. There

were no identifiable losers. This in turn paved the way for the more substantial liberalizations

that took place in the mid-1980s and in the 1990s.

       Mauritius found its own way to economic development because it created social and

political institutions that encouraged participation, negotiation, and compromise. That it did so

despite inauspicious beginnings and following a path that diverged from orthodoxy speaks

volumes about the importance of such institutions. The following section presents some cross-

national evidence suggesting that democracy tends in fact to be a reliable mechanism for

generating such desirable outcomes.



III. Participatory Political Regimes Deliver Higher-Quality Growth

       In policy circles, the discussion on the relationship between political regime type and

economic performance inevitably gravitates toward the experience of a handful of economies in
                                                        22


East and Southeast Asia, which (until recently at least) registered the world’s highest growth

rates under authoritarian regimes. These countries constitute the chief exhibit for the argument

that economic development requires a strong hand from above. The deep economic reforms

needed to embark on self-sustaining growth, this line of thought goes, cannot be undertaken in

the messy push and pull of democratic politics. Chile under General Pinochet is usually exhibit

no. 2.

         A systematic look at the evidence, however, yields a much more sanguine conclusion.

While East Asian countries have prospered under authoritarianism, many more have seen their

economies deteriorate—think of Zaire, Uganda, or Haiti. Recent empirical studies based on

samples of more than 100 countries suggest that there is little reason to believe democracy is

conducive to lower growth over long time spans. 13 Neither is it the case that economic reforms

are typically associated with authoritarian regimes (Williamson 1994). Indeed, some of the most

successful reforms of the 1980s and 1990s were implemented under newly elected democratic

governments—think of the stabilizations in Bolivia (1985), Argentina (1991), and Brazil (1994),

for example. Among former socialist economies too, the most successful transitions have

occurred in the most democratic countries.




13
   Helliwell (1994) and Barro (1996) try to control for the endogeneity of democracy in estimating the effect of the
latter on growth. Helliwell finds that democracy spurs education and investment, but has a negative (and
insignificant) effect on growth when investment and education are controlled. On balance, he finds no “systematic
net effects of democracy on subsequent economic growth.” Barro finds a non-linear relationship, with growth
increasing in democracy at low levels of democracy and decreasing in democracy at higher levels. The turning point
comes roughly at the levels of democracy existing in Malaysia and Mexico (in 1994), and somewhat above South
Africa’s level prior to its transition. A more recent paper by Chowdhurie-Aziz (1997) finds a positive association
between the degree of non-elite participation in politics and economic growth. See also Tavares and Wacziarg
(1996) who estimate a system of simultaneous equations and find a positive effect of democracy on growth through
the channels of enhanced education, reduced inequality, and lower government consumption.
                                                          23


           In fact, the record is even more favorable to participatory regimes than is usually

acknowledged. This section provides evidence in support of the following assertions:14

           1. Democracies yield long-run growth rates that are more predictable.

           2. Democracies produce greater short-term stability.

           3. Democracies handle adverse shocks much better.

           4. Democracies deliver better distributional outcomes.

The first of these implies that economic life is less of a crapshoot under democracy. The second

suggests that, whatever the long-run growth level of an economy, there is less instability in

economic outcomes under democratic regimes than under autocracies. The third finding

indicates that political participation improves an economy’s capacity to adjust to changes in the

external environment. The final point suggests that democracies produce superior distributional

outcomes.

           Taken together, these results provide a clear message: participatory political regimes

deliver higher-quality growth. I would contend that they do so because they produce superior

institutions better suited to local conditions.



(a) Democracy and long-term performance

           Figure 1 shows a scatter plot for a sample of 90 countries. The figure shows the partial

relationship between a country’s level of democracy and its growth rate of GDP per capita

during the 1970-89 period, after initial income, education, and regional effects are controlled for.

Democracy is measured on a scale of 0 to 1, using the Freedom House index of political rights

and civil liberties. While the slope of the relationship is positive and statistically significant, this


14
     Most of the evidence presented in this section comes from Rodrik (1997, 1999c, and forthcoming).
                                                 24


result is not very robust. As is clear from the figure, removing Botswana--which is an important

outlier--would make a big difference to the results. This is in line with existing results in the

literature, which suggest that there is no strong, determinate relationship between political

participation and average levels of long-run growth.

       Looking at individual cases, it becomes quickly evident why this is so. Among high-

growth countries, Taiwan, Singapore, and Korea rank low in terms of democracy (during the

period covered by the regression), this being the source of the conventional wisdom among

policymakers reported above. But some other countries, Botswana and Mauritius in particular,

have done equally well or even better under fairly open political regimes. (Note that the

rankings in this figure have to be interpreted relative to the benchmarks established by the

presence of the other controls in the regression.) Poor performers can similarly be found at

either end of the democracy spectrum: South Africa and Mozambique have done poorly under

authoritarian regimes, Papua New Guinea and Jamaica under relatively democratic ones.

       Hence mean long-run growth rates tend not to depend systematically on political regime

type. But this is only part of the broader picture. A different question is whether democracy is

the safer choice in the following sense: is the cross-national variance in long-run growth

performance smaller under democracies than it is under autocracies? Since mean growth rates

do not differ, a risk-averse individual would unambiguously prefer to live under the regime

where expected long-run growth rates cluster more closely around the mean.

       I first divide the country sample into two roughly equal-sized groups. I call those with

values of the democracy index less than 0.5 “autocracies” (n=48), and those with values greater

or equal to 0.5 “democracies” (n=45). The top panel in Table 1 shows the coefficients of

variation of long-run growth rates, computed across countries for the 1960-89 period, for the two
                                                 25


samples. The first row shows the unconditional coefficients of variation, without any controls

for determinants of growth rates. The second row displays the conditional version of the same,

where the variation now refers to the unexplained component from a cross national regression

(separate for each sample) with the following control variables: initial GDP per capita, initial

secondary school enrollment ratio, and regional dummies for Latin America, East Asia, and sub-

Saharan Africa. I find that the coefficient of variation (whether conditional or unconditional) is

substantially higher for autocracies than it is for democracies.

       Since countries with authoritarian regimes tend to have lower incomes, perhaps this result

reflects the greater randomness in the long-run growth rates of poor countries. To check against

this possibility, I divided countries differently. First, I regressed the democracy index on income

and secondary enrollment levels across countries (R2 = 0.57). Then I regrouped my sample of

countries according to whether their actual democracy levels stood below or above the regression

line. Countries above (below) the regression line are those with greater (less) political

participation than would be expected on the basis of their income and educational levels. In the

bottom panel of Table 1, these two groups are labeled “high democracy” (n=49) and “low

democracy” (n=44) respectively. The coefficients of variation for long-term growth rates are

then calculated for each group in the same way as before. Our results remain qualitatively

unchanged, although the gap between the two groups shrinks somewhat: the coefficient of

variation is smaller in countries with greater political participation (where “greater” now refers to

the benchmark set by the cross-national regression relating participation levels to income and

education).

       The bottom line is that living under an authoritarian regime is a riskier gamble than living

under a democracy.
                                                 26




(b) Democracy and short-term performance

       A point similar, but not identical, to the one just discussed was anticipated by Sah (1991),

who argued that de-centralized political regimes (and democracies in particular) should be less

prone to volatility. The rationale behind this idea is that the presence of a wider range of

decision-makers results in greater diversification and hence less risk in an environment rife with

imperfect information. This is a point similar to the one made above regarding the importance of

local knowledge. Note that this specific argument is about short-term volatility in economic

performance, and not about the dispersion in long-term growth rates which was the focus of the

previous section.

       To determine the relationship between regime type and volatility in short-run economic

performance, I focus on three national-accounts aggregates: (a) real GDP; (b) real consumption;

and (c) investment. (All data are from the Penn World Tables, Mark 5.6.) In each case,

volatility is measured by calculating the standard deviation of annual growth rates of the relevant

aggregate over the 1960-89 period (more accurately, by taking the standard deviation of the first

differences in logs). Then each measure of volatility is regressed on a number of independent

variables, including our measure of participation (democracy). The other independent variables

included are: log per-capita GDP, log population, exposure to external risk, and dummies for

Latin America, East Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and OECD.

       Table 2 shows the results. The estimated coefficient on the measure of democracy is

negative and statistically significant in all cases. A movement from pure autocracy (democracy

= 0) to pure democracy ( =1) is associated with reductions in the standard deviations of growth

rates of GDP, consumption, and investment of 1.3, 2.3, and 4.4 percentage points, respectively.
                                                         27


These effects are fairly sizable. Figure 2 shows a partial scatter plot which helps identify where

different countries stand. Long-standing democracies such as India, Costa Rica, Malta, and

Mauritius have experienced significantly less volatility than countries like Syria, Chile, or Iran,

even after controlling for country size and external shocks. 15

           Moreover, as the last column of Table 2 shows, causality seems to run directly from

regime type to volatility (rather than vice versa). In this column I have used secondary

enrollment ratio as an instrument for democracy (in addition to the other independent variables

mentioned earlier). This variable has all the properties of a desirable instrument, as it is well

correlated with democracy but virtually uncorrelated with the error term from the OLS

regression. With democracy instrumented in this fashion, the estimated coefficient actually

doubles in absolute value.

           The evidence strongly suggests, therefore, that democracy is conducive to lower volatility

in economic performance.



(c) Democracy and resilience in the face of economic shocks

           The late 1970s were a watershed for most developing economies. A succession of

external shocks during this period left many of them in severe payment difficulties. In some

cases, as in most of Latin America, it took almost a decade for macroeconomic balances to be

restored and for growth to resume. The question I now pose is whether democratic and

participatory institutions helped or hindered adjustment to these shocks of external origin.

           The main thing I am interested in explaining is the extent of economic collapse following

an external shock. In another paper (Rodrik forthcoming), I have explored how social cleavages


15
     Similar findings have also been reported in Chandra (1998) and Quinn and Woolley (1998).
                                                        28


and domestic institutions of conflict management mediate the effects of shocks on economic

performance. Here I focus on the role of participatory institutions specifically.

        In a recent review of the growth experience of developing countries, Pritchett (1997) has

looked for breaks in trend growth rates. These breaks tend to coalesce around the mid- to late-

1970s, with 1977 as the median break year. I use the difference in growth rates before and after

the break as my dependent variable.

        The basic story in Rodrik (forthcoming) is that the adjustment to shocks will tend to be

worse in countries with deep latent social conflicts and with poor institutions of conflict

management. Consequently, such countries will experience larger declines in growth rates

following shocks. These ideas are tested by regressing the change in growth on indicators of

latent conflict and on proxies for institutions of conflict management (in addition to other

variables 16 ). Figure 3 displays a sample partial scatter plot, showing the relationship between

ethnic cleavages and the growth decline. Controlling for other variables, there is a systematic

relationship between these two: countries with greater ethnic and linguistic fragmentation

experienced larger declines in economic growth.

        Our interest in democratic institutions in this context derives from the idea that such

institutions provide ways of regulating and managing social conflicts through participatory

means and the rule of law, and hence dissipate the adverse consequences of external shocks. To

test this hypothesis, we check to see whether our measure of democracy—this time restricted to

the 1970s only, to avoid possible reverse-causality—is related to changes in growth rates

subsequent to the shocks. The partial scatter plot shown in Figure 4, covering 101 countries,

16
  Each regression in this paper includes the following variables on the right-hand side in addition to those
specifically discussed: log GDP per-capita in 1975, growth rate prior to break year, measure of external shocks
during the 1970s, ethno-linguistic fragmentation (elf60), and regional dummies for Latin America, East Asia, and
sub-Saharan Africa.
                                                  29


suggests a clear affirmative answer. Countries with greater political freedoms during the 1970s

experienced lower declines in economic growth when their trend growth rate changed. The

relationship is highly significant in statistical terms; the t-statistic on the estimated coefficient on

democracy is 3.53, with a p-value of 0.001. Figure 5 shows the results when sub-Saharan

African countries are excluded from the sample. The reason to exclude these is both concern

with data quality and the possibility that the relationship is driven by a few African countries

with extreme values. But the relationship holds just as well in the restricted sample: the partial

slope coefficient is virtually unchanged and the t-statistic is almost as high (3.32). As these two

figures show, the hardest hit countries tended to be those with few political liberties (relative to

what would be expected of countries at their levels of income), such as Syria, Algeria, Panama,

and Gabon. Countries with open political regimes, such as Costa Rica, Botswana, Barbados, and

India, did much better.

        These results are perhaps surprising in view of the common presumption that it takes

strong, autonomous governments to undertake the policy adjustments required in the face of

adversity. They are less surprising from the perspective articulated above: adjustment to shocks

requires managing social conflicts, and democratic institutions are useful institutions of conflict

management.

        To probe the issues more deeply, I investigate the relationship between declines in

growth and three other aspects of political regime: (a) the degree of institutional (de jure)

independence of the executive; (b) the degree of operational (de facto) independence of the

executive; and (c) the degree to which non-elites can access political institutions. These three

variables come originally from the Polity III data (see Jaggers and Gurr, 1995), and have been re-

coded on a scale of 0 to 1 for the purposes of the current exercise. As before, I use the averages
                                                            30


of the values reported for each country during the 1970s. Note that these three indicators are

correlated with the Freedom House measure of democracy (which I have been using up to this

point) in the expected manner: independence of the executive tends to be lower in democracies,

and avenues of non-elite participation are larger. But there are interesting exceptions. The

United States, for example, ranks highest not only on the democracy index, but also in the degree

of institutional (de jure) independence of the executive. Other democracies with relatively

autonomous executives (de jure) are France, Canada, and Costa Rica. By contrast, South Africa

is coded as having had (during the 1970s) little democracy and little executive autonomy.

           A nagging question in the literature on political economy is whether an insulated and

autonomous executive is necessary for the implementation of economic reforms. 17 This question

is somewhat distinct from the question about democracy proper, since, as the examples just

mentioned illustrate, one can conceive of democratic systems that nonetheless have well-

insulated executives. Therefore the Polity III indicators are particularly relevant.

           The results shown in Figures (6)-(8) are again somewhat surprising—at least when

approached from the technocratic perspective. I find that more significant growth declines are

associated with greater institutional and operational independence of the executive and lower

levels of political access by non-elites. 18 The estimated coefficients are statistically highly

significant in all cases. Therefore, not only do we not find that executive autonomy results in

better economic management, the results strongly suggest the converse: political regimes with

lower executive autonomy and more participatory institutions handle exogenous shocks better! 19


17
     This literature is briefly surveyed and evaluated in Rodrik (1996).
18
  Moreover, the estimated signs on these variables remain unchanged if the Freedom House index of democracy is
entered separately in the regression.
19
  The finding on political participation echoes the argument in Isham et al. (1997) that more citizen voice results in
projects with greater economic returns.
                                                  31


This might be part of the explanation for why democracies experience less economic instability

over the long run (as demonstrated in the previous sub-section).

       It is worth mentioning in passing that the recent experience in East Asia strongly

validates these results. South Korea and Thailand, with more open and participatory political

regimes handled the Asian financial crisis significantly better than Indonesia. I have argued in

Rodrik (1999b) that democracy helped the first two countries manage the crisis for at least three

reasons. First, it facilitated a smooth transfer of power from a discredited set of politicians to a

new group of government leaders. Second, democracy imposed mechanisms of participation,

consultation, and bargaining, enabling policy makers to fashion the consensus needed to

undertake the necessary policy adjustments decisively. Third, because democracy provides for

institutionalized mechanisms of “voice,” the Korean and Thai institutions obviated the need for

riots, protests, and other kinds of disruptive actions by affected groups, as well as lowering the

support for such behavior by other groups in society.



(d) Democracy and distribution

       Finally, I turn to distributional issues. I have shown in Rodrik (1999c) that democracy

makes an important difference to the distribution of the enterprise surplus in the manufacturing

sectors of national economies. In particular, there is a robust and statistically significant

association between the extent of political participation and wages received by workers,

controlling for labor productivity, income levels, and other possible determinants. The

association exists both across countries and over time within countries (i.e. in panel regressions

with fixed effects as well as in cross-section regressions). Countries with greater political

participation than would have been predicted from their income levels such as India, Israel,
                                                 32


Malta, and Cyprus also have correspondingly higher wages relative to productivity. Some

countries at the other end of the spectrum—lower-than-expected values for the democracy index

and low wages—are Syria, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Mexico. Moving from Mexico’s level of

democracy to that of the U.S. is associated with an increase in wages of about 30 percent.

Instrumental-variables and event-study evidence suggests strongly that the relationship is causal;

that is, changes in political regime cause a redistribution of the enterprise surplus towards

workers.

        Figure 9 shows a different type of evidence relating to economy-wide inequality. One

problem with the evidence on the functional distribution of income within manufacturing

(discussed above) is that a pro-labor distribution in manufacturing can go hand in hand with a

more regressive distribution overall. This would be the case, for example, where pro-labor

policies create a "labor aristocracy" to the detriment of the informal and rural sector worker.

Figure 9 is quite comforting on that score. It shows that the relationship between democracy and

economy-wide inequality (measured by the Gini coefficent from the high-quality Deininger-

Squire data set) is in fact negative. More participatory regimes produce greater equality not only

within the modern (manufacturing) sector, but throughout the economy. And they do so--as the

previous evidence indicates--without cost to economic growth and while producing greater

stability and resilience overall.



IV. Concluding remarks

        Institutional reform has become the buzzword of the day. Policy advisors and

international financial institutions (IFIs) find it tempting to extend their advice and conditionality

to a broad range of institutional areas, including monetary and fiscal institutions, corporate
                                                  33


governance, financial and asset market supervision, labor-market practices, business-government

relations, corruption, transparency, and social safety nets. While such efforts have got the basic

diagnosis right--the development of a market-based economy requires a heavy dose of institution

building--they suffer from two weaknesses.

         First, it is not clear whether the IFIs can overcome their bias towards a particular, "neo-

liberal" social-economic model--a model that is approximated, if not fully replicated, in the real

world by the United States. It is telling that when South Korea recently came under IMF

conditionality, the IMF asked the country to undertake an ambitious range of reforms in trade

and capital accounts, government-business relations, and labor-market institutions that entailed

remolding the Korean economy in the image of a Washington economist’s idea of a free-market

economy. This model is not only untested, it forecloses some development strategies that have

worked in the past, and others that could work in the future. If Korea, a country with an

exemplary development record, is subject to pressures of this kind, one can imagine what is in

store for small countries with more checkered economic histories. As I have argued in this paper,

an approach that presumes the superiority of a particular model of a capitalist economy is quite

restrictive in terms of the range of institutional variation that market economies can (and do)

admit.

         Second, even if the IFIs could shed their preference in favor of the neo-liberal model,

there would remain an organizational bias towards providing similar, even if not identical, advice

to client governments. It would be difficult for institutions like the World Bank and the IMF to

adopt a "let a hundred flowers bloom" strategy, as it would appear that some countries are being

treated more or less favorably. The result is likely to be at best unfriendly to institutional

experimentation on the part of client governments.
                                                  34


       To be sure, some institutional convergence can be useful and proper. No one can be

seriously against the introduction of proper accounting standards or against improved prudential

supervision of financial intermediaries. The more serious concern with regard to IFI

conditionality is that such standards will act as the wedge with which a broader set of

institutional preferences--in favor of open capital accounts, deregulated labor markets, arms-

length finance, American-style corporate governance, and hostile to industrial policies--will be

imparted on the recipient countries.

       My focus on the importance of local knowledge, and on participatory democracy as a

meta-institution for eliciting and aggregating it, suggests that conditionality is perhaps better

targeted at basic political freedoms. I have shown in this paper that democracies perform better

on a number of dimensions: they produce less randomness and volatility, they are better at

managing shocks, and they yield distributional outcomes that are more desirable. One

interpretation of these results, and the one that I have emphasized throughout, is that democracy

helps build better institutions. While I am a great believer in institutional diversity, I see no

argument that would make it appropriate for some governments to deny their citizens basic

political rights such as freedom of speech, the right to vote and stand for political office, or

freedom of association. If there is one area where institutional conditionality is both appropriate

and of great economic value, it seems to me that this is it.
                                              35


REFERENCES

Alesina, Alberto, and Allan Drazen, "Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?" American Economic
Review, 81(5), 1991, 1170-1188.

Amsden, Alice H., Asia's Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, New York, Oxford
University Press, 1989.

Barro, Robert, “Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study,” NBER
Working Paper no. 5698, August 1996.

Bordo, Michael D., Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White, eds., The Defining Moment: The
Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1998.

Chandra, Siddharth, “On Pillars of Democracy and Economic Growth,” Graduate School of
Public and International Affairs, University of Pittsburgh, February 1998.

Chowdhurie-Aziz, Monali, “Political Openness and Economic Performance,” unpublished paper,
University of Minnesota, January 1997.

Evans, Peter, Embedded Autonomy: States & Industrial Transformation, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1995.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 114(1), 83-116.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Michael Gavin, "Securing Stability and Growth in a Shock Prone
Region: The Policy Challenge for Latin America," Inter-American Development Bank,
Washington, DC, 1996.

Helliwell, John, “Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic Growth,” British
Journal of Political Science 24, 1994, 225-248.

Hoff, Karla, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Modern Economic Theory and Development," World Bank,
October 1999.

Isham, Jonathan, Daniel Kaufmann, and Lant Pritchett, “Civil Liberties, Democracy, and the
Performance of Government Projects,” The World Bank Economic Review, May 1997, 219-42.

Jacoby, Sanford M., "Risk and the Labor Market: Societal Past as Economic Prologue," Institute
of Industrial Relations, UCLA, 1998.

Jaggers, K., and T.R. Gurr, “Tracking Democracy’s Third Wave with Polity III Data,” Journal of
Peace Research 32, 1995, 469-482.
                                              36


Johnson, Simon, and Andrei Shleifer, "Coase v. the Coasians: The Regulation and Development
of Securities Markets in Poland and the Czech Republic," MIT and Harvard, September 1999.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, "Governance Matters," unpublished
paper, The World Bank, May 1999.

Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics & Politics, November 1995, 207-
228.

Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-
Country Investigation,” unpublished manuscript, July 1996.

Lau, Lawrence J., Yingyi Qian, and Gerard Roland, "Reform Without Losers: An Interpretation
of China's Dual-Track Approach to Transition," November 1997.

Lin, Justin Yifu, and Jeffrey B. Nugent, "Institutions and Economic Development," in J.
Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Economic Development, vol. 3A, North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1995.

Meade, J.E., and others, The Economics and Social Structure of Mauritius--Report to the
Government of Mauritius, London, Methuen and Co., Ltd., 1961.

Miles, William F.S., "The Mauritius Enigma," Journal of Democracy, 10(2), April 1999, 91-104.

North, Douglass C., and R. Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1973.

North, Douglass C., and Barry Weingast, "Constitutions and Commitment : The Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England," Journal of Economic
History, XLIX, 1989, 803-832.

Pritchett, Lant, “Economic Growth: Hills, Plains, Mountains, Plateaus and Cliffs,” unpublished
paper, World Bank, October 1997.

Przeworski, Adam, and Fernando Limongi, “Political Regimes and Economic Growth,” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 1993, 51-69.

Qian, Yingyi, Gerard Roland, and Chenggang Xu, "Coordinating Changes in M-Form and U-
Form Organizations," paper for the Nobel Symposium, August, 1999.

Quinn, Dennis P., and John T. Woolley, “Democracy and National Economic Performance: The
Search for Stability,” School of Business, Georgetown University, June 1998.

Rodrik, Dani, “Understanding Economic Policy Reform,” Journal of Economic Literature,
March 1996, 9-41.
                                              37



Rodrik, Dani, "Democracy and Economic Performance," unpublished paper, December 1997.

Rodrik, Dani, "Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?" Journal of Political
Economy, 106(5), October 1998, 997-1032.

Rodrik, Dani, "Why Is There So Much Economic Insecurity in Latin America?" unpublished
paper, October 1999. (http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/rodrik/insecur.pdf)

Rodrik, Dani, The New Global Economy and Developing Countries: Making Openness Work,
Overseas Development Council, Washington, DC, 1999(b).

Rodrik Dani, “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
1999(b).

Rodrik, Dani, "Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and Growth
Collapses," Journal of Economic Growth, 4(4), December 1999, forthcoming.
(http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/rodrik/conftext.pdf)

Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Wing Thye Woo, "Understanding China's Economic Performance,"
Journal of Policy Reform, forthcoming.

Sah, Raaj K., “Fallibility in Human Organizations and Political Systems,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 5(2), Spring 1991, 67-88.

Tavares, Jose, and Romain Wacziarg, “How Democracy Fosters Growth,” Harvard University,
August 1996.

Temple, Jonathan, and Paul Johnson, "Social Capability and Economic Growth," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, August 1998, 113(3), 965-90.

Tornell, Aaron, and Philip R. Lane, "The Voracity Effect," American Economic Review, 89(1),
March 1999, 22-46.

Unger, Roberto Mangabeira, Democracy Realized: The Progressive Alternative, Verso, London
and New York, 1998.

Wellisz, Stanislaw, and Philippe Lam Shin Saw, "Mauritius," in Ronald Findlay and Stanislaw
Wellisz, eds., The Political Economy of Poverty, Equity, and Growth: Five Open Economies,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1993.

Williamson, John, ed., The Political Economy of Policy Reform, Washington, DC, Institute for
International Economics, 1994.
                                                                              38




                             coef = .02196586, se = .00923168, t = 2.38

                                                                                                                               Botswana
                 .062969




                                                                                                             Mauritiu


                                                                                                  Lesotho
                                                   Singapor                Seychell
                                                    Taiwan
e( gr7089 | X)




                                                         Korea                     Brazil                 Malta
                                                                                               Portugal
                                                                 Tunisia         Ecuador
                                                                                                    Colombia Dominica
                                                                 Mexico           Cyprus      Kenya
                                                           Paraguay
                                    Syria                                            Trinidad
                                                                                          Japan Iceland
                                                                              Mali
                                                                               Indonesi ItalyNorway
                                                                                              Barbados                Costa Ri
                                               Algeria                              Turkey      Austria
                                                     Jordan        Spain     Zimbabwe France
                                                                                   Malaysia
                                                                        Uganda
                                                                      Finland     Canada    United K Ireland
                                                                                 Thailand
                                                                           Guatemal     Greece
                                                 Uruguay                                     Honduras
                                                                                         Belgium
                              Yugoslav        South af     Swazilan
                                    Chile                                          Switzerl Salva Sri Lank
                                                                                         ElBanglade
                            Hungary     Panama                        Togo
                                                                      Malawi  Germany,
                                                                                   Sweden   Senegal
                                                           Haiti           Israel                                              India
                                                                              Pakistan Netherla
                               Poland                                   United
                                                                  Myanmar       S
                                                                               Sierra  Venezuel
                                                                                       L               Jamaica
                                                                            Bolivia
                                                                                Denmark
                                                                             Australi
                                                      ArgentinCentral
                                                                 Peru
                                                                      Ghana New Zeal
                                                                                                  Fiji

                                     Iran, I.                                 Zambia
                                                                 Niger     Guyana
                                                                  Zaire    Philippi
                                                Mozambiq
                                                                                                                    Papua Ne
                 -.038903

                        -.462324                                                                                          .478619
                                                                      e( dem7089 | X )


Figure 1:                      Partial correlation between democracy and economic growth, 1970-89
                               (controlling for initial income, education, and regional dummies)
                                                                         39

                         coef = -.02327064, se = .0073816, t = -3.15

                                       Somalia
              .046139



                         Syria Chile
                                                        Niger

                                                     Guyana
                              Algeria                                                                                        Gambia
                                                                                              Nigeria
                                                 Chad
                                                        Guinea-B
e( sdc | X)




                                       Paraguay
                                  Yugoslav

                                    Jordan               Portugal
                                         Nicaragu
                                Iran, I.   Turkey                     Liberia
                                                                                   Kenya Jamaica
                                                                             Trinidad
                                       Congo              Togo
                                                            Iceland                          Dominica
                                              Burundi
                                                 Finland
                                                    Indonesi        United S
                                            Spain Korea
                                                     Argentin   Ghana  United K Japan
                                                                    Thailand
                                                                      Zimbabwe                Papua Ne
                                              Mauritan     Greece  Canada
                                                                    Malaysia
                                                                       Italy
                                                                           Brazil
                             Panama                                        Banglade
                                                                               Fiji
                                    Uruguay            Peru Uganda
                                                             Bolivia
                                                               Germany,
                                                                     Pakistan
                                                                   Norway
                                                               France                                  Mauritiu      India
                                                         Philippi
                                                           Mexico
                                                                Australi
                                    Gabon                 New  Denmark
                                                                ZealMorocco
                                                         ZaireSweden
                                                                        Austria
                                                          SwitzerlNetherlaIreland    Cyprus
                             Haiti Singapor Tunisia Mali Cape ver ElTanzania
                                                                         Salva      Venezuel      Barbados
                                                        Malawi
                                                          South    af                    Israel
                                                                                          Colombia
                                                                                           Sri Lank
                                                              Egypt
                                     Benin Central        Cote
                                                      Guatemal    d'I Zambia                                Costa Ri
                                                           Cameroon  Honduras
                                                                          Nepal
                                                                Ecuador              Senegal
                                                                   Madagasc Burkina
                                                                                                     Malta
                                                                    Ethiopia
              -.024103

                     -.366946                                                                                        .524269
                                                                e( dem7089 | X )

Figure 2:                  Partial correlation between democracy and consumption volatility
                                                                            40

                              coef = -1.8392835, se = .83629833, t = -2.2

                                                                            Uruguay
                   4.30598
                                                                              Cyprus
                                                                                                  Chad
                                                        Botswana                                  Tanzania
                                                                    Chile
                                                                              Mauritiu
                                                                                  Ghana
                                                                 Barbados
                              Korea
                               Burundi                Ireland                      Mexico
                                                            Tunisia
                                    Rwanda                                                     Spain
                                                  Malta           Taiwan                Angola
                                                                                           Mali
                                                Japan
                                                           Brazil
                                              Portugal
                                                     Colombia         Malawi                 Malaysia
                                                                                       Thailand    Pakistan
                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                  Guinea
                                                                                   Senegal
e( differen | X)




                                                        Costa  Ri      Finland
                                                                       Ethiopia  Gabon
                                                Dominica                 Togo
                                                                            Burkina         Kenya
                                                          Italy    Zimbabwe                  Morocco
                                                                                                  Ecuador
                                                                  El   Israel Panama Sri Lank
                                                                     Salva
                                                                                                        SouthGuatemal
                                                                                                              af
                                                        Greece
                                                         Germany, Singapor
                                                                      Syria Congo
                                                           Denmark Austria
                                Somalia                     Paraguay
                                                             HondurasVenezuel France
                                                                                Niger                     Belgium
                                                                                                         Switzerl
                                                                                                                            Canada
                                                   Jamaica      Sweden         CentralAustrali
                                                                              Benin                     United SBolivia       India
                                             Mauritan     Norway
                                                         Iceland                                  Zaire       Peru
                                                                Netherla              Argentin
                                                Haiti                                      New Zeal
                                                                                       Algeria
                                                                             Gambia
                                              Egypt                                   Sierra L
                                                                            Mozambiq              Indonesi
                                                                                                            Nepal
                                                                                           Zambia

                          Madagasc           Jordan                                    United K   Cote d'I
                                                                   Nicaragu
                                                                                           Nigeria            Trinidad
                                                                                                     Uganda

                                                                                                  Philippi
                                                                                                       Guyana


                                                                                              Cameroon
                   -5.65361

                          -.557479                                                                                        .553313
                                                                      e( elf60 | X )

Figure 3:                       Ethnic cleavages and growth differentials (pre- and post- break year in
                                trend growth)
                                                                               41




                              coef = 3.4063786, se = .96476657, t = 3.53

                                                                                                              Botswana
                   4.59929
                                                                              Tanzania
                                                                     Chad
                                                                     Cyprus                 Mauritiu   Barbados
                                             Uruguay
                                                                        Ghana

                                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                                                            Ireland
                                                      Chile                                             Malta
                                                                  Mexico
                                                                      Angola                         Colombia
                                                                                                            India
                                                                      Mali Pakistan
                                                                                Thailand                  BurkinaCosta Ri
                                                                                    JapanKenya Sri Lank
                                                                                  Guatemal
e( differen | X)




                                             Spain          TaiwanKorea  MalawiSenegalEthiopia                                 Gambia
                                                               Burundi Rwanda
                                                                          Turkey
                                                                              Canada             Dominica
                                               Tunisia              Guinea
                                                               Brazil
                                                                  Morocco           Belgium El Salva
                                                           South  afFinland
                                                               Portugal TogoSwitzerl
                                                      Ecuador        Zimbabwe    ItalyS Austria
                                                                            United                      Jamaica
                                                                                Australi
                                                                       Israel FranceVenezuel
                                                                                   Denmark
                                                                    Bolivia     Germany,
                                                                            Honduras
                                                                        Niger
                                                                          Greece
                                                                      Zaire     NewNorway
                                                                               Sweden  Zeal
                                                                                        Iceland
                                      Gabon             Congo                       Netherla
                                                                                   Indonesi
                                                       Singapor
                                                              Paraguay
                                                Peru      Central           Sierra    L
                                        Panama          Benin
                                                     Argentin       Nepal
                                                                     Mauritan
                                                                                Zambia
                              Syria                    SomaliaHaiti
                                                      Mozambiq Egypt                 United K
                                      Algeria
                                                                               Trinidad Nigeria
                                                            Cote d'I
                                                                 Nicaragu          Madagasc
                                                                                      Guyana
                                                          Uganda            Philippi
                                                Jordan
                                                                             Cameroon
                   -5.12568

                          -.548494                                                                                          .667472
                                                                     e( democ70s | X )

Figure 4:                       Democracy and growth differentials (pre- and post- break year in
                                trend growth)
                                                                            42


                              coef = 3.533285, se = 1.0630298, t = 3.32

                                                                                                             Barbados
                   3.69551                      Uruguay
                                                                                      Cyprus


                                                              Chile                                Ireland                 India
                                                                                                             Sri Lank
                                                                                                              Malaysia

                                                                                                                     ColombiaMalta
                                                                                                                               Costa Ri
                                                                               Mexico          Thailand
                                                                                                 Pakistan
                                                    Tunisia                                             Dominica
                                                                                                  Guatemal
                                                                                        Turkey
e( differen | X)




                                                                           Morocco                         El Salva
                                                      Spain                        Indonesi
                                                                                 VenezuelCanada
                                                                                      Korea
                                                                         Taiwan
                                                                          Finland
                                                                                Switzerl              Japan
                                                                               Brazil    Italy  Belgium        Jamaica
                                                                                        DenmarkAustria
                                                                                      Australi
                                                                               New United
                                                                                      Zeal
                                                                                       Germany,
                                                                            Portugal         S
                                                                                         Honduras
                                                                                 Israel France
                                                                  Ecuador           SwedenNorway
                                                                                            Iceland
                                                                                  Bolivia
                                                                                   Nepal Netherla
                                                         Singapor            Paraguay       Greece
                                                 Panama     Argentin Haiti
                                                           Peru

                                                                                        United K
                              Syria   Algeria                               Egypt



                                                                                       Trinidad
                                                                       Nicaragu
                                                                                             Guyana
                                                                                  Philippi

                                                          Jordan
                   -4.49398

                          -.546667                                                                                         .428284
                                                                      e( democ70s | X )

Figure 5:                      Democracy and growth differentials (pre- and post- break year in
                               trend growth), excluding sub-Saharan African countries
                                                                               43

                               coef = -2.3612801, se = .9549911, t = -2.47

                                                 Botswana
                   4.47472
                                                                                           TanzaniaChad
                                                                                                              Cyprus
                                                                    Uruguay
                                                            Ghana
                                                Malaysia             Ireland
                                                                                  Chile
                                                            Malta                                           CostaMexico
                                                                                                                   Ri
                                                                                  Colombia
                                                    India             Sri Lank Mali
                                         Togo                Thailand                                 Senegal
                                                 Dominica Burkina Pakistan
                                                       Burundi                         Guatemal
                                                                       Japan                         Kenya Rwanda
                                                                      Gambia
e( differen | X)




                                                                                                     Spain Tunisia
                                                                                                Malawi                        Canada
                                                   Jamaica    Turkey           Taiwan
                                                       Ethiopia          Belgium                        Morocco
                                                                                                        Korea
                                                                                                         Gabon
                                                                                                          El Salva Venezuel
                              Switzerl                      Brazil                              Guinea
                                                                            Finland                  Ecuador
                                                              South af      Italy                 Congo              Portugal   United S
                                                      Zimbabwe                Australi       Bolivia
                                                                           Austria
                                                                      IsraelDenmark
                                                                          New    Zeal                 France
                                                                            Germany,
                                                                        Iceland                       Singapor
                                                  Honduras                  Norway
                                                                               Sweden           Indonesi
                                                          Niger             Netherla Greece       Zaire
                                                                                                   Panama
                                                                                                   Zambia
                                                                                                   Central
                                                                Peru                                   Paraguay
                                                                                                 BeninSierra
                                                                               Argentin                       L
                                                                                                    Nepal
                                                                                                                  Syria
                                                                                                   Algeria     Somalia
                                                               Trinidad    United K                  Haiti
                                                                                                            Egypt
                                                                         Guyana Nigeria
                                                                                                         Cote d'I
                                                                                                           Nicaragu
                                                                                            Madagasc
                                                                                                 Philippi
                                                                                                  Uganda
                                                                                                     Jordan

                                                                                    Cameroon
                   -5.22294

                          -.559218                                                                                        .443639
                                                                       e( mono_x | X )

Figure 6:                         Institutional (de jure) independence of the executive and growth
                                  differentials (pre- and post- break year in trend growth)
                                                                              44


                               coef = -2.3367757, se = .63331585, t = -3.69

                                       Botswana
                   4.47472
                                                                       Tanzania                 Chad
                                                              Cyprus
                                                                                                   Uruguay
                                                                                       Ghana
                                        Malaysia                    Ireland
                                                                                                       Chile
                                           Costa Ri      Malta                                    Mexico
                                                   Colombia
                                           India   Sri Lank                                  Mali
                                                                             Senegal
                                                                                 Thailand
                                                                                    Togo
                                                                       Burkina
                                                                          Dominica Guatemal Pakistan
                                                                                      Burundi
                                                                        JapanKenya           Rwanda
                              Gambia
e( differen | X)




                                                                                    Canada Malawi                  Tunisia
                                                                                                                   Spain
                                       Jamaica                         Turkey                Taiwan
                                                                 Ethiopia
                                                                       El Salva
                                                                              Belgium                  KoreaMoroccoBrazil Gabon
                                                                Venezuel                Guinea
                                                                                    Switzerl
                                                                             Finland         Ecuador
                                                        South af                 Congo
                                                                                     United SPortugal
                                                                          Italy Australi
                                          Zimbabwe                          Austria                   Bolivia
                                                                      IsraelDenmark
                                                                            New Zeal
                                                                            Germany,                    France
                                                                        Iceland          Singapor
                                                                     Honduras
                                                                           Norway
                                                                                Sweden
                                                                               Indonesi
                                                                             Netherla
                                                                                Niger             Zaire Greece
                                                                                                           Panama
                                                                                                      Zambia
                                                                                                Central
                                                                                                      Paraguay
                                                                                                        BeninPeru
                                                                                 Sierra L                   Argentin
                                                                                           Nepal
                                                                                                                              Syria
                                                                                                      Somalia         Algeria
                                                         Trinidad          United K       Haiti
                                                                                      Egypt
                                                 Guyana                                          Nigeria        Cote d'I
                                                                                                           Nicaragu
                                                                             Madagasc
                                                                                                   Philippi
                                                                                                   UgandaJordan


                                                                                               Cameroon
                   -5.22294

                          -.833472                                                                                     .603293
                                                                       e( xconst_x | X )

Figure 7:                        Operational (de facto) independence of the executive and growth
                                 differentials (pre- and post- break year in trend growth)
                                                                               45




                              coef = 2.4286182, se = .7411522, t = 3.28

                                                                                                                   Botswana
                   4.47472
                                                               Chad
                                                                 Tanzania
                                                                                      Cyprus
                                        Uruguay
                                                                  Ghana
                                                                                                   Malaysia
                                                                                    Ireland
                                             Chile
                                                                 Malta                                  Costa Ri
                                                     Mexico                                  Colombia
                                                                     Mali      Sri Lank       India
                                                                     Senegal
                                                                          Thailand
                                                 Dominica Burundi      Pakistan
                                                                            Guatemal
                                                                                Togo Burkina
                                                               Kenya
                                                                Rwanda            Japan                                       Gambia
e( differen | X)




                                     Tunisia
                                    Spain                           Malawi Canada
                                          Taiwan                    TurkeyEthiopia                            Jamaica
                                         Gabon Brazil        Korea  Morocco   Belgium
                                                                              El Salva
                                                                      Guinea
                                                                        Switzerl             Venezuel
                                                         CongoPortugal    Ecuador
                                                                            Finland
                                                 SouthBolivia
                                                        af            United   S Italy
                                                                           Australi
                                                                   Zimbabwe  Austria
                                                                           Denmark
                                                                            France
                                                                   IsraelGermany,
                                                                            New    Zeal
                                                         Singapor               Iceland Honduras
                                                                            Norway
                                                                       Sweden   Indonesi
                                                                  Zaire Niger
                                                                Greece     Netherla
                                               Panama         Zambia
                                                             Central
                                              Peru     Benin Paraguay
                                        Argentin                  Sierra L
                                                      Nepal
                              Syria
                                      Algeria    Somalia
                                                            TrinidadHaiti    United K
                                                   Egypt
                                                                                        Guyana
                                                 Cote d'I Nigeria
                                                           Nicaragu
                                                               Madagasc
                                                        Philippi
                                                          Uganda
                                           Jordan

                                                              Cameroon
                   -5.22294

                          -.568213                                                                                       .94865
                                                                      e( parcom_x | X )

Figure 8:                       Ability of non-elites to access political institutions and growth
                                differentials (pre- and post- break year in trend growth)
                                                                         46


                               coef = -11.764853, se = 4.6754887, t = -2.52

                                                                Malawi
                   16.0142

                                                                               Lesotho




                                                                    Mexico              Brazil
                                                                                    Turkey
                                             Chile                         United S
                                                                         Guatemal
                              Panama                                                   Australi
                                                                                          Japan
                                                                                             New Zeal
                                                     Tunisia
                                                       Singapor
                                                            Algeria
                                                                 Malaysia
 e( giniall | X)




                                                                                                Honduras
                                                                           Sri Lank                                       Botswana
                                                                                                                           Philippi
                                                                                            Israel
                                                       South Af                                Thailand
                                                                                                 Bolivia
                                                                              Cananda            United   K
                                                                         Morocco          Greece          Dominica
                                                                                                          Argentin
                                                                                                         Ireland Venezuel
                                                                                       SwedenPoland
                                                       Jordan                              ItlayNetherla
                                                                                   Columbia
                                                                                 Germany,
                                            Bahamas,
                                                                                            Hungary
                                                                             China      Denmark
                                                                                     Pakistan
                                                                                Norway                                India
                                                                       Cote d'I      Luxembou Belgium
                                                                     Banglade           Austri      Nigeria
                                                                                       Ecuador     Spain
                                                                                                    Uruguay
                                                                                    Korea       Jamaica
                                                                      Ghana                      Uganda
                                                                                  Indonesi                  Costa Ri Mauritiu

                                                                         Finland


                                                                                               Peru
                   -13.3838

                          -.48638                                                                                     .310544
                                                                  e( democnew | X )




Figure 9: Partial association between democracy and economy-wide inequality (Gini
coefficient), 1985-89

Controls: log gdp/cap, log gdp/cap squared, urbanization; dummies for Latin America, East
Asia, SSA, socialist countries, and oil exporters.
                                                    47


Table 1

Variance of economic performance under different political regimes
                  coeff. of variation of long-run economic growth rates under:
                           autocracies                   democracies

unconditional                1.05                              0.54

conditional                  0.70                              0.48

                        "low democracy"                  "high democracy"

unconditional                1.02                              0.61

conditional                  0.64                              0.54




Note: See text for explanation.
                                                     48



Table 2

Political participation and volatility of economic
performance
(estimated coefficient on democracy from multiple regression)

                               dependent variable
                                       standard deviation of growth
                                            rate of:
                 real GDP   consumption investment consumption
                   OLS          OLS          OLS            IV

democracy         -1.31**      -2.33**        -4.36*       -4.97**
                   (0.60)       (1.09)        (1.61)        (2.10)

N                   101          101           101              88



Note: Additional regressors (not shown): log per-capita GDP, log
population, a measure of exposure to external risk, dummies for
Latin America, East Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and OECD. Robust
standard errors reported in parentheses. Secondary enrollment ratio
used as instrument in IV estimation. Asterisks denote levels of
statistical significance: ** 95 percent; * 99 percent.
