NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DO DANCERS SMOKE?
TIME PREFERENCE, OCCUPATIONAL CHOICE, AND WAGE GROWTH

Lalith Munasinghe
Nachum Sicherman

Working Paper 7542
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7542
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

We thank George Loewenstein and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of NY, the University
of Oregon, Columbia University, and the Society for Advanced Behavioral Economics conference in San
Diego, June 1999, for many helpful comments and suggestions. We are indebted to Rachel Singal and Jaime
Rosenfeld for collecting and analyzing the survey data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Lalith Munasinghe and Nachum Sicherman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why Do Dancers Smoke? Time Preference, Occupational Choice,
and Wage Growth
Lalith Munasinghe and Nachum Sicherman
NBER Working Paper No. 7542
February 2000
JEL No. J2, J3, I1
ABSTRACT

Time preference is a key determinant of occupational choice and investments in human capital.
Since careers are characterized by different wage growth prospects, individual discount rates play an
important role in the relative valuation of jobs or occupations. We predict that individuals with lower
discount rates are more likely to select into jobs or occupations with steeper wage profiles. To test this
hypothesis we use smoking as an instrument for time preference. Panel data from the NLSY (1979-94)
are ideal for our purposes since it contains information on smoking behavior in addition to detailed work
histories and other socio-economic variables. We find that smokers have substantially flatter wage profiles,
and a higher marginal rate of substitution of current wages for future wages. Incidentally, a survey of several
hundred undergraduates at Barnard and Columbia College show that dance majors have the highest
smoking rate.

Lalith Munasinghe
Department of Economics
Barnard College, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
lm25@columbia.edu

Nachum Sicherman
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ns38@columbia.edu

"I'd like to stop smoking. I have smoked for about 15 years. I was a dancer, and all dancers smoke,
it's the most bizarre thing", Newark Star-Ledger, Jan. 1, '98.

1. Introduction
The title of our paper “Why Do Dancers Smoke?” suggests a paradox. Dancers place great
importance on physical health, strength, and fitness; and yet, smoking leads to untoward health,
loss of strength, and diminished fitness. We contend that the concept of time preference, or, in the
economic parlance, of individual discount rates – i.e. the variation in individual valuations of
present versus future consumption – resolves this apparent paradox. Both activities sacrifice some
distant benefit for a more present-oriented gratification. Dancers are passionate, if not obsessed,
with their work; but their careers are short with dim, if not non-existent, prospects of future
earnings. Even more obvious is the fact that smokers sacrifice future health for an immediate
source of pleasure. Hence the answer we consider is that dancers smoke because they are more
present-oriented.1
The focus of the paper is on smoking and wage dynamics. Our main objective is to first
empirically assess the correlation between smoking and wage growth over the life cycle, and
second, to ask whether the estimated correlation between smoking and wage dynamics is consistent
with the above time preference argument. Admittedly, our analysis of smoking and wage growth
does not focus on dancers per se, and the intention of the opening paragraph is simply to motivate
the hypothesis that individual discount rates may be a potentially important source of the observed
differences in wage growth prospects among careers. Hence we need to address two key questions.
1

Seminar participants never fail to point out the “real” reason why dancers smoke: weight control.
Although this answer is not inconsistent with our claim that dancers have higher discount rates,
among 120 plus professional dancers who smoke (based on a survey we conducted in New York
City in 2001), a reason for smoking they least agree with is “weight control.” Among the reasons
they most agree with are “relaxation” and “enjoyment.” In that survey, of over 300 professional
dancers, about 40% were smokers, a rate substantially higher than the U.S. average for this age
group. The Center for Disease Control reports that the average smoking rates for women and men
age 18-34 (approximate age range in our sample) in 2000 were just shy of 25% and 29%,
respectively (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2002). Our sample is heavily biased
toward women.
3

First, what are the correlations between smoking and wage dynamics? Second, is smoking a
reasonable proxy for an individual’s discount rate?
Smokers in the U.S. earn substantially less than non-smokers. For example, Levine et. al.
(1997), using the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY), find that smokers earn 11% and
17% less than non-smokers in 1984 and 1991, respectively. After controlling for a host of
individual and family characteristics, this wage gap reduces to 4.2% and 6.9%.2 Using the same
NLSY data, we find that the major source of this wage gap is the dramatic differences in wage
growth rates between smokers and non-smokers. To preview our main findings: smokers have
lower wages at the time they first enter the labor market compared to their non-smoking
counterparts. And more strikingly, smokers also experience substantially lower wage growth over
the first decade of their careers.
These differences in wage dynamics across smokers and non-smokers raise the interesting
interpretive question about the possible direct and indirect causal mechanisms that may account for
the observed correlations between smoking and wage dynamics. The evidence based on a detailed
empirical analysis fails to reject the hypothesis that smokers are more likely to be present-oriented
than their non-smoker counterparts, and hence our findings suggest that individual discount rates
may play a significant role in career choice, investment in human capital, and, subsequently,
differences in wage growth rates across individuals.
The idea that smoking is a proxy for discount rates is extensively documented in the
economics literature (Fuchs, 1982). Empirical studies find correlations between smoking and
various other behaviors related to future outcomes, including health status, educational attainment,
earnings levels, use of seat belts, physical exercise, and brushing and flossing teeth (Hersch and

2

See Leigh and Berger (1989) for an earlier study on the effect of smoking on wages.
4

Viscusi 1990; Hersch 1996; Levine et. al. 1997; Hersch 2000; Viscusi and Hersch 2001).3 Our
paper contributes to this literature by studying the role of time preference in predicting human
capital investments, and thus, individual wage dynamics, a topic that has received little, if any,
attention so far. In addition, our finding of a strong negative correlation between smoking and wage
growth may be relevant to the literature that shows a correlation between health and income among
adults (Smith, 1999). If individual discounting is causally linked to investments in health and
investments in human capital (on the job) that enhance wage growth, then the positive correlation
between health and income levels should become stronger with age since the benefits (and costs) of
these investments (or lack of) materialize only later in life.4
One of the major challenges to any discounting hypothesis is the fact that individual
discount rates are inherently unobservable. For example, in economics the discount rate is a
conceptual device – an abstraction, if you will – that we use to aggregate benefits and costs that
accrue over time. As such, the discount rate is not a fact but rather a plausible presumption that
individuals are likely to differ in terms of their relative valuation of present versus future
consumption. As a consequence, the purported link between smoking and discount rates can be
challenged by a variety of alternative hypotheses that can also claim to account for the observed
correlations between smoking and wage dynamics. Hence our empirical strategy is to explicitly test
an exhaustive list of plausible but alternative explanations. Note that any such hypothesis must be
on an omitted variable that is not only correlated with smoking but also more closely linked to

3

Of course smoking is affected by a variety of factors in addition to time preference. For example,
risk aversion, cigarette prices, parents’ behavior, and even residential location (Gruber and Zinman,
2000), are likely determinants of smoking. To the extent that smoking better reflects these other
factors vis-à-vis time preference, our assumption that smoking is a good proxy for discounting is
indeed less sound, and thus, may lead to weaker empirical results.

4

Smith (1999) focuses on the direct dual causation from health to wealth and from wealth to health.
However, he alludes to a third possibility: “Or perhaps some unobserved factor makes some people
both healthier and wealthier” (page 148). Our hypothesis is that individual discount rate is a likely
contender of such an unobserved factor.
5

workers’ productivity and earnings. The obvious strategy, therefore, is to include a rich set of
control variables – that represent the alternative hypotheses – and test for the importance and
significance of the net correlations between smoking and wage dynamics.
Although we include a host of control variables in our regression analyses, this approach
has two caveats that should be noted. First, some of these control variables are also likely to be
correlated with time preference, and to the extent they are, the estimated net smoking effects should
be interpreted as a lower bound of the effects of individual discounting. Second, since the discount
rate is unobservable it is always possible to claim that the observed net correlations are due to yet
“another” unobserved, or, even worse, unobservable individual characteristic. Of course, to qualify
as a genuinely distinct hypothesis this omitted variable must be uncorrelated with discounting.
These considerations and caveats guide the selection of control variables and our interpretation of
the empirical findings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss various
theoretical linkages between wage dynamics, time preference, and smoking. In Section 3 we
present our empirical results and discuss our findings. Section 4 concludes. A bibliography, data
appendix, tables, and a figure are appended at the end.

2. Smoking and Wage Dynamics: Conceptual Links
In this section we consider various explanations for the observed correlations between smoking and
wage dynamics. In Figure 1 we attempt to highlight some key factors and their inter-relationships
to smoking and wage dynamics, including time preference and education. We begin with the
discounting hypothesis and then continue to discuss various alternative hypotheses that might also
explain the observed correlation between smoking and wage dynamics, including learning and
education, among others.

6

Discounting. Although our paper does not present a theory of time preference, in Figure 1 we list
some possible determinants of individual time preference since some of these factors are likely to
be selected as control variables. Apart from what might be unexplained sources of time preference,
we think that background factors such as parental income and their educational attainments, family
stability, and religious fervor, are likely determinants of time preference.5
The role of individual discount rates in predicting human capital investments, including onthe-job training, has been widely discussed in the labor economics literature (Becker 1975; Mincer
1974).6 For example, Haley (1973) explicitly states: “The rate of discount will be inversely related
to the time spent specializing. This result makes eminently good sense. The higher the discount
rate, the less value an individual places on future dollars relative to present dollars. The individual
with the relatively higher discount rate will be less inclined to forego present income for
investment purposes than would the individual with a relatively low discount rate. Therefore, if all
other parameters are the same, the individual with the higher discount rate will stop specializing in
the production of human capital sooner than the individual with a lower discount rate” (page 938).
This human capital investment framework is ideally suited to study the effects of time
preference on various aspects of wage dynamics. If individuals with higher discount rates are less
likely to invest in all forms of human capital then the ramifications for wages at the time of first
5

Becker and Mulligan (1997) present a formal model of individual time preference where
individual discount rates are viewed as an optimal choice variable given marginal costs and
benefits of investment in activities that affect time preference.
6

By focusing on heterogeneity of time preference among individuals we sidestep various
interesting and controversial issues related to individual discounting. For example, Loewenstein
(1992) challenges the implicit, if not standard, notion in microeconomic theory that individuals
have a unique discount rate for all behaviors with future consequences. Although we speak of an
individual discount rate, our assumption is much weaker than the assumption challenged by
Loewenstein. We only need to assume that there is a high correlation of implied individual discount
rates over a limited set of behaviors. Another recent debate centers on the appropriate specification
of discounting. The issue is whether the standard exponential function should be replaced by a
hyperbolic specification (e.g. see Laibson 1997). For a labor market application of hyperbolic
discounting see Della Vigna and Paserman (2000). For a critical review of hyperbolic discounting,
see Rubinstein (2003).
7

entry into the labor market (first wage) and wage growth are straightforward. Individuals with high
discount rates are likely to have lower and flatter wage profiles: lower because of smaller pre-labor
market human capital investments and flatter because of smaller on-the-job human capital
investments.
Theories of compensation based on considerations other than human capital are also likely
to have similar predictions. For example, workers with high discount rates will find jobs with backload compensation – on account of say high monitoring costs (Lazear, 1981) or high turnover costs
(Salop and Salop, 1976) – less attractive than their more future oriented counterparts. The general
point is that dynamic theories of compensation imply that individuals with higher discount rates are
less likely to self-select into jobs that weigh future wages more heavily than current wages.7
Since individual discount rates are unobservable, we study their effect on wage dynamics
by assuming that smoking is a proxy for time preference. Hence our reduced form hypothesis is
that smokers will have lower and flatter wage profiles. This presumed linkage between wage
dynamics and smoking via time preference, however, must be moderated by consideration of other
possible explanations for the observed correlations between smoking and wage dynamics. In the
following we rehearse various alternative explanations with a view to empirical testing.

7

Since individual discount rates are defined in terms of current versus future consumption and not
in terms of current versus future incomes, we implicitly assume that workers face borrowing
constraints against returns on investments in human capital. It should be noted, however, that even
if the capital market is perfect, the returns on an investment in schooling, for example, depend on
hours of work if schooling raises market productivity by a larger percentage than it raises nonmarket productivity. Individuals who are more future-oriented desire relatively more leisure at
older ages. Therefore, they work more at younger ages and have a higher discounted marginal
benefit on a given investment than persons who are more present oriented.
8

Unobserved Learning. Heterogeneity of learning ability is another potential explanation of the
observed correlation between smoking and wage dynamics. For example, more efficient (able)
learners are likely to invest more in schooling as well as in other forms of human capital, including
job training. As a consequence these efficient learners will have a higher first wage and a steeper
wage profile. If they are also less likely to smoke because their higher learning ability leads them to
better understand the negative effects of smoking, then it is possible that this unobserved dimension
of ability could be the culprit behind the observed negative correlations between smoking and wage
dynamics.8 The fact that our regression results remain robust9 despite the inclusion of an
extraordinarily rich set of control variables related to ability (see footnote 9) strongly suggests that
unobserved ability is an unlikely explanation of the observed differences in wage dynamics across
smokers and nonsmokers.10
Education. Although we have stressed the direct effects of time preference on smoking and
occupational choice,11 we recognize other more subtle relationships between these variables. For
example, consider the various inter relationships involving education. First, although educational
levels (and other forms of human capital investments) are likely to be directly influenced by an

8

Since the NLSY has information on a battery of ten ASVAB test scores (see data appendix for
details), to claim that learning ability is unobserved seems somewhat tenuous. It stands to reason
that at least some subset of these test scores will be correlated with such learning ability, and thus
the inclusion of these test scores as independent variables in a wage growth regression should be a
sufficient test of the learning hypothesis.
9

While controlling for years of schooling reduced our estimated coefficients substantially,
including additional controls had much smaller or no effect on our results.

10

In another study we model wage dynamics as a function of individual discount rates and learning
efficiency, and derive an empirical test to address whether smoking reflects discounting or learning
ability. The empirical results overwhelmingly support the time preference hypothesis put forth in
this paper (Munasinghe and Sicherman 2004).
11

Wage growth is an important feature of occupations, and thus a key determinant of occupational
choice. Although occupations differ on many dimensions, our focus in this paper is on the wage
growth dimension only. As a consequence we view wage growth differences as reflecting
occupational choice.
9

individual's discount rate, there is also the possibility of reverse causality, namely, the effect of
education on time preference.12 Second, education could also impact smoking behavior
independent of time preference due to more efficient transmission of information about the hazards
of smoking among the educated (Grossman 1972, 1975, Kenkel 1991). Third, the observed positive
correlation between education and wage growth could be due to factors other than discounting such
as complementarities between schooling and job training in production technology. Hence,
including education as a control variable in a wage growth regression requires a more nuanced
interpretation of our estimates of smoking coefficients. To the extent that education is correlated
with smoking for reasons other than time preference, it should, of course, be included as a control
variable. However, to the extent education also reflects time preference, the estimated coefficient
on smoking (interpreted as a time preference effect) is likely to be biased downward.

Health. Health factors could be a direct explanation for the negative correlation between smoking
and wage growth. Smokers are likely to be less healthy, and health could be a determining factor in
investments in on-the-job training. 13 We attempt to address this potentially important factor by
explicitly considering the health status of our respondents in the NLSY. Although the negative
correlation between smoking and wage growth persists despite the inclusion of health status as a
12

Becker and Mulligan (1997) provide the following mechanism by which schooling can reduce
discount rates: “Schooling focuses students’ attention on the future. Schooling can communicate
images of the situations and difficulties of adult life, which are the future of childhood and
adolescence. In addition, through repeated practice at problem-solving, schooling helps children
learn the art of scenario simulation” (pp. 735-736).
13

The Becker-Mulligan framework suggests alternative interpretations of links between time
preference and other outcomes such as health status. While Fuchs (1982) argues that differences in
time preference explain differences in health related decisions and outcomes, Becker and Mulligan
argue for reverse causality: People in better health are more likely to invest in activities that reduce
their discount rate (because they expect to live longer). Of course exogenous events may also affect
time preference. For example, Hersch (2000) finds that the presence of young children reduces
smoking especially among women. Similarly, familiarity with life circumstances of older family
members may lead to a more vivid and tangible picture of what one’s own future beckons, and
hence to a higher valuation of future outcomes.
10

control variable, it indeed appears from our data that smokers are less healthy even in the short run.

Class. Another alternative explanation for the correlation between earnings growth and smoking
could be based on the sociological concept of social class hierarchy. The argument is that social
class, independent of time preference, is a determinant of both smoking and occupational choice,
and thus, also of wage growth. For example, the correlation between wage growth and smoking
could be due to the fact that blue-collar workers smoke more (because they are blue-collar workers)
and because blue-collar jobs are typically low wage growth jobs.14 A counter argument is
Banfield's thesis that social class itself is defined by time preference (Banfield 1970). To the extent
that social class and time preference do not perfectly overlap, some of our control variables such as
neighborhood income and parents education levels are likely to proxy social class. A related
explanation could also be based on the idea that the culture of occupations may be more or less
tolerant of smoking behavior.15 However, in our analysis this is unlikely to be a major cause of the
correlations since we observe smoking behavior at a relatively early age. In Section 3.5 we provide
additional evidence showing that smoking decisions are made at a relatively young age, based on a
survey of several hundred College undergraduate students.

Borrowing Constraints. An argument based on borrowing constraints can also account for the
correlations between smoking and wage dynamics. Suppose smokers come from relatively poor
households that face credit and liquidity constraints. As a consequence they will be less able to
make investments for the future. Because smoking is a proxy for family wealth and credit
constraints, first wage and wage growth are likely to be negatively correlated with smoking. We
14

Of course this explanation begs the question as to why blue collar workers smoke more than their
white-collar counterparts.

15

Although it is not obvious why jobs or occupations that are more tolerant of smoking are also
low wage growth.
11

attempt to address this issue by including parental education levels and measures of neighborhood
income as control variables in our regression analyses.

Risk Taking. Some studies show a positive correlation between smoking and risk taking (e.g.,
Viscusi and Hersch, 2001, Barsky et al., 1997). However, as Shaw (1996) shows, “risk takers are
rewarded with higher wage growth rates”. Therefore, the fact that we cannot directly control for
risk aversion is likely to lead to a downward bias of our estimated smoking coefficient.

3. Empirical Analysis
3.1. Data
Our data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY) are ideally suited to study the
role of smoking in predicting wage dynamics. The data contain information about smoking
behavior of the respondents in their late teens and early twenties. The panel nature of the data and
the fact that we observe the entire early work histories of the vast majority of our respondents allow
us to directly correlate smoking behavior with individual earnings over the first decade or so of
their careers. In addition, the NLSY data contain rich information on a variety of individual,
family, geographic and work related characteristics. As a consequence, we are able to evaluate a
large number of alternative hypotheses by including a rich array of control variables in our
regression analyses. In the appendix we have a detailed description of the NLSY data.

3.2. Wage growth measures
We estimate a variety of wage growth functions within a simple least-squares framework. The
basic regression equation is of the form:
(1)

∆Wi = α Si + X i ß + µi ,

where ∆W is a measure of earnings or wage growth, S is the smoking indicator, X is a vector of
12

individual and other characteristics, and µ is the error term for the ith individual. Given the young
age of the NLSY sample, we compute these wage growth measures for approximately the first
decade of labor market experience. Our construction of individual wage growth rates exploits the
panel nature of the NLSY by running, for each individual in our sample, a simple OLS wage
regression with time since first entering the labor market as the independent variable. We interpret
the time coefficient as an estimate of the individual average wage growth rate and implement it as
the dependent variable in our wage growth analyses. In the individual OLS regressions we specify
the wage rate metric both as the real wage and as the log of real wage.16
We compute wage growth measures over long and short panels. In the long panel we use
information over the entire observed career of each individual.17 However, in this panel labor
market spells are correlated with age and schooling levels. This leads to biased estimates of wage
growth rates since wage increases are more rapid in the early part of careers. For example, if we
observe a shorter period of labor market experience for more educated groups we are likely to over
estimate their wage growth rates. To address such concerns we construct wage growth measures
from a panel that is restricted to the first six years of labor market experience. We also create a
second short panel by further restricting it to only those with continuously valid wage observations
in the first six years of their careers.18

16

Standard wage equations, of course, only use the log specification. The reason for this practice is
the universal implementation of Mincer’s human capital earnings function. In the context of our
paper, where what matters is the perception of wage increases, it is not evident a priori which
measure of wage growth is more relevant. Therefore, we present evidence using both measures. In
a previous version of the paper we also used nominal wages and its log counterpart and duplicated
the same qualitative results.
17

Although individuals are surveyed from 1979 to 1994 in the NLSY, they “enter” our sample only
when they first enter the labor market.

18

If more future oriented individuals are more likely to work continuously, such a constraint might
bias the sample.
13

3.3 . Descriptive statistics
Table 1 presents smoking rates (reported in 1984) for a select group of occupations. In our entire
sample 38% were classified as smokers in 1984.19 The variation in this gross smoking rate is quite
dramatic with “Maids and Housemen” at the high end with a smoking rate of 62%, and “Teachers
in Elementary Schools” at the low end with less than 10%. These rates are comparable to estimates
found in other studies.20
Table 2 presents some descriptive statistics for smokers and non-smokers. These gross
mean characteristics are strikingly different. For example, educational attainment is substantially
higher among non-smokers.21 Non-smokers, on average, have over one and a quarter more years of
completed schooling, are much more likely to have a high school diploma, and score about 10
points higher on the Armed Forces Qualifying Tests (AFQT). The differences in labor market
outcomes are even more dramatic. Smokers enter the labor market earlier than non-smokers due to
their lower level of schooling, thus their higher level of potential market experience. However,
non-smokers have more “net” labor market experience, lower turnover rates, and earn more than
smokers22. Not surprisingly, a relatively smaller percent of non-smokers report health as a limiting

19

We define a smoker as someone who smokes at least one cigarette per day on average. This
definition is more or less comparable to the definition of “current smoker” used by the US Center
for Disease Control. See the data appendix for further details. As a comparison, Evans and
Montgomery (1994) report 30% for the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES), and
33% for the 1987 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). Levine, Gustafson and Velenchik
(1997), also using the NLSY, report smoking rates of 37% in 1984 and 29% 1991.

20

Although the detailed rankings of occupations by smoking has varied over the years (Nelson
et.al. 1994), they are broadly similar to ours, where blue collar workers are at the top, and white
collar workers are at the bottom, where teachers and sales representative have the lowest smoking
rates (Bang and Kim, 2001)
21

This is a well-documented finding (see Sander 1995).

22

The gap between “potential experience” (age-schooling-6) and “net” experience (actual years of
employment) also reflects the higher turnover and unemployment rates of smokers.
14

factor to the amount and kind of work they could do.23
The gross hourly pay is substantially lower for smokers compared to non-smokers. On
average, the non-smoker wage premium is over 15%. The differences in first wage and wage
growth rates provide further insight into the overall wage disparity between smokers and nonsmokers. The mean first wage is lower for smokers, but this difference (7%) is not as substantial as
the difference in overall wages. However, the substantial difference in the increases in hourly
wages (.34 versus .21) represents a huge wage growth premium of over 60% between smokers and
non-smokers, and thus suggests that wage growth differentials are largely responsible for the welldocumented fact that smokers earn less than non-smokers.24

3.4. Regressions results
3.4.1. First wage and smoking
Table 3 reports OLS estimates from regressions where the dependent variable is the individual’s
reported wage at the time the individual first enters the labor market (first wage). The numbers in
the table show only the coefficients of the smoking variable under various model specifications.
First wages are about forty cents lower for smokers. This represents a 4.7% wage gap between
smokers and non-smokers. This wage gap reduces by half after controlling for a rich set of
23

It is possible that individuals having health problems will select into jobs where their health
problems do not limit their work, thus resulting in an underestimation of health problems due to
smoking. We hope that the use of the word “could” in the survey instrument reduces such a
problem. (See data appendix for the exact wording of the survey instrument.) For additional
evidence on the health limitations of smoking on the job see Leigh (1985 and 1986).
24

If smoking is a proxy for discounting then our measure of wage growth may in fact
underestimate the “effective” wage growth rate for non-smokers. Since non-smokers are more
likely to have a College degree and thus have considerably higher debt, their wages during the
early part of careers will overstate their disposable income. Hence the “effective” wage growth
differential between non-smokers and smokers is likely to be even higher than what is suggested by
our measured wage growth differences. Similar considerations suggest that the “effective” first
wage differences between non-smokers and smokers will be smaller than the gross differences
presented in Table 2. These considerations, however, are unlikely to lead to any first order bias of
our regression coefficients since we control for completed years of schooling.
15

individual and family characteristics.25 As we argued earlier this estimated difference in first wages
is consistent with the time preference hypothesis that smokers, because they are more present
oriented, are likely to invest less in both observed and unobserved pre-market human capital, and
thus experience lower first wages. We now turn to our analyses of the correlations between
smoking and wage growth rates.

3.4.2. Wage growth and smoking
Tables 4 through 6 present regression results on the partial correlation between wage growth and
smoking. Although we report only the coefficient on smoking, the numerous estimates we present
reflect different data samples, wage metrics, and the addition of more control variables. The two
columns in each table show estimates from regressions using two different wage growth metrics
based on dollar wages and log wages, respectively. The numbers going down the rows are smoking
coefficients from regression specifications that cumulatively add more control variables. Note that
in our first row the only variable, in addition to smoking, is the first wage.26 Finally, Tables 4
through 6 show estimates based on the long, short and continuously short panels, respectively. In
Appendix Table 1 we report the full regression results for two of the models presented in Table 4.
The striking finding across the various wage growth metrics and model specifications is the
25

These estimated differences in first wages are likely to underestimate the true differences in
levels of pre-labor market human capital between non-smokers and smokers if non-smokers are
taking relatively higher initial wage reductions due to higher on-the-job investments.

26

The reason for including first wage in the regressions is because equilibrium considerations of
wage dynamics imply a trade-off between first wage and wage growth. Equilibrium in the labor
market implies that jobs with different wage growth rates will have comparable value. As a
consequence, when a worker accepts a job she must pay for the option of high wage growth by
accepting a lower initial wage. Hence these dynamic models of compensation imply a negative
correlation between first wage and wage growth, holding all other factors constant including the
discount rate (see, for example, Munasinghe, 2000). Although we do not report the coefficient
estimates of first wage here, across all our model specifications the estimated coefficient of first
wage is negative as predicted (see Appendix Table 1). In addition, first wage is likely to be an
indicator for unobserved heterogeneity in skills, thus providing an additional control for
heterogeneity across smokers and non-smokers.
16

negative and significant correlation between smoking and wage growth. This result is robust to the
inclusion of many control variables. The negative correlation between smoking and wage growth
increases somewhat after controlling for age, race, and gender. Unsurprisingly, including
completed years of schooling in wage growth regressions reduces this negative correlation
substantially. Note, however, that the net effect of smoking still remains significant across all
specifications. Including AFQT scores as a proxy for unobserved characteristics such as
intelligence, schooling quality, and skills learned at home,27 leads to a further reduction of the
negative effect of smoking. However, the negative smoking coefficient remains large and
significant.28
In Section 2.2 we discussed a variety of alternative explanations and the possible inclusion
of certain control variables as a means of evaluating the predictive power of these hypotheses. Our
finding that the inclusion of schooling reduces the smoking coefficient substantially raises an
interpretive question. To the extent that schooling and smoking are correlated for reasons quite
apart from time preference, the reduced impact of smoking on wage growth should be interpreted
as an unbiased estimate of time preference. However, to the extent that the correlation between
schooling and smoking is due to time preference, this estimated coefficient should be interpreted as
a lower bound of the time preference effect. Similar considerations apply to the inclusion of AFQT
scores as a control variable.
We also identified a variety of other potentially important control variables. The hypothesis
that budget constraints of poor households limit their access to human capital investments coupled
with the fact that the poor are more likely to smoke suggested the inclusion of household income as
27

While some studies used the AFQT scores as a proxy for intelligence, others have argued that
these scores reflect mainly quality of schooling and skills learned during childhood.

28

The AFQT score is a weighted mean of four test scores from the ten Armed Services Vocational
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) tests administered to the NLSY respondents in 1980 (See the data
appendix for details). Replacing the AFQT score with the ten separate scores did not affect our
results.
17

a test of this hypothesis. Since we do not have income information of parents of NLSY
respondents, we constructed a “neighborhood” income variable using census data from 1980 on the
basis of race and education level of parents. Although this average neighborhood income variable
is positively correlated with wage growth, our smoking coefficients remain highly robust.29 In fact
the inclusion of a host of other variables (in the last row of each table), such as health status,
religious affiliation and frequency of attendance of religious service, barely changes the coefficient
estimate of smoking.
In summary: the negative smoking coefficient reduces substantially when human capital
variables are included (education and AFQT scores); it is highly robust to a whole host of
additional control variables; and more importantly, it remains significant across all model
specifications.
Next we address the question of magnitude of these wage growth differences between
smokers and non-smokers. Table 7 shows the wage growth differentials for the three data samples
we use in our regression analyses. Each number represents the mean wage growth difference
between non-smokers and smokers as a percentage of the mean wage growth of smokers. The
numerator of the “gross” columns is based on sample mean differentials, and the numerator of the
“net” columns is based on the smoking coefficient from the wage growth regression with the most
extensive controls, including first wage, completed years of schooling and AFQT scores. These
results are presented for two wage growth metrics – real wage growth in dollar and percentage
terms, respectively.
The striking result is the huge difference in the mean wage growth rates between nonsmokers and smokers. Across the different sample restrictions and wage growth metrics, this wage
growth differential varies from a low of 31% to a high of 65%. Put simply, the mean annual wage
29

We also experimented with including an interaction between smoking and neighborhood income
to test whether smoking may have an even more negative effect on wage growth among poorer
households. Our estimates of this interaction effect were by and large insignificant. Perhaps, a more
refined measure of household wealth may have lead to a different result.
18

growth of non-smokers is about 50% higher than it is for smokers. As we predicted earlier in our
discussion, this differential is substantially reduced when the schooling effects are netted out. But
notice that the net effect of non-smoking on wage growth still remains sizeable – from a low
estimate of 15% to a high estimate of almost 40%. Of course, the real impact of discount rates on
wage growth is likely to be higher than this net estimate via smoking since schooling (as well as
other variables like AFQT scores) is also likely to be correlated with individual discount rates. So
these “net” effects should be interpreted as low bound estimates of the effect of discounting on
wage growth.

3.5 Survey of College Students
We conclude our empirical analysis by presenting some evidence on smoking and choice of college
majors. Our working hypothesis is that the correlation between occupational choice (i.e.,
investment in human capital) and smoking does not reflect any causal relationship. Both decisions
are affected by the individual’s rate of time preference. An alternative hypothesis is that there is a
causal relationship from occupational choice to smoking. For some reasons, working in a given
occupation affects the likelihood of smoking. This potential problem is partially taken care of by
the fact that the smoking information in our data is collected at a relatively young age, which is, in
most cases, prior to entry into the labor market. In this section we report smoking rates across
college majors. The results further support the hypothesis that smoking decisions are made prior to
entry into the labor market and probably even prior to entry to college.
We administered over 400 surveys to Barnard and Columbia College undergraduates in
1999. The survey contained a series of questions about smoking and other behaviors related to
future outcomes. We also collected information on gender, college major, ethnicity, religious
affiliation, and family background. Students from about 30 majors were sampled. However, in our
analysis we only use the top 10 majors because of sample size considerations. In Table 8 we

19

present smoking rates by major. The first column of Table 8 lists the top ten majors by sample size.
The order of majors from top to bottom is ranked from the highest smoking rate to the lowest. The
two majors with the highest smoking rates are Dance and English, and with the lowest smoking
rates are Engineering and Psychology. Defining smokers as those smoking at least five cigarettes
per day (“Smoker 2”) leads to a single switch between the top five and the bottom five majors –
History majors switch to the low end from the high end, and Political Science majors switch from
low to high. What is striking in this table is the large variation in smoking rates by major – from
67% of Dance majors to just 17% of Psychology majors. To address the possible objection that this
variation might be explained by the “culture” of departments or majors, we computed the percent
of current smokers that started smoking prior to coming to College. This information is presented
in the last column of Table 8 under the label “Prior Smoker.” The numbers do not show a strong
pattern, except that a higher fraction of smokers in the Dance and English departments appear to
have also started smoking prior to coming to College.
Although it might be tempting to assert that Dance and English majors have poorer earnings
prospects, we make no attempt here to present evidence about differences in expected future
earnings across college majors. This evidence, no doubt preliminary and tangential, should raise
some caution about the “culture” of occupation or profession as an important cause of smoking.

4. Conclusion
We find that smokers have lower and flatter wage profiles compared to non-smokers. This finding
is robust to a variety of wage growth measures and inclusion of a host of control variables. The
results are consistent with the hypothesis that smoking is a proxy for time preference, especially
given the use of an extraordinary rich set of controls for heterogeneity in ability across individuals.
Therefore, our findings highlight the importance of discounting in individuals’ decision making in
the labor market as well as in health related decisions.

20

Public policy consensus highlights the importance of early education and intervention. Our
findings suggest that such interventions should focus on influencing a child's time preference. The
factors and mechanisms that determine time preference should therefore be a high priority for
research and public policy discussion.

21

References
Bang, K. M., and Kim, J. H. Prevalence of Cigarette Smoking by Occupation and Industry in the
United States. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, September 2001, 233-239.
Banfield, E. C. The Unheavenly City: The Nature and Future of Our Urban Crisis. Boston, MA:
Little, Brown and Company, 1970.
Barsky, R., Juster, F. S., Kimball, M. S., and Shapiro, M.D. Preference Parameters and
Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1997, 537-580.
Becker, G. S., and Mulligan, C. The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, August 1997, 729-758.
Becker, G. Human Capital, 2nd Edition, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
Della Vigna, S., and .Paserman, D. Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting. Harvard University
working paper, January, 2000.
Evans, W. N., and Montgomery, E. Education and Health: Where There's Smoke There's an
Instrument. NBER working paper No. 4949, December 1994.
Fuchs, V. R. Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study. In V.R. Fuchs (Ed.) Economic
Aspects of Health, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1982, 93-120
Grossman, M. The Demand for Health. New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research,
1972.
Grossman, M. The Correlation between Health and Smoking. In Terleckyj, N.E. (Ed.) Household
Production and Consumption, New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975,
147-211.
Gruber, J. and Zinman, J. Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and Implications. NBER
Working paper No. 7780, July 2000.
Haley, W. J. Human Capital: The Choice between Investment and Income. The American
Economic Review, December 1973, 929-944.
Hersch, J. Smoking, Seat Belts, and Other Risky Consumer Decisions: Differences by Gender and
Race. Managerial and Decision Economics, September 1996, 471-481.
Hersch, J. Gender, Income Levels, and the Demand for Cigarettes. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, November 2000, 263-282.
Hersch, J., and .Viscusi, W. K. Cigarette Smoking, Seatbelt Use, and Differences in Wage-Risk
Tradeoffs. The Journal of Human Resources, Spring 1990, 202-227.
Kenkel, D. S. Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling. Journal Political Economics,
April 1991, 287-305.
22

Laibson, D. Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic discounting. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
1997, .443-477.
Lazear, E. P. Agency, Earnings Profile, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions. American Economic
Review, September 1981, 606-20.
Leigh, J. P. An empirical analysis of self-reported, work-limiting disability. Med Care. April
1985, 310-319.
Leigh, J. P. Correlates of Absence From Work due to Illness. Human Relations, January 1986, 81100.
Leigh, J. P. and Berger, M. C. Effects of Smoking and Being Overweight on Current Earnings.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Jan.-Feb. 1989, 8-14.
Levine, P. B., Gustafson, T. A., and Velenchik, A. D. More Bad News for Smokers? The Effects
of Cigarette Smoking on Wages. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1997, 493-509.
Loewenstein, G. The Fall and Rise of Psychological Explanation in the Economics of Intertemporal Choice. In G. Loewenstein and J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time. New York, NY:
Russell Sage, 1992, 3-34.
Mincer, J. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York, NY: Gregg Revivals, 1993; Original
publication 1974.
Munasinghe, L. Wage Growth and the Theory of Turnover. Journal of Labor Economics, April
2000, 204-220.
Munasinghe, L., and Sicherman, N. Wage Dynamics and Unobserved Heterogeneity: Time
Preference or Ability? Working Paper, Columbia University, 2004.
Nelson, D. E., Emont, S. L., Brackbill, R. M., Cameron, L. L., Peddicord, J., and Fiore, M. C.
Cigarette smoking prevalence by occupation in the United States. A comparison between 1978
to 1980 and 1987 to 1990. J. Occup. Med., May 1994, 516-525.
Rubinstein, A. “Economics and Psychology?” The Case of Hyperbolic Discounting. International
Economic Review, November 2003, 1207-1216.
Salop, J. and Salop, S. Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November 1976, 619-627.
Sander, W. Schooling and Smoking. Economics of Education Review, March 1995, 23-33.
Shaw, K L. An Empirical Analysis of Risk Aversion and Income Growth. Journal of Labor
Economics, October 1996, 626-653.
Smith, J. P. Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and Economic
Status. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1999, 145-166.

23

Viscusi, W. K., and Hersch, J. Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, May 2001, 269-280.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health, United States, 2002, with Chart book
on Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, MD: Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics Division of Data Services, September 2002.

24

5. Data Appendix: National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth, 1979-94
Our data is from the NLSY. This is a panel of 12,686 youth, aged 14-21 in 1978, and sampled
continuously since 1979. Our sample includes data up to 1994. We include individuals in our
sample when they first report that their “main activity'' is “working.'' Therefore, our “First Wage”
variable is recorded accordingly. The key variable of our analysis is whether, in 1984, respondents
answered affirmatively to whether they smoked or not. We classify a smoker (in 1984) as a person
who at least smoked one cigarette per day on average. Out of 12,584 who responded, 38.8% were
classified as smokers. Similar, but not exact, questions were also asked in 1992. A smoker was
classified as someone who “smokes daily” (as opposed to “occasionally” or “not at all”). Of the
8,341 who responded in 1992, 28.92% were classified as smokers. We utilized only the 1984
smoking questions for the following reasons: By 1992 the number of individuals that answered the
smoking survey dropped dramatically, due to sample attrition. Only 7,822 individuals answered the
1992 survey and had valid wage growth measures. More important, the sample attrition was not
random. Individuals who smoked in 1984 were more likely to drop out, and even worse, those with
lower wage growth were substantially more likely to drop out.
Our principal dependent variable is a wage growth measure for each individual constructed
over the first several years in the labor market. We construct a wage growth coefficient for each
individual by estimating a wage regression as a function of time only. This estimated coefficient is
our measure of individual wage growth rates. For wages we use two measures of hourly payments,
real wages (in 1987 dollars) and their natural logarithm. In an earlier version of the paper we also
used nominal wages. Since none of our results was affected by the use of nominal wages, we limit
the analysis here to real wages. We consider wage reports to be valid only if nominal pay is
between $2 and $200. Given the construction of our wage growth measure, a minimum of two
valid observations per individual is required in order to be included in the sample.
We construct two versions of this estimate: (1) using the longest panel of data for each

25

individual, and (2) using only the first 6 years in the labor market - counting the first 6
surveys/years since entering the labor market. This allows for less than 6 observations if
individuals leave missing values in some years.
Below we discuss the construction of several key variables used in the regressions:
“Health” – Respondents in the NLSY were asked, in each survey, the following two questions:
(1) “hltamt” - whether health limited the amount of work you could do since last survey (“(are
you/would you be) limited in the kind of work you (could) do on a job for pay because of your
health?”), and (2) “hltknd” - whether health limited the kind of work you could do since last survey
(“(are you/would you be) limited in the amount of work you (could) do because of your health?”).
Using the answer to these two questions we constructed several other additional health measures:
(1) “evera” - if a person ever reported hltamt=1,
(2) “everk” - if a person ever reported hltknd=1,
(3) “mhlta” - % of times reported hltamt=1, and
(4) “mhltk” - % of times reported hltknd=1.
We experimented with all measures but report regressions’ result using “mhltk” only. None of the
results was affected by using any of the other alternative measures of health.
Schooling: We use the respondents report on “highest grade completed” to construct six
schooling dummies: 8 years or less, 9-11 years, 12 years, 12-15 years, 16 years, and 17+ years. We
report only the results using the dummy variables. Replacing the schooling dummies with the
continuous measure didn’t affect our results.
AFQT Scores: During the summer and fall of 1980, NLSY79 respondents participated in
an effort of the U.S. Departments of Defense and Military Services to update the norms of the
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). The Department of Defense and Congress,
after questioning the appropriateness of using the World War II reference population as the primary
basis for interpreting the enlistment test scores of contemporary recruits, decided in 1979 to

26

conduct this new study. NLSY79 respondents were selected since they comprised a pre-existing
nationally representative sample of young people born during the period 1957 through 1964. This
testing, which came to be referred to as the “Profile of American Youth,” was conducted by NORC
(National Organization for Research at the University of Chicago) representatives according to
standard ASVAB procedure guidelines; respondents were paid $50 for their participation. Groups of
five to ten persons were tested at more than 400 test sites, including hotels, community centers, and
libraries throughout the United States and abroad. A total of 11,914 civilian and military NLSY79
respondents (or 94 percent of the 1979 sample) completed this test: 5,766 or 94.4 percent of the
cross- sectional sample, 4,990 or 94.2 percent of the supplemental sample, and 1,158 or 90.5
percent of the military sample.
The ASVAB consists of a battery of 10 tests that measure knowledge and skill in the
following areas: (1) general science; (2) arithmetic reasoning; (3) word knowledge; (4) paragraph
comprehension; (5) numerical operations; (6) coding speed; (7) auto and shop information; (8)
mathematics knowledge; (9) mechanical comprehension; and (10) electronics information. A
composite score derived from select sections of the battery can be used to construct an approximate
and unofficial Armed Forces Qualifications Test score (AFQT) for each youth. The AFQT is a
general measure of trainability and a primary criterion of enlistment eligibility for the Armed
Forces. The creation of this percentile score, called AFQT89, involves: (1) computing a verbal
composite score by summing word knowledge and paragraph comprehension raw scores; (2)
converting subtest raw scores for verbal, math knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning; (3)
multiplying the verbal standard score by two; (4) summing the standard scores for verbal, math
knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning; and (5) converting the summed standard score to a
percentile.
Religion: We use two indicators for religious affiliation and frequency of attending
religious services: (1) dummy variables indicating whether the person was raised Protestant,

27

Baptist, Episcopalian, Lutheran, Methodist, Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, or Jewish. (2) The
frequency in which respondents attended religious services (never, several times a year, about once
a month, three times a month, about once a week, or more than once a week). In the regressions’
results reported in the paper we include both measures: religious affiliation and frequency of
attendance.
“Neighborhood Income”: This variable was constructed using the 1980 census of
population and later matched to the NLSY sample. It was calculated to describe the expected value
of a person’s neighborhood per capita income, given their race (white, black, or Hispanic),
education level (less than 8 years, 9-11 years, 12-15 years, or 16+ years), and the county they live
in, using data from the 1980 Census. Neighborhoods are defined as block groups in the 1980
Census, so each block group’s per capita income was calculated by dividing aggregate household
income for the block group by the total number of persons living in that block group. (Both of
these were variables given to us by the census.) Since the 1980 Census does not include Hispanic
as one of their race categories, but rather as an ethnic category separate of race (Hispanic persons
were placed into one of five race categories: white, black, Asian, Native American or other.), we
needed to approximate the number of Hispanics, non-Hispanic whites and non-Hispanic blacks
living in each block group. We did this by generating a beta for each race, which would represent
the percent of Hispanic persons that are of that race, and multiplying it by the number of Hispanic
persons living in the block group. This would approximate the number of Hispanic persons that
were recorded as belonging to each race, so that these categories could be amended. (This process
was done for each block group and for each education level. It was repeated several times,
replacing the betas, for precision.) The outcomes of this process were numbers for Hispanic, nonHispanic white, and non-Hispanic black persons in each education level for each block group.
“Neighborhood Income” was then found by creating the expected value of a person of race X and
education level Y for each county.

28

Appendix Table 1
Wage Growth Regression
OLS estimation results (standard errors in parentheses). Sample: Long Panel
Wage growth measures are based on
(i) Real Wage
(ii) Log of real wage
Smoker
First Real Wage
Sex (if male)
Race (if non-white)
Age in 1984
Schooling: 9-11 years
12 years
12-15 years
16 years
17+ years
AFQT scores
Health problems
Neighborhood income
Religious affiliation (excluded: Presbyterian)
Raised Protestant
Raised Baptist
Raised Episcopalian
Raised Lutheran
Raised Methodist
Raised Roman Catholic
Raised Jewish
Raised other

Continue on next page.
29

-.052
(.018)
-.084
(.002)
.197
(.016)
.030
(.022)
-.008
(.003)
-.024
(.052)
.007
(.050)
.110
(.053)
.352
(.058)
.418
(.062)
.003
(.0004)
-.276
(.074)
.00003
(.000006)

-.0048
(.0019)
-.0818
(.0026)
.0220
(.0018)
-.0001
(.002)
-.0015
(.0004)
.0028
(.0055)
.0105
(.0054)
.0226
(.0057)
.0438
(.0062)
.0451
(.0067)
.0003
(.00004)
-.0358
(.0080)
.000003
(.0000006)

-.021
(.048)

.0006
(.0052)

-.044
(.035)
-.039
(.071)
-.021
(.046)
-.036
(.042)
.007
(.003)
.187
(.090)
-.043
(.040)

-.0034
(.0038)
-.0016
(.0076)
-.0027
(.0050)
-.0041
(.0045)
.0008
(.0037)
-.0017
(.0097)
-.0053
(.0043)

Appendix Table 1 - Continue
Wage growth measures are based on
(i) Real Wage
(ii) Log of real wage
Frequency of attending services (excluded: “never”)
Several times a year
About once a month
Three times a month
About once a week
More than once a week
Constant term
R2
Number of observations

30

.040
(.024)
.022
(.033)
-.014
(.030)
.017
(.026)
-.004
(.033)
.4118
(.111)
.19
9396

.0007
(.0026)
.0020
(.0035)
-.0046
(.0033)
-.0018
(.0029)
-.0037
(.0036)
.1475
(.012)
.14
9396

Table 1
Smoking Rates by Select Occupations1
NLSY 1984

Occupation

Smoking Rate

Observations

All

.376

9,501

Maids and Housemen
Roofers
Kitchen workers
Waiters
Heavy truck drivers
Laborers and Construction
Carpenters
Janitors and Cleaners
Housekeepers and Butlers
Truck drivers (light)
Teachers (n.e.c.)2
Cashiers
Sales workers, other commodities
Secretaries
Athletes
Computer Programmers
Teachers, elementary schools

.621
.600
.566
.554
.509
.476
.451
.413
.386
.365
.349
.348
.325
.283
.226
.208
.094

66
40
53
233
106
504
82
305
171
126
43
391
351
297
31
101
53

1

Occupations are randomly selected across the spectrum of smoking rates with the exception that we
omit occupations with very low sample sizes.
2
Not elsewhere classified.

31

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics across Smokers and Non-smokers
NLSY 1979-1994
Non-Smokers

Smokers

Age (in 1984)
Non white
Sex (% males)
Married

23.49
.43
.49
.44

23.66
.37
.54
.38

Schooling
High School Diploma
Afqt89
Father's schooling
Mother's schooling

13.3
.86
45.3
9.7
10.4

11.9
.66
34.7
9.1
9.9

Health limit kind of work
Net years of experience (in 1994)*
Potential years of experience (in 1994)*
First wage (real)
First wage (nominal)

.035
11.5
14.1
5.91
4.77

.045
10.4
15.8
5.55
4.36

Hourly (nominal) pay (79-94)
Changed employer since last interview (79-94)
Quit job (79-94)
Was laid-off (79-94)
Was fired (79-94)

13.29
.354
.245
.068
.016

11.54
.431
.288
.086
.031

Increases in hourly wages (nominal)
Increases in hourly wages (in 1987 dollars)
First six years in the labor market
First six years, no missing observations
Increases in log hourly wages (in 1987 dollars)
First six years in the labor market
First six years, no missing observations

.67
.34
.39
.44
.037
.050
.057

.49
.21
.23
.32
.025
.031
.044

* “Net” refers to actual years of experience, while “potential” experience is calculated as (ageschooling-6).
Number of observation varies across variables. For fixed individual characteristics the number is
about 6700, and for means taken over the whole 79-94 period, the number is about 50,000 valid
observations.
All mean differences are significantly different from zero, using 99% confidence level (the t-test
was performed assuming equal variance).

32

Table 3
First Wage Regressions
OLS Smoking Coefficients
Standard Errors are in parentheses
Sample: Long panel1

No Controls
Limited Controls2
Full Controls3

Real Wage

Log Real
Wage

-0.404
(0.081)
-0.209
(0.084)
-0.213
(0.084)

-0.047
(0.005)
-0.022
(0.008)
-0.024
(0.008)

Notes
1

Includes the first wage of our long panel sample.

2

Limited Controls include age, race, sex, schooling, and AFQT scores.

3

Full Controls include in addition to the above also health status, measure of average neighborhood
income, and religious affiliation. See Notes to Table 4 and the Data Appendix for more details.

33

Table 4
Wage Growth Regressions
OLS Smoking Coefficients
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Sample: Long panel1

Wage growth measures based on
(i) Real wage

(ii) Log of real wage

1. First Real Wage

-.158
(.017)

-.0152
(.0018)

2. Sex, Race & Age

-.179
(.017)

-.0173
(.0018)

3. Schooling

-.059
(.018)

-.0053
(.0019)

4. AFQT

-.048
(.018)

-.0043
(.0019)

5. Health, Neighborhood
Income, Religion

-.052
(.018)

-.0048
(.0019)

Cumulative Controls2

Notes
1

Long panel refers to the sample of wage growth measures computed over the entire observed
careers of our NLSY respondents.

2

Control variables: First real wage (and the log of first real wage in the second column), gender,
race (nonwhite versus white), age, six schooling categories, AFQT scores, health status, average
per capital neighborhood income, religion affiliation, and frequency of attendance of religious
services. See the Data Appendix for a more detailed description of all variables.

34

Table 5
Wage Growth Regressions
OLS Smoking Coefficients
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Sample: Short panel1

Wage growth measures based on
(i) Real wage

(ii) Log of real wage

1. First Real Wage

-.209
(.024)

-.0245
(.0027)

2. Sex, Race & Age

-.237
(.023)

-.0280
(.0027)

3. Schooling

-.102
(.024)

-.0124
(.0028)

4. AFQT

-.087
(.024)

-.0107
(.0028)

5. Health, Neighborhood
Income, Religion

-.088
(.024)

-.0109
(.0028)

Cumulative Controls2

Notes
1

Short panel refers to the sample of wage growth measures computed over the first six years since
entering the labor market.
2

Control variables: First real wage (and the log of first real wage in the second column), gender,
race (nonwhite versus white), age, six schooling categories, AFQT scores, health status, average
per capital neighborhood income, religion affiliation, and frequency of attendance of religious
services. See the Data Appendix for a more detailed description of all variables.

35

Table 6
Wage Growth Regressions
OLS Smoking Coefficients
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Sample: Short-Continuous panel1

Wage growth measures based on
(i) Real wage

(ii) Log of real wage

1. First Wage

-.188
(.023)

-.0191
(.0022)

2. Sex, Race & Age

-.212
(.023)

-.0212
(.0022)

3. Schooling

-.079
(.023)

-.0078
(.0022)

4. AFQT

-.063
(.023)

-.0062
(.0022)

5. Health, Neighborhood
Income, Religion

-.067
(.023)

-.0067
(.0022)

Cumulative Controls2

Notes
1

Short-Continuous panel refers to the sample of wage growth measures computed over the first six
years since entering the labor market without any missing observations.
2

Control variables: First real wage (and the log of first real wage in the second column), gender,
race (nonwhite versus white), age, six schooling categories, AFQT scores, health status, average
per capital neighborhood income, religion affiliation, and frequency of attendance of religious
services. See the Data Appendix for a more detailed description of all variables.

36

Table 7
Wage growth differences between non-smokers and smokers
Real dollar differences
Gross
Net

Real percentage differences
Gross
Net

Long panel

62%

24%

48%

20%

Short panel

67%

38%

58%

35%

Short-Continuous panel

38%

21%

31%

15%

Sample restrictions

Notes. The above numbers represent the differences in wage growth between non-smokers and
smokers as a percent of the mean wage growth of smokers. In the “Gross” column, the numerator is
the difference in sample means (of wage growth) between non-smokers and smokers while the
denominator is the mean value for smokers (see Table 2). In the “Net” column the numerator is the
regression coefficient of the smoking dummy variable, (see tables 4-6) while the denominator is the
mean value for smokers (see Table 2). The three rows represent data from the different sample
restrictions we impose.

37

Table 8
Smoking Rates by College Majors*
(Survey of College Majors 1999)

Major

Obs

Number of
Smokers

Dance

12

8

English

21

10

History

14

6

Asian Studies

10

4

Computer Science

11

4

Economics

120

40

Political Science

23

7

Natural Science

33

8

Engineering

45

9

Psychology

24

4

Smoker 1

Smoker 2

(SE)

(SE)

Prior
Smoker
(SE)

.67
(.136)
.48
(.109)
.43
(.132)
.40
(.155)
.36
(.145)
.33
(.043)
.30
(.096)
.24
(.074)
.20
(.060)
.17
(.077)

.33
(.136)
.24
(.093)
.14
(.093)
.20
(.126)
.18
(.116)
.13
(.031)
.22
(.086)
.09
(.050)
.11
(.047)
.08
(.055)

.63
(.171)
.70
(.145)
.33
(.192)
.25
(.217)
.75
(.271)
.43
(.078)
.29
(.172)
.25
(.153)
.56
(.165)
1.0
(0)

Notes
*Results based on several hundred surveys of Barnard and Columbia College undergraduates.
Only the top 10 majors are reported. Standard Errors (SE) are in parentheses and are calculated
assuming binomial distribution.
Definitions
Smoker 1: If smoke 1 or more cigarettes per day.
Smoker 2: If smoke 5 or more cigarettes per day.
Prior Smoker: Fraction of current smokers (Smoker 1) who started smoking prior to coming to
College (before age 18).

38

Figure 1
Why Do Dancers Smoke?
Time Preference, Occupational Choice, and Wage Growth

Education
“Innate preference”
Parents’ Income
Parents’ Education
Family Stability
Religion
…

Time Preference
(Discount Rate)

Smoking

Occupation
OJT
(Wage Growth)

39

