NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL EXERCISE PRICES FOR EXECUTIVE STOCK OPTIONS

Brian J. Hall
Kevin J. Murphy

Working Paper 7548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7548

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

We thank Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo and John Matsusaka for valuable comments. The spreadsheets
and macros used in this article are available from the authors at www-rcf.usc.eduJ---kjmurphy. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

2000 by Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.

Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive Stock Options
Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 7548
February 2000
JEL No. JO, J3, GO, G3

ABSTRACT
Although exercise prices for executive stock options can be set either below or above the

grant-date market price, in practice virtually all options are granted at the money. We offer an
economic rationale for this apparent puzzle, by showing that pay-to-performance incentives for risk-

averse, undiversified executives are typically maximized by setting exercise prices at (or near) the
grant-date market price. We provide an operationally useful alternative to Black-Scholes (1973) for
the purpose of both valuing executive stock options and measuring the incentives created by options.

Our framework has implications not only for exercise-price policies, but also for indexed options,
option repricings, exchanges of cash for stock-based compensation, and the design of bonus plans.

Brian J. Hall
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
bhall@hbs.edu

Kevin J. Murphy
USC
Marshall School of Business
MC 1427
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1427

kjmurphyusc.edu

Stock options, which give the recipient the right to buy a share of stock at a prespecified "exercise" price for a pre-specified term, have emerged as the single largest
component of compensation for US executives (Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey Liebman, 1998). In
fiscal 1998, the grant-date value of stock options accounted for 40% of total pay for S&P 500

CEOs, up from only 25% of total pay in 1992.' Stock-options have become increasingly
important for rank-and-file workers as well: 45% of US companies awarded options to their

exempt salaried employees in 1998, while 12% and 10% awarded options to their nonexempt and hourly employees, respectively.2

One of the most striking facts about executive stock options is that the exercise price of
virtually all options is set equal to the current stock price at the grant date. For example, 94%

of option grants to S&P 500 CEOs in 1998 were at-the-money grants. In theory, exercise
prices can be set below the grant-date stock price (discount options), above the grant-date

stock price (premium options), or indexed to some industry or market index (indexed
options). Premium and indexed options have strong proponents (e.g., Alfred Rappaport,
1999), who argue that discount and at-the-money options create huge rewards for belowmarket performance, especially during a bull market.

Exercise-price policy is perhaps the central design issue regarding options. Setting the

exercise price, like setting the "performance threshold" in any incentive plan, defines the

standard against which performance is measured, and determines the likelihood of an

ultimate payout. To our knowledge, no one has advanced a convincing (or even

Data extracted from Compustat's ExecuComp database, using grant-date option values based on
ExecuComp's Black-Scholes' calculations.
2

Prevalence data are based on the American Compensation Association's 199 7-1998 Salary Budget Survey,

and include survey results from 735 publicly traded corporations.

PAGE 2

unconvincing) economic rationale for the near-uniform practice of issuing options at-themoney. Accounting and tax considerations may explain why discount and indexed options
are unpopular, but do not explain the paucity of premium options.3 And, while inertia and
corporate conformity ("mimicry") can explain why policies are similar across companies, we

would not expect the observed practice to sustain itself in the long run if it were sufficiently
inefficient.

We explore the optirnality of various exercise-price policies by developing a
framework for measuring the value of, and incentives provided by, non-tradable executive
(and employee) stock options. Our framework provides an alternative to traditional option

pricing methodologies, which overestimate option values for risk-averse executiverecipients. We show that there is a fairly wide range of exercise pricing policies that yield
close-to-optimal pay-to-performance incentives, and that this range typically includes grantdate market values. Risk-averse executives discount small probabilities of large option gains,

and setting exercise prices at (or near) the grant-date market price maximizes incentives by

ensuring a relatively high probability of ultimate payout. Our framework, developed and

described more fully in Hall and Kevin J. Murphy (2000), has implications not only for
exercise-price policies, but also for option repricings, exchanges of cash for stock-based
compensation, and the design of bonus plans.

Under US accounting rules, as long as the exercise price and term are fixed in advance, the accounting
charge for options equals the spread between the grant-date market price and exercise price. There is
therefore no charge for at-the-money or premium options, but there is a charge for discount options (the
grant-date spread) and itidexed options (because the exercise price is not fixed in advance). Under US tax
rules, options must have exercise prices at or above the grant-date price to qualify for favorable tax
treatment; however, most top executives receive "non-qualified" options which are not subject to this
restriction.

PAGE 3

I. The Cost and Value of Executive Stock Options
When valuing non-tradable executive stock options, it is critical to distinguish between

two valuation concepts: the cost to the company, and the value to the executive-recipient.
The economic or opportunity cost of granting an option is the amount the company could
have received if it were to sell the option to an outside investor rather than giving it to the
executive. The outside investor is generally free to trade the option, and can also take actions

(such as short-selling the underlying stock) to hedge away the risk of the option. Fischer

Black and Myron Scholes (1973) and Robert Merton (1973) demonstrated that, since
investors can hedge, options can be valued as if investors were risk neutral and all assets

appreciate at the risk-free rate. This risk-neutrality assumption forms the basis of option

pricing theory and is central to all option pricing models, including binomial models,
arbitrage pricing models, and Monte Carlo methodologies.4

In contrast to outside investors, company executives cannot trade or sell their options,

and are also forbidden from hedging the risks by short-selling company stock. In addition,
while outside investors tend to be well-diversified (holding small amounts of stock in a large

number of companies), company executives are inherently undiversified, with their physical

as well as human capital invested disproportionately in their company. For these reasons,
company executives will generally place a much lower value on company stock options than
would outside investors.

Ignoring complications related to early exercise, potential forfeiture, and executive

inside information, option valuation formulas such as the Black-Scholes formula are

See John Hull (1993) for a comprehensive discussion of the various pricing models.

PAGE 4

appropriate for measuring the amount outside investors would pay for an option.5 However,
the value of a non-tradable option to a risk-averse executive is more appropriately measured

by the amount of riskiess cash compensation the executive would exchange for the option.

We estimate option values using the "certainty equivalence" approach, similar to that
adopted by Richard Lambert, et. al. (1991). In particular, we suppose that an executive has
non-firm-related wealth of TI', holds s shares of company stock, and is granted an option to

buy one share of stock at exercise price X in T years. Assuming that w is invested at the risk-

free rate, r1, and that the realized stock price at T is PT, the executive's wealth at time T is
given by W w(J+ ri)T + SPT + max(O,Pr.-X). If, instead of the option, he were awarded Vin

cash invested at the risk-free rate, his wealth at time T would be W (w+V(1+ rj)T + spy.
We define the executive's value of the option as the certainty equivalent Vthat equates
(1)

/U('Wf(PT,)dPT fU(Wr)f(PT)dPT
To solve (1) numerically, we assume the executive has constant relative risk aversion

p, and assume (using the Capital Asset Pricing Model, CAPM) that the distribution of stock

prices in T years is lognormal with volatility a and expected value ('rj + f3(rm-rj) - o'2/2,)T,

where fi is the firm's systematic risk and rm is the return on the market portfolio.6 The figures
and numerical calculations in this article are derived assuming no dividends, cr .30, /3= 1, rj

= 6%, and rm- r1 6.5%, but the qualitative results are not sensitive to (reasonable) changes
in these parameters.

We relax these assumptions in Hall and Murphy (2000).
6

For tractability, we assume that the distribution of future stock prices is the same whether the executive
receives options or cash. If the grant provides incentives that shift the distribution, and if the shift is not
already incorporated into stock prices as of the grant date, we will underestimate both the cost and value of
the option. Since our results hinge on the c1fl'erence between (rather than the levels of) cost and value, we
do not expect this assumption to affect our qualitative results.

PAGE 5

The value of an option from an executive's perspective depends on the usual Black-

Scholes parameters (exercise price, stock price, dividend yield, risk-free rate, and time until

expiration) and also depends on managerial risk-aversion, wealth, and stockholdings. Our
numerical analysis shows that the certainty-equivalent value is decreasing in risk aversion,
increasing in non-firm-related wealth, and decreasing in holdings of company stock. Figure 1
illustrates the value of a ten-year non-tradable stock option with an exercise price of $30. The
realized payout is defined as the (positive) spread between the market and exercise price, and

the Black-Scholes value, C(P), approximates the company's cost of granting an option. The
certainty equivalent is calculated as the amount of cash the executive would willingly give up

to receive the option, assuming constant relative risk aversion of 2, and assuming that all
stock and options are held for ten years.

As shown in Figure 1, the "executive value" lines (which plot the certainty-equivalent

values as a function of stock prices) lie strictly below the Black-Scholes line, V(P)<C(P),
indicating that risk-averse executives value non-tradable options at significantly less than

their cost to the company.7 Moreover, executives with large holdings of company stock
(relative to their wealth) place lower values on options. For example, when the stock price
and exercise price are both $30, the figure shows that the Black-Scholes value is $16.55. In

contrast, an executive with 33%, 50%, and 66% of his wealth in company stock values the
option at only $15.01, $10.65 and $7.49, respectively. When the stock price is $15 (i.e., the

option is issued with an exercise price double the stock price), the Black-Scholes value is
$4.95, while the executive values are only $3.93, $2.48 and $1.58 (for 33%, 50% and 66% of
wealth in stock, respectively).

PAGE 6

Figure 1 and our subsequent analysis suggests that, while Black-Scholes may be
appropriate for estimating the company's cost of granting an option, it is not appropriate for
estimating the value an executive places on a non-tradable option. Moreover, the ratio of the

Black-Scholes cost to the executive's valuation is largest for options that are granted well
out-of-the-money. Intuitively, options granted out-of-the-money are more likely to expire

unexercised than options granted in the money. For example, based on the CAPM and
company parameters assumed above, an option granted at-the-money will be in-the-money at

expiration with 80% probability. In contrast, an option with an exercise price double the
grant-date market price will be in-the-money at expiration with 50% probability; setting the

exercise price to triple the grant-date price reduces the exercise probability to only 35%.
Risk-averse executives will discount payouts realized with low probabilities, and the wedge
between Black-Scholes and executive values will be larger for out-of-the-money options.

II. Incentives from Executive Stock Options
Stock options provide a direct link between executive expected utility and shareholder

wealth. Assuming executives understand how their actions affect share prices, option
holdings provide incentives for executives to take actions that increase share prices, and
avoid actions that decrease share prices.8 The incentives from a single option will naturally

depend on the slope of the executive-value line, ÔV/ oF, which defines how the certainty-

equivalent value changes with an incremental change in the stock price. As illustrated in
figure 1, the slope of the executive-value line is less than the slope of the Black-Scholes line,
The executive-value line can actually lie above the Black-Scholes line when executives are sufficiently
diversified and have sufficiently low risk aversion.

PAGE 7

I' / oP. for undiversified executives. For example, when the stock price and exercise price
are both $30, the slope of the Black-Scholes function is 0.86 (860 per $1 price change), but
the slope of the executive-value line is only 0.64 for an executive with 50% of his wealth in

company stock. For a premium option granted with P=$15 and X=$30, the Black-Scholes
slope is 0.63 compared to an executive-value slope of only 0.38 for the same executive.

Figure 1 illustrates the trade-off faced by the board when setting exercise prices for
executive options: increasing the exercise price, X reduces the incentives of each option
granted, OV/ OF, but also reduces the company's cost of granting each option, C. In other
words, holding the company's total cost of granting n options constant, nC = k, the company

could grant a few options at a low exercise price, or more options at a higher exercise price.
For example, suppose that a company's stock price is $30, and that the board has decided to

award the executive $500,000 in options. The company could award the executive 16,667
shares of restricted stock (essentially options with a zero exercise price). Alternatively, based

on our maintained assumptions regarding dividend yield, volatility, etc., the company could

award 30,200 at-the-money options (with a Black-Scholes value of $16.55 each) or 50,500
premium options with an exercise price of $60 (with a Black-Scholes value of $9.90 each).

The company's optimization problem contains two steps. First, we fix the total cost of

options to k, and solve for the exercise price, X, that maximizes incentives, OnV/ OP.
Second, we find the grant-size, k, that maximizes company value. The first step solves,

(2)

MAX

x âiJ lOP, subject to nC = k.

The incentive-maximizing exercise price, X*, will depend on the usual arguments in the
8

Stock options may also provide incentives to encourage risk-taking, to avoid dividends, and to favor

PAGE 8

Black-Scholes function and will also depend on other factors that affect ônV/ 9P, such as the

degree of risk aversion, wealth, previously owned stock, and the number of options to be

granted. The second step, determining the value-maximizing grant size, depends on the
(unmodeled) production function linking executive actions to company value. Although

solving this second step is beyond the scope of this article, we show that X is relatively
constant through a wide range of grant sizes.

Figure 2 depicts total managerial incentives from an option grant with a Black-Scholes

value of $500,000 (assumed to be 10% of his initial $5 million wealth). Incentives are
defined as ênV/ oP and measure the change in the certainty equivalent values of n options
for each $1 change in stock prices; assumptions regarding risk-aversion, etc., are maintained

from Figure 1. The figure shows that the incentives for an executive with 50% of his wealth

in company stock are maximized by setting an exercise price equal to 110% of the market

price of the stock on the date of grant. Importantly, the incentive loci are relatively flat
around the maximum: OnVI OP is within 1% of its maximum in range of exercises prices

between 90% and 140% of the grant-date stock price. Similarly, the incentives for an
executive with 66% of his wealth in company stock are maximized at an exercise price of
only 80% of the grant date market price. Again, the incentive loci are relatively flat around

the maximum; exercise prices in the range of 60% to 80% of the stock price generate
incentives within 1% of the maximum.

In addition to showing how executive incentives vary with changes in the exercise
price, Figure 2 also shows how the Black-Scholes' slope of options costing nC=k vary with
the exercise price. The figure shows that OriCi OPis monotonically increasing throughout the
repurchases over dividends; see Murphy (1999) for a survey of the related literature.

PAGE 9

depicted

range; in fact, ônC / oP is monotonically increasing for all exercise prices. The

result suggests that, if managers valued stock options at their Black-Scholes value, the
optimal granting policy would be to grant an infinite number of options at an infinite exercise

price. The absurdity of this result underscores the need to introduce managerial risk aversion
into any analysis of executive stock option valuations and incentives.

Table 1 shows the range of incentive-maximizing exercise prices for executives with
different option-grant amounts, diversification, and risk-aversion. The incentive-maximizing

range is defined as the exercise prices that generate incentives, s9nV/OP, within 1% of its
maximum. The table shows that the optimal range is lower for large grants (as a percentage

of wealth), and is also lower for less-diversified and more risk-averse executives. The
analysis suggests that, for the range of parameters explored in Table 1, setting exercise prices

at (or near) the grant-date market price maximizes pay/performance incentives for riskaverse, undiversified executives. In the few cases in which the incentive-maximizing range
does not include at-the-money options, the incentives provided by at-the-money options are
within a few percentage points of the maximum because of the flatness of the curves.

Our results show that, holding constant the company's cost of making an option grant,
incentives are maximized by setting exercise prices within a range that typically includes the

grant-date market price. Executive value, however, is maximized by setting the exercise

price as low as possible. We believe that US accounting rules, which require some
accounting charges for discount options, help explain why exercise prices are seldom set

below grant-date market prices. Our analysis suggests that, in general, avoiding the
accounting charge is not likely to be very costly to companies in terms of providing
incentives. That is, even in cases where the optimal grant is a discount option, granting at-

PAGE 10

the-money options instead of discount options provides incentives that are nearly as strong.

IV. Extensions and Conclusions
Executive pay practices are subject to intense public scrutiny, especially when they
deviate from established precedent. Although the desire to avoid publicity can explain why
companies adopt similar option terms (such as granting all options at the money), we would

not expect the practice to survive if it systematically yielded sub-optimal incentives. We
offer an economic rationale for the observed practice, by showing that pay-to-performance

incentives for risk-averse, undiversified executives are typically maximized by setting
exercise prices at (or near) the grant-date market price.

More generally, we have provided an operationally useful alternative to Black-Scholes

for the purpose of both valuing stock options and measuring the incentives created by such
options. Black-Scholes values measure the company's cost of granting an option, but do not

measure the value of the non-tradable option to a risk-averse executive. This result helps
explain why executives so often argue that Black-Scholes valuation estimates are "too high,"

and why they demand large premiums for accepting stock options in lieu of cash
compensation. The result also helps explain why companies feel such pressure to reprice
when their options go "underwater." Because these options have such a high probability of

expiring out of the money, risk-averse executives place very little value on them (much
lower than the value implied by Black-Scholes calculations), and they therefore provide very

weak incentives. In addition, our analysis helps explain why firms rarely grant premium
options, and a slight extension of our analysis helps explain the paucity of indexed option
plans. In particular, indexed options issued at-the-money have a payout probability of only

PAGE 11

50%, which, according to our analysis, is generally too low to provide meaningful incentives
for risk-averse executives.9

Our results also have implications for academic research that adds options values to

other risky components of pay to establish "total compensation." At best, this aggregate
calculation is a measure of the company's cost of the compensation package, and not an
estimate of the executive's value of the compensation package. Finally, our analysis offers

some general implications for the design of employee bonus plans. Human resource
practitioners often claim that incentive plans are most effective when there is a relatively

high probability that employees receive at least some payout. We explicitly model the
incentives from stock option contracts, and find that, holding the expected cost of the payouts

constant, incentives for risk-averse employees are maximized when the probability of a
payout is reasonably high.

Measuring performance relative to an index can have the desirable effect of protecting executives from
market- and industry-wide shocks. But indexing the exercise price of an option on average raises the
performance threshold (through general market appreciation) as well as changes the implicit performance
measure to a relative measure. The increased threshold leads to sub-optimally low payout probabilities
unless the option is sufficiently discounted at grant.

PAGE 12

References

Black, Fischer and Scholes, Myron. "The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,"
Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81, 637-59.

Hall, Brian J. and Leibman, Jeffrey B. "Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?" Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1998, 113(3): 653-691.

Hall, Brian J. and Murphy, Kevin J. "Stock Options for Undiversified Executives," mimeo,
Harvard Business School, January 2000.

Hull, John. Options, Futures, and Other Derivative Securities, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall:
New Jersey, 1993.
Lambert, Richard A.; Larcker, David F. and Verrecchia, Robert E., "Portfolio Considerations
in Valuing Executive Compensation," Journal of Accounting Research, 1991, 29(1), 12949.

Merton, Robert C., "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, IV, 1973, 141-183.

Murphy, Kevin J.. "Executive Compensation," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, North Holland, 1999.

Rappaport, Alfred, "New Thinking on How to Link Executive Pay with Performance,"
Harvard Business Review, March/April 1999, 91-101.

PAGE 13

Figure 1
Executive Value Lines: Option Values for Undiversified Executives

Stock Price

Figure 2
Incentive-Maximizing Exercise Prices

. hi

50%

100%

Exercise Price as Percentage of Stock Price
Note: The figure assumes that executives are granted stock options with a Black-Scholes value of 10% of initial
wealth. We define incentives" as the change in the certainty-equivalent option value for each $1 change in the
stock price.

PAGE 14

Table 1

Incentive-Maximizing Ranges of Exercise Prices
% of Wealth Granted
in Stock Options

% of Wealth held in
Company Stock

Executive
Risk Aversion

Optimal Exercise Price
Range as % of Stock Price

10%

33%

2.0

125%—185%

10%

50%

2.0

90%—140%

10%

66%

2.0

60%—100%

10%

33%

3.0

70%—105%

10%

50%

3.0

45%—70%

10%

66%

3.0

30%—45%

15%

33%

2.0

110%—160%

15%

50%

2.0

80%—120%

15%

66%

2.0

55%—90%

Optimal Range defined as exercise prices that generate total incentives, ônV/ ÔP, within 1% of the maximum incentives.

