                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE INFORMATION IN THE HIGH YIELD BOND
                              SPREAD FOR THE BUSINESS CYCLE:
                            EVIDENCE AND SOME IMPLICATIONS


                                               Mark Gertler
                                               Cara S. Lown


                                            Working Paper 7549
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w7549

                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2000




Prepared for the Conference on Financial Instability at Oxford University, July 1999. Thanks to Ken Kuttner,
Colin Mayer, John Meullbauer and Philip Hartmann for helpful comments and to Federico Ravenna and
Nathaniel Baum-Snow for excellent research assistance. Gertler also wishes to thank the National Science
Foundation and the C.V. Starr Center for financial support. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and not of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or
the Federal Reserve System.

© 2000 by Mark Gertler and Cara S. Lown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explic it permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Information in the High Yield Bond Spread for the
Business Cycle: Evidence and Some Implications
Mark Gertler and Cara S. Lown
NBER Working Paper No. 7549
February 2000
JEL No. E37, E44
                                           ABSTRACT

        The market for high yield (below investment-grade) corporate bonds developed in the middle
1980s. We show that, since this time, the high yield spread has had significant explanatory power for the
business cycle. We interpret this finding as possibly symptomatic of financial factors at work in the business
cycle, along the lines suggested by the financial accelerator. We also show that over this period the high
yield spread outperforms other leading financial indicators, including the term spread, the paper-bill spread
and the Federal Funds rate. We conjecture that changes in the conduct of monetary policy over time may
account for the reduced informativeness of these alternative indicators, all of which are tied closely to
monetary policy.


Mark Gertler                                               Cara S. Lown
Department of Economics                                    Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York University                                        33 Liberty St.
269 Mercer St., 7th Floor                                  New York, NY 10045-0001
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
gertlerm@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu
1 Introduction
Until the early 1980s only the highest quality firms could issue marketable debt. By the
middle 1980s, however, a market emerged for corporate bonds with below investment grade
ratings. Firms that traditionally did not have the financial strength to float marketable bonds
were now able to do so. The types of debt instruments they now issue are kindly known as
“high yield bonds” (and unkindly known as “junk bonds.”)1
    In this paper we explore the information content that the spread between the high yield
bond rate and the corresponding safe interest rate has for business cycle activity. Our
motives are two-fold. First, as we discuss later, this spread may be a potentially good
measure of overall financial conditions. In this respect, it may offer a way to detect evidence
of the role of credit market frictions in the amplification and propagation of business cycles,
along the lines suggested by the recent theoretical work on the financial accelerator2 .
    Second, from both a forecasting and policy standpoint, there is on-going interest in ex-
ploring the information content of financial indicators.3 These variables are well measured
and available in real time. Some standard indicators which have performed well through
the middle 1980s, particularly the commercial paper/T-bill spread and the term spread, ap-
pear to have lost considerable forecasting power in recent years.4 The same has been true
for simple indicators of monetary policy, such as the Federal Funds rate. In this context, it
is interesting to explore the forecasting performance of the high yield spread as compared
to these other indicators. To be sure, as we discuss below, we are skeptical of the value
of heavy reliance on any single indicator. On the other hand, if the caveats are clearly
understood, a financial indicator can have a potentially useful role in a policy-maker’s in-
formation set. At a minimum, further, the kinds of forecasting exercises we undertake here
can yield insights into the nature of the business cycle and (as we discuss) the role that
monetary policy has played.
    To help interpret the empirical work that follows, Section 2 outlines the theory of the
financial accelerator. We argue that the relevant measure of financial conditions that the
theory suggests is the premium for external funds, i.e., the spread between the cost of
obtaining external finance and the opportunity cost of internal finance. We then argue that
the high yield bond spread may provide a reasonable measure of this premium.
    Section 3 explores the marginal explanatory power of the high yield bond spread for
cyclical activity. The measure of the cycle we use is the log difference between real gross
domestic output and the Congressional Budget Office’s measure of potential output. We
show that since the middle 1980s the high yield bond spread has had significant marginal
explanatory power for the output gap, both statistically and quantitatively. We next show
in section 4 that over this period, the explanatory power of the high yield bond spread
   1 For  descriptions of the high yield bond market see Helwege and Kleiman (1997) and Milken (1999).
   2 Bernanke    and Gertler (1989) describe the financial accelerator. For a recent survey of the literature, see
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1998.)
    3 See, for example, Estrella and Mishkin (1998).
    4 See Dotsey (1999) on the recent performance of the term spread and Friedman and Kuttner (1998) on

the recent performance of the paper-bill spread.

                                                        1
dominates that of the two currently popular indicators, the term spread and the commercial
paper/ T-bill spread. We base our conclusions on both an analysis of in-sample fit and of
out-of-sample forecasts. We conclude that the results are suggestive of both the strong role
that financial factors have played in recent times and also of the change in the role that
monetary policy played in the most recent recession, as compared to previous downturns.
    Section 5 examines the explanatory power of the high yield bond spread relative to
some leading candidate driving forces of the economy, including oil shocks and monetary
policy shocks. Again, the high yield bond spread appears to have superior explanatory
power, both from a statistical and quantitative standpoint. One interesting side result is
that, beginning in the early 1980s, the impact of monetary policy shocks on real GDP
seems to vanish. We interpret this finding as corroborative of our argument in Section 3
that the traditional financial indicators (the term spread and the commercial paper/T-bill
spread) may have suffered a reduction in explanatory power due to a recent change in the
role that monetary policy plays in the business cycle. Section 6 contains some concluding
remarks about how to interpret our overall findings.


2 The Financial Accelerator and the Premium for Ex-
  ternal Funds: A Guide for Interpreting Cyclical Move-
  ments in the High Yield Bond Spread
The banking and corporate debt crises experienced by a number of industrialized coun-
tries from the late 1980s to the early 1990s along with the more severe versions that have
occurred in Japan and many emerging market economies have reawakened economists to
the idea that financial market conditions may play an important role in shaping aggre-
gate economic activity. At the same time, over the last decade, theoretical macroeconomic
frameworks have evolved that characterize explicitly how financial factors may amplify and
propagate business cycles. This mechanism is known as the “financial accelerator.” More
recently, models that feature a financial accelerator have developed to the point where they
are now useful for providing a quantitative assessment of how much this mechanism might
contribute to explaining aggregate fluctuations.5
    While macroeconomics models that emphasize a financial accelerator often differ in
details, they also contain several common elements6 : First, there is some friction present
in the financial market (e.g., asymmetric information or costs of contract enforcement) that
introduces a wedge between the cost of external funds and the opportunity cost of internal
funds, termed “the premium for external funds.” Second, this premium is an endogenous
   5 See Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1998) and the references therein.
   6 See Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (forthcoming) for a formal deriva-
tion of the financial accelerator. The latter use a dynamic New Keynesian model as the baseline macroeco-
nomic framework. One could also obtain qualitatively similar results using the larger scale model developed
by Muellbauer (1996).



                                                    2
variable and depends inversely on the balance sheet strength of the borrower. Finally, bor-
rowers’ financial positions depend positively on aggregate economic activity (e.g. in a
boom, asset values and cash flows rise relative to debt, and vice-versa in a downturn). The
procyclical behavior in borrowers’ financial positions in turn implies countercyclical move-
ment in the premium for external funds. This countercyclical movement in the premium
serves to amplify borrower spending and hence overall aggregate activity, relative to the
case of frictionless financial markets. It is in this general way that the financial accelerator
works.
    The econometric evidence in support of the financial accelerator consists mainly of nu-
merous panel data studies that demonstrate that liquidity constraints impinge on the behav-
ior of both firms and consumers at the individual level7 . Though not without controversy,
these studies point to considerable evidence that financial market frictions matter at the
individual level (i.e. that a premium for external finance exists and has on operative effects
on real economic decisions). At the same time, direct empirical evidence of the importance
of financial accelerator at the aggregate level has been harder to detect.
    In addition to the usual problem of endogeneity that hampers any evaluation of aggre-
gate data, there is the additional complication that the central economic variable at the core
of the cyclical mechanism that these theories stress - the premium for external funds - is
not easy to observe. More precisely, as we argue, until the development of the market for
high yield debt, plausible indicators of this premium did not exist.
    Ideally, one would like an indicator of the premium that is market determined. The
problem here, as we have noted, is that until the early 1980s only the highest quality bor-
rowers (specifically, investment grade firms) have been able to issue market debt. These
types of firms experience relatively few obstacles in obtaining external finance. Hence,
the spread they pay (relative to safe debt) is not going to help detect an operative financial
accelerator. Firms that face the kind of financial market frictions that the theory describes
have traditionally relied heavily on commercial banks for external finance. However, the
only available bank rate (for use in aggregate time series analysis) is the prime lending rate.
The latter, unfortunately is a posted rate. An additional complication is that bank loans of-
ten contain non-price terms that are not directly quantifiable. Thus, even if the prime were
a market rate, it would still not accurately reveal the premium for external finance.
    The development of the market for below investment grade debt has, among other
things, opened up the possibility of obtaining a plausible measure of the premium for exter-
nal finance. The rate on high yield bonds is clearly market determined. Further, the firms
that obtain funds in this market are precisely the kind that face the type of frictions in the
credit market that the theory describes. It is true that these firms reflect only a portion of
those with imperfect access to credit. The rest obtain funds from commercial banks and
other types of intermediaries. However, it is likely to be the case that over the cycle, the
spread on high yield debt is closely correlated with the premium on external funds that
these purely bank-dependent firms face. In this respect, the spread on high yield bonds
might provide a good overall indicator of the external finance premium for the broad class
   7 For   a recent survey of the literature see Hubbard (1998).

                                                        3
of firms with imperfect credit access.
    To be clear, the spread could be a leading indicator even if capital markets were per-
fect, since it incorporates expectations of future default. However, the financial accelerator
theory suggests that, everything else equal, the spread is likely to have greater marginal
forecasting power for real activity than otherwise. The reason is that, under this theory,
disturbances that orginate in the financial sector can affect the real economy, in contrast to
the perfect markets paradigm. The high yield bond spread, in turn, is likely to incorporate
these disturbances.8
    In the next section, we explore the explanatory power of the high yield spread. The
interpretation we give is that it provides a reasonable measure of financial conditions, as
we have just outlined9 . We also provide some evidence to support this interpretation.


3 The High Yield Bond Spread and the Output Gap: Em-
  pirical Analysis
Figure 1 presents plots of two candidate high yield bond spreads at the quarterly frequency
over the period 1980:1 - 1999:1. The solid line is the difference between the high yield
bond rate and the corresponding rate for the highest quality firms (AAA rated). The dotted
line is the difference between the high yield rate and the rate on ten year Treasury Bonds.
Overall both spreads move closely together. As it turns out, our empirical results do not
depend on which spread we use.
    We have a mild preference for the high yield/ AAA spread, for the following reason:
The spread between the AAA rate and the ten year government bond rate can gyrate tem-
porarily due to liquidity problems in the bond market. These gyrations, in turn, translates
into shifts in the high yield/ government bond spread that are unrelated to the underly-
ing quality of the firms in the market. This kind of phenomenon occurred recently during
the default on Russian bonds. As Figure 1 illustrates, there was a sharp rise in the high
yield/ government bond spread, but it was mainly due to an increase in the AAA/ten year
government that came about as a result of the flight into government bonds. Because the
firms in the corporate bond market had the option of obtaining short term bank loans to
meet any funding needs, this “liquidity-induced” rise in corporate spreads had little impact
on aggregate activity. The high yield/ AAA spread is largely immune to these transitory
liquidity disruptions and is thus our preferred measure. We accordingly report results for
   8 Though   we do not report the results here, a simple indicator of default risk for high grade borrowers,
the BAA-AAA spread, has much less marginal forecasting power than the high yield bond spread. Thus, the
possibility that the high yield bond spread is more sensitive to overall financial conditions (since it involves
the market for below investment grade firms) might account for its greater marginal forecasting power, along
the lines we have suggested.
    9 Mishkin (1991) early on advocated the use of a market determined interest rate spread to gauge financial

market conditions. Bernanke and Gertler (1995) similarly argue in favor of a spread that could proxy the
premium for external finance. They also provide a critique of the use of credit aggregates to proxy financial
conditions.


                                                       4
this measure, though it is fair to say that the results change little when we use the other
measure.
     Note also that until the mid-1980s most of the outstanding high yield debt consisted of
bonds that were initially investment grade but received a downgrade in rating during the
1980-82 recessionary period.10 Beginning in the middle 1980s, however, most of the debt
in the market was issued originally by below investment grade firms. For this reason we
focus on a sample period that begins in 1985:1, though we also present results for the whole
sample.
     As Figure 1 shows, both spreads rise sharply in anticipation of the 1990-92 downturn.
In addition, the spreads are lower in the recent period of robust growth (middle to late
1990s) than in the mid-1980s period of more modest growth. The informal picture then is
that there is a strong inverse relation between the high yield spread and aggregate activity,
at least since the mid-1980s. Even in the early 1980s, when the high yield market was
not well developed (and consisted mainly of firms near investment grade), there was an
upward spike in the spread during the recession, though it was less dramatic than what
occurred during 1989-92.
     We next supplement this informal analysis with some formal statistics. Figure 2 reports
the cross-correlation of the high yield spread with the output gap (the log difference of real
GDP and the CBO measure of potential output), for both the 1985:1-1999:1 sample and
the 1980:1-1999:1 sample.11 The results suggest that since 1985 there has been a strong
inverse relation between the high yield spread and the output gap. Further the high yield
spread clearly leads movements in output by one to two years. The high yield spread six
quarters lagged, for example, has a correlation of ,0:8 with the current output gap. A
similar pattern holds for the full sample, though not as pronounced as in the sub-sample.
     To next ascertain the marginal information in the high yield bond spread, we regress
the output gap on four lags of itself and four lags of the spread. We consider two different
specifications. In the first, the dependent variable is the output gap one quarter ahead. In the
second, it is the output gap one year ahead. The former specification allows us to consider
the information content in the spread for near term cyclical behavior while the latter allows
us to consider the information content for the medium term.
     Table 1 presents the results for each specification over the two sample periods. Reported
are (i) exclusion tests of the null hypothesis that the high yield spread contains no marginal
information and (ii) the sum of the coefficients on the high yield spread along with tests of
the null that this sum is zero. Over the 1985:1-1999:1 sample, we strongly reject the null
hypotheses that the spread contains no marginal information for both the quarter ahead and
year ahead specification. The sum of the coefficients are negative and statistically different
from zero, so that the spread not only predicts but predicts in the direction we would expect:
i.e., controlling for the lagged output gap, a rise in the spread signals a decline in the future
output gap. Similar results appear for the year ahead specification over the full sample.
The spread is not significant in the quarter ahead case, however. Thus, the strong relation
  10 These   downgraded bonds are known in the market as “fallen angels.”
  11 Note   that both the output gap and the high yield spread are stationary random variables.


                                                       5
between the spread and cyclical activity really begins in the middle 1980s, as the earlier
descriptive analysis suggests.12
     To gauge whether movements in the spread matter quantitatively for movements in the
output gap, we estimate a simple bivariate vector autoregression (VAR). We use four lags
of each variable and order the spread last (i.e. we assume that movements in the output gap
may have a contemporaneous impact on the spread but not vice-versa.). Figure 3 reports the
effect of a one standard deviation increase in the yield spread. The error bands represent
two standard deviation confidence intervals. As the figure shows, an unanticipated one
standard deviation rise in the spread leads to a significant decline in output, both statistically
and economically.
     The interpretation we wish to give to the link between movements in the spread and the
output gap is that it is symptomatic of the financial accelerator at work. To be sure, since the
evidence is based on a reduced form system, the impulse response does not yield any kind
of precise quantitative estimate of this mechanism. What it does say is that some kind of
shock that is orthogonal to the current output gap and manifests itself in an increase in the
high yield spread does have a significant effect on the path of aggregate real activity. Thus
while the evidence is not definite proof of a quantitatively important financial accelerator,
it is certainly compatible with this scenario.
     Figure 4 presents some further descriptive evidence in support of the notion that an
operative financial accelerator underlies the co-movement between the high yield spread
and the output gap. The top panel shows that movements in the high yield spread are
closely related to the net interest burden that non-financial corporations face. The latter is
the ratio of interest payments to interest plus cash flow. It is a simple (inverse) measure of
firms’ balance sheet strength. As we noted, the theory underlying the financial accelerator
suggests an inverse relation between balance sheet strength and the premium for external
funds. The co-movement between the high yield spread and the net interest burden is
consistent with this scenario.
     Particularly striking is the simultaneous sharp rise in both variables during the late
  12 As  we have noted, the salient feature of the data is the very sharp rise in the high yield spread in late
1989 that preceded the 1990-91 recession, the only significant dowturn in the sample. While it is perfectly
legitimate to exploit the variation in the data that comes from this single epsiode, it is nonetheless useful
to know whether this event accounts for all the explanatory power of the high yield spread for the output
gap. To get at this issue, we re-estimated the forecasting equation for the output gap, this time allowing the
coefficients to switch (at all lags) on the five observations on the spread between 1989Q:4 and 1990Q:4. In
effect, we identify the explanatory the spread that remains after removing the five largest observations in the
sample. Overall, the explanatory power of the high yield spread for the output gap a year ahead is largely
unaffected by this exercise. In particular, for the year ahead regression, the p-value for the joint significance
of the spread is 0:03 for the full sample and 0:00 for the restricted sample. Further, the sum of the coefficients
(with p-values in parentheses) over the two samples are ,0:007 (0:03) and ,0:008 (0:00). Thus, little
changes from the benchmark case reported in Figure 1. For the quarter ahead case, however, the high yield
spread does not add significant marginal predictive power in the restricted sample. However, the sum of the
coefficients remains significantly negative. In summary, the 1990-91 recession alone does not account for the
explanatory power of the spread for the year ahead output gap, but does seem to matter a great deal for the
quarter ahead case.


                                                        6
1980s. A combination of events contributed to the rise in the net interest burden over this
period: (i) the development of the high yield bond market, (ii) tightening of monetary policy
(i.e. increased short term interest rates) and (iii) a weakening of corporate cash flows due
to the tightening and other factors. It is exactly this kind of scenario that should produce a
rise in the premium for external funds that, in turn, has an overall dampening effect on the
economy. The co-movement between the net interest burden, the high yield spread and the
output gap are certainly consistent with this interpretation of events. It is also of interest to
observe that during the recent period of high growth, the net interest burden is low and so
too is the high yield spread. Again, the broad picture aligns with the notion of an operative
financial accelerator.
     The premium for external funds should also be related to conditions in banking. Weak-
ness in bank balance sheets impedes the ability of these institutions to intermediate funds.
The net effect is to constrain the overall supply of funds to firms with imperfect access
to credit and thereby raise the premium for external funds. The bottom panel in Figure
4 compares the movement in the high yield spread to the condition of bank capital asset
ratios from 1984:1 through 1999:1. The low capital asset ratio at the beginning of the
period reflects the consequences of the risk-taking encouraged by the deregulation of the
financial services industry that occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s. This deregula-
tion was not accompanied by a prudent adjustment of the (regulatory) financial safety net.
As a consequence, many banks became highly levered and at the same time ventured into
increasingly risky types of loans. The combination of poor capitalization and a risky loan
portfolio left many of these institutions heavily exposed to the shocks that followed, includ-
ing the defaults on LDC debt and the collapse of oil and real estate prices. The net effect
was a serious decline in bank capitalization. Accompanying this decline in capital was a
sharp rise in the high yield spread, in line with the theory of the financial accelerator.13
Interestingly, the low spread that has prevailed in recent times is accompanied by strength
in not only non-financial corporate balance sheets, but bank balance sheets as well.
     Finally, the bottom panel also plots the information on the terms of bank lending from
the senior loan officers’ survey.14 The gap from 1984 to 1990 reflects the fact that the
survey was briefly discontinued over this period. However, the available data shows that
periods where the terms of credit tightened are associated with upward movements in the
high yield spread. In this respect the high yield spread appears to be a good measure of
overall financial conditions as we conjectured.
  13 For  a discussion of the problems in banking during the 1980s and the impact these problems had on the
real economy, see Bernanke and Lown (1991).
   14 For a analysis of the forecasting value of the information in the loan officer’s survey, see Lown, Morgan

and Rohatgi (1999).




                                                      7
4 A Comparison with Other Spreads
In this section we compare the explanatory performance of the high yield spread to the
two leading alternatives: the commercial paper/T-bill spread and the term spread (ten year
government bond minus one year bond.) Each of these spreads has been a reliable indicator
of economic activity for most of the time since the early 1970s, but each has declined in
performance over the last decade.15
    Traditional use of financial information for forecasting emphasized monetary aggre-
gates, following the lead of Friedman and Schwartz (1963). As suggested by Goodhart’s
law, attempts to target monetary aggregates in the early 1980s led to a decline in their fore-
casting power. Financial innovation (which induced fluctuations in velocity) also caused
the statistical relation between money and output to deteriorate.
    In response to the poor predictive performance of monetary aggregates, Friedman and
Kuttner (1992, 1993) originally proposed examining the predictive power of the paper-
bill spread. They showed that this indicator had strong predictive power up through the
mid-1980s. For similar reasons, Estrella and Hardouvelis (1991) and Estrella and Mishkin
(1998) proposed the term spread. This variable also worked very well over a similar time
period.
    In our view, the performance of each of these indicators is tied closely to monetary
policy. In particular, each of these spreads moves sharply in periods of significant monetary
tightening. For example, during periods of sharp increases in the Federal Funds rate, the
paper-bill spread has widened significantly and the term spread has become significantly
negative (i.e, the yield curve has become inverted.) The widening of the paper-bill spread
is associated with a surge in money market instruments, including commercial paper and
CDs that has typically accompanied a monetary tightening: the surge of these instruments
on the market temporarily depresses their price.16 The negative movement in the term
spread simply reflects that the monetary tightening is inducing a rise in near term short
rates relative to future short term rates.
    To the extent that these indicators are connected with monetary policy, then it is un-
derstandable why they might perform well through the middle 1980s. As a number of
economist have noted, monetary tightening to curtail inflation was an important feature of
each of the recessions from the late 1960s through the early 1980s. In this vein, since a
sharp monetary tightening did not precede the most recent downturn (1990-92), it is un-
derstandable that these indicators did not forecast real activity to the same degree as in the
past.
    Figure 5 presents cross-correlations of each of these indicators with the output gap. To
illustrate the change in the cyclical pattern of each of these indicators over time, we plot
results for the two samples: 1980:1 - 1999:1 and 1985:1-1999:1. Note that the former
includes the period of monetary policy tightening under Volcker. For the full sample, the
  15 See Stock and Watson (forthcoming) for a general description of the cyclical pattern of interest rate
spreads.
  16 See Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox (1993), Friedman and Kuttner (1993) and Gertler (1993).




                                                    8
patterns are consistent with the idea that the indicators are capturing policy tightening. In
particular, the current output gap is negatively correlated with lagged values of the paper-
bill spread, implying that a rise in the spread (perhaps induced by a policy tightening)
signals a subsequent decline in output. In a similar spirit, over the full sample, the output
gap is positively correlated with lagged values of the term spread: Accordingly, a decline in
the term spread (again, perhaps induced by a policy tightening) signals a decline in output.
    Note, however, that for both indicators, the cross-correlation with the output gap
changes dramatically when we move from the full sample to the sub-period 1985:1-1999:1.
Again, the results are consistent with the interpretation that these indicators are tied to mon-
etary policy. The absence of a monetary policy-induced contraction in output on the scale
of the early Volcker disinflation appears to account for the breakdown in the lead-lag rela-
tion observed over the full sample.
    We explore the issue further by considering some simple “horse races” of the high yield
spread against each of the alternative spreads. In each case, we regress the output gap on
four lags each of output gap, the high yield spread and one of the alternative indicators. We
consider both quarter ahead and year ahead estimates. We also estimate over the 1980:1-
1999:1 sample and the 1985:1-1999:1 sample.
    Table 2 presents the results from exclusion tests of the high yield spread versus the
alternative indicator. The numbers in the table are p-values for the null that the particular
spread has no information for the output gap. Over the full sample (which, again, includes
the Volcker disinflation) the term spread appears to dominate. It is a statistically significant
predictor of the output gap after controlling for the high yield spread, for both quarter ahead
and year ahead forecasts. The high yield spread in this case is significant only for the year
ahead forecast. The paper-bill spread over this sample is significant only for the quarter
ahead forecast. The reverse is true for the high yield spread in this case.
    The results change, however, for the 1985:1-1996:1 sample. In this case, the high yield
spread has more reliable marginal explanatory power for the output gap than either the
paper-bill spread or the term spread. When run against either alternative indicator, the high
yield spread remains a statistically significant predictor of the output gap. This result holds
for both the quarter ahead and year ahead estimates of the output gap. Interestingly, the
term spread has no significant marginal explanatory power for the output gap over this
period. The paper-bill spread is significant for the year ahead forecast.
    We explore the issue further by considering the ability of each spread to aid in out-of-
sample forecasts for the output gap. Specifically, we consider a set of bivariate regressions
of the output gap on four lags each of the output gap and the respective spread. For bench-
mark purposes, we also estimate a univariate relation of the output gap on four lags of itself.
Again, we consider both quarter ahead and year ahead estimates of the output gap.
    We first estimate the equation over the period 1985:1 through 1996:1 for the quarter
ahead case, and stop a year earlier (1995:1) for the year ahead case. We next generate a
forecast for each case (in the quarter ahead case the first forecast is for 1996:2 and in the
year ahead case it is for 1996:1.) We then move forward one quarter, re-estimate the model
(over the sample 1985:1 - 1996:2, for the quarter ahead case and 1985:1-1995:2 for the year


                                               9
ahead case) and then generate a new set of forecasts. We continue this algorithm through
the end of the sample.
    Figure 6 presents the results for the quarter ahead forecasts and Figure 7 for the year
ahead. The top panel in each figure plots the ex post behavior of GDP against the forecast
from the univariate case. Note that in each instance the univariate model systematically
underpredicts.
    The bottom panel reports the out-of-sample results for each of the bivariate models.
Interestingly, the high yield spread significantly improves both the quarter ahead and year
ahead forecast of the output gap. The forecast in each case tightly overlaps the realized
value. On the other hand, neither the paper-bill spread nor the term spread is particularly
helpful for predicting the output gap over this period. As in the univariate case, the forecasts
systematically underpredict the output gap.
    From a variety of standpoints, accordingly, since the mid 1980s the high yield spread
has been a more reliable indicator of cyclical activity than either the paper-bill spread or
the term spread.


5 Oil Shocks and Monetary Policy
We next compare the marginal information in the high yield spread to several other vari-
ables that reflect potentially important forces that affect the economy: the real price of oil
and several indicators of the stance of monetary policy. As in the previous section, we run
a simple horse race of the high yield spread against an alternative, based on a projection of
the output gap on lagged values of itself, the high yield spread and the alternative variable.
    The first alternative we consider is the real price of oil. Hamilton (1983) and others
have argued that oil shocks have been a central driving force of the business cycle. The
question then arises as to whether the high yield spread might be capturing information
about this shock. On the surface this seems unlikely because the high yield spread rose
well in advance of the 1990 oil shock associated with the war in Kuwait (see Figure 1).17
    Table 3 presents results that bear out this conjecture. The top two rows present results of
exclusions tests for the high yield spread and the real price of oil respectively. As before, the
number presented is the p-value for the null that the variable in question is not significant in
the trivariate regression equation for the output gap. Over the full sample, 1980:1 -1999:1,
the real oil price is significant and the high yield spread is not. Note that this sample
captures the influence of not only the 1990 oil shock on output, but the 1979 shock as well.
It also includes the period 1980:1-1985:1 where the high yield bond market was not well
developed.
    The results change, however, when we restrict attention to the 1985:1 -1999:1 period.
The high yield spread is now significant, and strongly significant for the year ahead fore-
cast. Oil prices are only marginally significant for the year ahead forecast of the output gap.
  17 One   qualification is that the high yield market may have anticipated the problems in Kuwait. Investigat-
ing this issue is beyond the scope of the paper.


                                                     10
Thus movements in the high yield spread over this period contain significant information
for output that is independent of movements in oil prices.
    It is important to note that even if oil prices had eliminated the explanatory power of
the high yield spread, it is still the case that a financial accelerator mechanism could have
been at work over this period. The triggering force in this case would have been the oil
shock. That is, to the extent that rising oil prices weakened firm financial positions, the
financial accelerator could have served to magnify the direct affect of oil prices on real
activity. However, since oil prices do not eliminate the explanatory power of the high yield
spread, we are left with the possibility that disturbances other than oil shocks may have
triggered the financial accelerator.
    We next turn attention to indicators of monetary policy. We consider two: the broad
aggregate M2 (specifically, the growth rate) and the Federal Funds rate, as proposed orig-
inally by Bernanke and Blinder (1992). Endogeneity problems make M2 a questionable
indicator of the stance of policy. We nonetheless include it, given the tradition of analyzing
the predictive power of this aggregate (not to mention the interest of the new European
Central Bank in monetary aggregates). One issue is that in the simple trivariate regressions
we are not controlling for inflation. Thus, in addition to the nominal growth rate of M2
and the nominal Funds rate, we also consider real M2 growth and the ex post real Federal
Funds rate.
    As Table 3 shows, the monetary indicators tend to do better over the full sample 1980:1-
1999:1 than over the restricted sample that begins in 1985:1. The high yield bond spread
dominates M2 over each period. As we have noted, however, M2 is a questionable indicator
of the stance of monetary policy.
    The Federal Funds rate, on the other hand is highly significant over the full sample. In
this case, the high yield spread is significant only for the year ahead forecast. However, the
situation more than reverses when we restrict attention to the 1985:1-1999:1 sub-period.
Here the high yield spread is significant for both the quarter ahead and year ahead forecast
of output. The Funds rate, on the other hand is insignificant in both cases.
    Overall, the results are consistent with those obtained in the previous section, to the
extent that the paper-bill spread and the term spread are closely tied to the stance of mon-
etary policy. That is, the Federal Funds rate has highly significant marginal information
only when we include the period of the Volcker policy tightening, as was the case with the
paper-bill and term spreads.
    It should be clear that the results do not suggest that monetary policy has become unim-
portant in recent years. Rather they imply only that the “non-systematic” movements in
policy have become less important, so that the marginal information for aggregate activity
contained in indicators tied closely to monetary policy has diminished.18 The same, how-
ever, is not true for the high yield spread, which seems to contain significant information
for the output gap that is not available from the lagged output or other leading indicators.
    To explore this issue further, we consider the effects of orthogonalized shocks to the
  18 See Bernanke, Gerter, and Watson (1997) for an analysis of the problem of identifying the systematic
versus non-systematic component of monetary policy.


                                                   11
Funds rate versus the high yield spread. We begin by noting the change in the impact of the
Funds after the early 1980s. In particular, we consider a simple quarterly VAR that includes
four lags of the Federal Funds rate along with the logs of real GDP, the real GDP deflator,
and an index of commodity prices. This kind of system is the simplest that has been used
to analyze the impact of monetary policy shocks.19
    To identify a shock to monetary policy, we order the Funds rate last in the VAR. Figure
8 then portrays the impulse responses to a positive shock to the Funds rate, for the two
samples 1979:4-1999:1 and 1985:1-1999:1. Over the long sample, the unanticipated rise
in the Funds rate has the conventional effect: Output and prices decline; and the effect
is statistically significant. However, when we restrict attention to the shorter sample, the
impact of the Funds rate completely vanishes20. Again, we stress that this does not imply
that monetary policy has become unimportant, only that the non-systematic component has
become less significant. The longer sample incorporates the Volcker disinflation during
which there was an unusual rise in the Funds rate. The simple linear model interprets
this period as one of big positive shocks to the Funds rate, which helps account for the
overall impact of the orthogonalized shocks.21 The absence of high inflation post-1985
eliminated the need for any unusual tightening. In addition, as originally emphasized by
Taylor (1993), monetary policy under Greenspan has reacted in a very systematic way to
the economy. As a consequence it is only natural that monetary policy shocks should have
become less important.
    Finally, we add the high yield bond spread to the VAR and order it last in the system.
Thus, we let monetary policy affect the spread within the period, but assume that the Fed is
not influenced by current innovations in the spread - though, it may certainly be influenced
by lagged movements in the spread. We then consider the impact of a positive shock to
the yield spread. Note that the shock has a significant depressing effect on real output over
time. Thus, movements in the spread over this period that are orthogonal to output, prices
and the Funds rate have a significant impact on aggregate activity. Again, the results are
consistent with there being an operative financial accelerator during this era.


6 Conclusion
Our results indicate that the high yield bond spread contains statistically significant and
quantitatively important information for aggregate economic activity since the time of the
  19 See Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996) and Bernanke and Mihov (1998).       The authors also include
non-borrowed and total bank reserves in the model. Under the assumption that the Funds rate is the policy
instrument, however, adding reserves typically has little impact on model dynamics.
   20 Note that the results pertain to quarterly data. With monthly data it is possible to detect a significant

effect of the Funds rate on industrial production, post-1985. However, the results typically are accompanied
by a “price puzzle” (i.e, a policy contraction produces a rise in prices), which makes questionable whether
the policy shock is properly identified.
   21
      Clarida, Gali and Gertler (forthcoming) provide formal evidence of a significant shift in the reaction
functon around the time of Volcker.


                                                     12
development of the market for below-investment grade debt. This conclusion is based on
an analysis of both in-sample fit and out-of-sample forecasts. One caveat is that the sample
period (1985:1-1999:1) is relatively short and includes only one major recession.22 On the
other hand, the high yield spread does considerably improve the out-of-sample forecast of
the recent behavior of the output gap, particularly relative to other financial indicators.
    We also argue that the high yield spread may be a good measure of overall financial
conditions. In particular, it may be good proxy for the premium for external funds, a
variable that plays a central role in the financial accelerator. In this vein, the cyclical relation
between the high yield spread and the output gap may be symptomatic of an operative
financial accelerator, along the lines suggested by the theory.
    Another key finding is that, since the middle 1985s, the high yield spread outperforms
the other leading financial indicators of real economic activity, including the paper-bill
spread, the term spread and the Federal Funds rate. As we discussed, changes in the conduct
of monetary policy that have occurred since the early 1980s likely account for the reduced
informativeness of these alternative indicators, all of which are closely tied to monetary
policy.
    A virtue of the high yield spread is that because it is extremely sensitive to default risk,
it may detect a greater variety of factors that influence the macro-economy than do the other
indicators. This might explain why it was informative, in contrast to the other indicators,
over an era where monetary policy was not the central factor in the downturn.
    Thus, there is the possibility that the high yield spread may prove to be a relatively
durable and useful indicator of economic activity. Several qualifications are in order, how-
ever: First, it is important to keep in mind that the informativeness of any financial indicator
is sensitive to the nature of the business cycle and, relatedly, to the conduct of monetary
policy. Attempts to adjust policy to target the indicator will reduce its informativeness, as
we know from Goodhart’s law. In a similar spirit, because the cyclical properties of the
indicator are likely sensitive to the monetary policy rule, basing policy explicitly on the
indicator may lead to problems of circularity, as emphasized by Woodford(1994).
    Second, the predictive power of the spread is likely to hinge on the extent to which
financial conditions in the high yield bond market are highly correlated with financial con-
ditions in other credit markets, particularly the market for bank loans.23 We provided
informal evidence to show that this high correlation was present over the sample we exam-
ined, particularly during the recessionary period. Situations could arise, however, where
the spread might not acurately gauge overall credit conditions. For example, the recent rise
in the high yield bond spread was due in part to factors idiosyncratic to this market (i.e., the
Russian bond default) and not symptomatic of a systematic deterioration of credit condi-
  22 As we discussed earlier (see footnote 11), however, dummying out the observations on the high yield
spread over the period 1989:4-1990:4 does not perceptively weaken the explanatory power that the high yield
spread has for the output gap a year ahead.
  23 Thus, for example, even if direct bond financing is small relative to bank finance, as for example is the

case in Europe today, the spread emerging from a liquid high yield market can still be informative about the
course of the overall economy, to the extent financial conditions are correlated across markets.



                                                     13
tions, of the kind that occurred in the late 1980s. In this recent episode, banks remained in
relatively good financial health and, accordingly, were in a position to supply funds to offset
the disruption of the high yield market (with the support of an appropriately accommoda-
tive monetary policy)24. Similarly, Y2K problems could create idiosyncratic problems in
the high yield market that could mute the overall informativeness of the high yield spread.
What all this suggests, is that it may be desirable to develop a general economy-wide index
of financial conditions, of which the high yield bond spread is one component.
  24 Fora discussion of the substitution between bond and bank credit over this period, see Saidenberg and
Strahan (1999).




                                                   14
References
 [1] Bernanke, Ben, “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary Policy Trans-
     mission”, American Economic Review 82, September 1992, 901-921.

 [2] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Cycles,”
     American Economic Review, March 1989.

 [3] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
     Monetary Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, Fall 1995, 27-
     48.

 [4] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerator in
     a Quantitative Business Framework,” NBER Working Paper # 6455, March 1998,
     forthcoming, The Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Michael Wood-
     ford, editors.

 [5] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Mark Watson, “Systematic Monetary Policy and
     the Effects of Oil Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997:1, 91-157.

 [6] Bernanke, Ben and Cara S. Lown, “The Credit Crunch,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
     nomic Activity, 1991:2, 205-247.

 [7] Bernanke, Ben and Ilian Mihov, “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics CXIII, August 1998, 869-902.

 [8] Christiano Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, “The Effects of Mon-
     etary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” Review of Economics and
     Statistics, February 1996, 16-34.

 [9] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroe-
     conomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     forthcoming.

[10] Dotsey, Michael, “The Predictive Content of the Interest Rate Term Spread for Fu-
     ture Economic Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Quarterly Review 84/3
     Summer 1998, 30-51.

[11] Estrella, Arturo and Gikas Hardouvelis, “The Term Structure of Interest Rates as a
     Predictor of Real Economic Activity,” Journal of Finance 46, 55-572.

[12] Estrella, Arturo and Frederic Mishkin, “Predicting Recessions: Financial Variables as
     Leading Indicators,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February1998.

[13] Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth N. Kuttner, “Money, Income and Interest Rates,”
     American Economc Review 82, June 1992, 472-492.

                                           15
[14] Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth N. Kuttner, “Economic Activity and Short Term
     Credit Markets: An Analysis of Prices and Quantities,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
     nomic Activity, 1993:2, 193-283.

[15] Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth N. Kuttner, “Indicator Properties of the Paper-Bill
     Spread: Lessons From Recent Experience,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
     February 1998, 34-44.

[16] Friedman Milton and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States,
     1867-1960, Princeton University Press, 1963.

[17] Gertler, Mark, “Comment on Friedman and Kuttner,” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 1993:2, 271-277.

[18] Hamilton, James, “Oil and the Macroeconomy Since World War II,” Journal of Polit-
     ical Economy 91: 228-48.

[19] Helwege, Jean and Paul Kleiman, “Understanding Default Rates on High Yield Secu-
     rities,” Journal of Fixed Income Securities, 55-61.

[20] Hubbard, R. Glenn, “Capital Market Imperfections and Investment,” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Literature 36, March 1998.

[21] Kashyap, Anil, David W. Wilcox and Jeremy Stein, “Monetary Policy and Credit Con-
     ditions: Evidence From the Composition of External Finance,” American Economic
     Review 83, June 1993, 78-98.

[22] Lown, Cara S., Donald P. Morgan and Sonali Rohatgi, “Commercial Credit Standards
     at Banks: How We Observe Them and Why They Matter,” mimeo, Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York, June 1999.

[23] Milken, Michael, “Prosperity and Social Capital,” Wall Street Journal, June 23, 1999,
     A26.

[24] Mishkin, Frederic, “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Per-
     spective,” in R. Glenn Hubbard editor, Financial Markets and Financial Crises, Uni-
     versity of Chicago Press, 1991, 69-108.

[25] Muellbauer, John N.J., “Income Persistence and Macro-Policy Feedbacks in the U.S.”
     Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 58, 703-733.

[26] Saidenberg, Marc and Philip Strahan, “Are Banks Still Important for Financing Large
     Businesses?”, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of
     New York, August, 1999.




                                           16
[27] Stock, James and Mark Watson, “Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S. Time Series,”
     forthcoming in the Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Michael Wood-
     ford, editors.

[28] Taylor, John, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie Rochester Con-
     ference on Public Policy 39, 1993, 1995-214

[29] Woodford, Michael, “Non-Standard Indicators for Monetary Policy,” in Monetary
     Policy, N. Gregory Mankiw editor, University of Chicago Press, 1994, 95-115.




                                          17
                                          Table 1

                       Bivariate Regressions Predicting GDPGAP

                      Importance of High Yield – AAA Bond Spread

                               1981:Q1-1999:Q1                 1986:Q1-1999:Q1

                        1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead   1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead


p-Value for
Joint Significance           0.14            0.00           0.02              0.00

Sum of Coefficients         -0.001          -0.01          -0.002            -0.01
p-Value                      0.08            0.01           0.00              0.00
Table 2

                  Trivariate Regressions Predicting GDPGAP


A. High Yield - AAA Bond Spread Relative to Commercial Paper - Treasury Bill
   Spread

                          1981:Q1-1999:Q1                 1986:Q1-1999:Q1

                  1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead   1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead

p-Value for
HYAAA                  0.26           0.04              0.00            0.00
CPTBSP                 0.03           0.20              0.13            0.00


B. High Yield – AAA Bond Spread Relative to the Term Spread

                          1981:Q1-1999:Q1                 1986:Q1-1999:Q1

                  1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead   1 Quarter Ahead   1 Year Ahead

p-Value for
HYAAA                  0.17           0.01              0.02             0.00
TERMSP                 0.00           0.00              0.97             0.20
                                             Table 3

                       Trivariate Regressions Predicting GDPGAP

              High Yield - AAA Bond Spread Relative to Oil Prices and
                             Monetary Policy Indicators



                           1981:Q1-1999:Q1                      1986:Q1-1999:Q1

                 1 Quarter Ahead     1 Year Ahead      1 Quarter Ahead    1 Year Ahead

p-Value for

HYAAA                   0.32                 0.23             0.07                0.00
Real Oil Prices         0.58                 0.00             0.97                0.09

HYAAA                   0.13                 0.02              0.02               0.00
Nom. M2 Growth          0.79                 0.99              0.66               0.08

HYAAA                   0.10                 0.00              0.07               0.00
Real M2 Growth          0.20                 0.01              0.82               0.18

HYAAA                   0.58                 0.04              0.02               0.00
Nom. FF                 0.00                 0.00              0.42               0.22

HYAAA                   0.58                 0.04              0.02               0.00
Real FF                 0.00                 0.00              0.42               0.21
                                             Figure 1
                             The High Yield Bond Rate
      Percent
    10                                                                                                  10



                       High Yield Bond -10 Year Treasury Bond




      5                                                                                                 5




                                                                  High Yield Bond -AAA Corporate Bond

      0                                                                                                 0
     1980 Q1       1983 Q1       1986 Q1          1989 Q1       1992 Q1       1995 Q1        1998 Q1

Shading indicates periods of recession
                                    Figure 2
Cross-Correlation: High Yield - AAA Bond Rate and GDP Gap


   0.4                                                                   0.4
                                             1985 to 1999




     0                                                                   0



                1980 to 1999

   -0.4                                                                  -0.4




   -0.8                                                                  -0.8
          -12           -8     -4        0                  4   8   12

                                      Quarter
                                         Figure 3
               Impact of the High Yeld spread on the Output Gap: 1986:1 - 1999:1

0.0028                                              0.75


0.0014
                                                    0.50

0.0000
                                                    0.25

-0.0014
                                                    0.00
-0.0028

                                                    -0.25
-0.0042

                                                    -0.50
-0.0056


-0.0070                                             -0.75
          0     4     8        12   16                      0    3       6     9    12   15   18

              Resp of CBOGAP                                         Resp of HIGH_AAA
                                 Figure 4
                         Financial Indicators
     Percent
10                                                                                38




                     Coverage Ratio
                     (right scale)
 5                                                                                23



                   High Yield -AAA Bond
                   Rate (left scale)


0                                                                                 8
1980 Q1        1984 Q1          1988 Q1        1992 Q1        1996 Q1

     Percent
10                                                                            60
                             Percent Bankers
                                Reporting                Bank Capital-Asset
                              Tighter Loan               Ratio (left scale)
                                Standards
                               (right scale)
                                                                              30


 5


                                                                              0
                    High Yield -AAA
                    Bond Rate (left scale)



0                                                                             -30
1980 Q1        1984 Q1          1988 Q1        1992 Q1       1996 Q1
                                   Figure 5
 Cross-Correlations: Commercial Paper-TBill and GDP Gap
  Percent
 0.5                                                                         0.5

                                  1985 to 1999
0.25                                                                         0.25


   0                                                                         0

                                                     1980 to 1999
-0.25                                                                        -0.25


 -0.5                                                                        -0.5
        -12         -8       -4              0               4      8   12


 Cross-Correlations: 10 Yr-1 Yr Treasury Rate and GDP Gap
     Percent
  0.5
                                                                                 0.5
                                  1980 to 1999


    0
                                                                                 0


              1985 to 1999
 -0.5                                                                            -0.5



   -1                                                                            -1
        -12         -8       -4                  0            4     8    12
                                          Quarter
                                  Figure 6
     Out of Sample Forecasts - 1 Quarter Ahead
     Percent
 4                                                                             4



                                                     GDP Gap

 2                                                                             2


                                         Predicted with Lagged Gap


 0                                                                             0




-2                                                                             -2
1996 Q2        1996 Q4      1997 Q2        1997 Q4         1998 Q2   1998 Q4

     Percent
 4                                                                             4



                                                GDP Gap

 2                                                                             2

                                       High Yield Bond Spread



 0                                                                             0


                                           Term Spread

     Commercial Paper Spread
-2                                                                             -2
1996 Q2      1996 Q4         1997 Q2       1997 Q4         1998 Q2   1998 Q4
                                  Figure 7
       Out of Sample Forecasts - 1 Year Ahead
     Percent
 4                                                                                      4
                                                    GDP Gap




 2                                                                                      2


                                        Predicted with Lagged Gap

 0                                                                                      0




-2                                                                                    -2
1996 Q1   1996 Q3   1997 Q1   1997 Q3   1998 Q1    1998 Q3   1999 Q1   1999 Q3   2000 Q1

     Percent
 4                                                                                       4




                                GDP Gap                   Commercial Paper Spread
 2                                                                                       2

                                 High Yield Bond
                                 Spread


 0                                                                                       0


                                          Term Spread

     Commercial Paper Spread
-2                                                                                       -2
1996 Q1 1996 Q3 1997 Q1 1997 Q3         1998 Q1    1998 Q3   1999 Q1   1999 Q3      2000 Q1
                                                                      Figure 8a
                                           Impact of Federal Funds rate shock: 1979:4 - 1999:1
0.0050                            0.002                                     0.010                                    0.8



                                  0.001                                                                              0.6
                                                                            0.005
0.0025

                                  0.000                                                                              0.4
                                                                            0.000

0.0000                            -0.001                                                                             0.2

                                                                            -0.005
                                  -0.002                                                                             0.0

-0.0025
                                                                            -0.010
                                  -0.003                                                                             -0.2



-0.0050                           -0.004                                    -0.015                                   -0.4
          0     4   8   12   16             0   3   6   9   12   15    18            0    3   6   9   12   15   18          0   3     6   9   12   15   18

              Resp of GDP                       Resp of DEFL                             Resp of PCOM                               Resp of FF
                                                                             Figure 8b
                                                 Impact of Federal Funds rate shock: 1986:1 - 1999:1
0.005                                   0.002                                      0.020                                    0.36

0.004                                                                              0.015                                    0.27
                                        0.001
0.003
                                                                                   0.010
                                                                                                                            0.18
0.002                                   0.000
                                                                                   0.005
0.001                                                                                                                       0.09
                                        -0.001                                     0.000
0.000                                                                                                                       -0.00
                                                                                   -0.005
-0.001                                  -0.002
                                                                                                                            -0.09
                                                                                   -0.010
-0.002
                                        -0.003
                                                                                                                            -0.18
-0.003                                                                             -0.015


-0.004                                  -0.004                                     -0.020                                   -0.27
         0   3   6   9   12   15   18             0    3   6   9   12   15    18            0    3   6   9   12   15   18           0   3     6   9   12   15   18

             Resp of GDP                              Resp of DEFL                              Resp of PCOM                                Resp of FF
                                                                                Figure 9
                                                      Impact of High Yeld spread shock: 1986:1 - 1999:1
0.0050                          0.0100                             0.075                                    0.6                                   0.6


0.0025                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                0.0075                                                                      0.4

0.0000                                                             0.050
                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                0.0050                                                                      0.2
-0.0025
                                                                                                                                                  -0.0

-0.0050                         0.0025                             0.025                                    -0.0

                                                                                                                                                  -0.2
-0.0075
                                0.0000                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                  -0.4
-0.0100                                                            0.000

                                -0.0025                                                                     -0.4
                                                                                                                                                  -0.6
-0.0125


-0.0150                         -0.0050                            -0.025                                   -0.6                                  -0.8
          0   4   8   12   16             0   4   8     12   16             0    3   6   9   12   15   18          0   3   6   9   12   15   18          0   3   6   9   12   15   18

          Resp of GDP                     Resp of DEFL                      Resp of PCOM                               Resp of FF                        Resp of HIGH_AAA
