NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION DYNAMICS:
A STRUCTURAL ECONOMETRIC ANALYSIS

Jordi Galí
Mark Gertler

Working Paper 7551
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7551
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

The authors thank participants at the JME-SNB Gerzensee Conference on “The Return of the Phillips Curve,
NBER Summer Institute and ME Meetings, and seminars at Lausanne, UPF, Delta, Chicago, Michigan,
Princeton, Yale, Columbia, San Francisco Fed, BIS, IIES, and the ECB, for useful comments. Special thanks
also to John Roberts and Mark Watson. Tomasso Monacelli and Fabio Natalucci provided excellent research
assistance. Financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics, the National Science
Foundation, and CREI is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis
Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler
NBER Working Paper No. 7551
February 2000
JEL No. E31
ABSTRACT
We develop and estimate a structural model of inflation that allows for a fraction of firms that use
a backward looking rule to set prices. The model nests the purely forward looking New Keynesian Phillips
curve as a particular case. We use measures of arginal cost as the relevant determinant of inflation, as the
theory suggests, instead of an ad-hoc output gap. Real marginal costs are a significant and quantitatively
important determinant of inflation. Backward looking price setting, while statistically significant, is not
quantitatively important. Thus, we conclude that the New Keynesian Phillips curve provides a good first
approximation to the dynamics of inflation.

Jordi Galí
Department d’Economia
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
Spain
and NBER, and New York University
jordi.gali@econ.upf.es

Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
gertlerm@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Among the central issues in macroeconomics is the nature of short run inflation
dynamics. This matter is also one of the most fiercely debated, with few definitive
answers available after decades of investigation. At stake, among other things, is the
nature of business cycles and what should be the appropriate conduct of monetary
policy.1
In response to this challenge, important advances have emerged recently in the
theoretical modeling of inflation dynamics.2 This new literature builds on early work
by Fischer (1977), Taylor (1980), Calvo (1983) and others that emphasized staggered nominal wage and price setting by forward looking individuals and firms. It
extends this work by casting the price setting decision within an explicit individual
optimization problem. Aggregating over individual behavior then leads, typically, to
a relation that links inflation in the short run to some measure of overall real activity,
in the spirit of the traditional Phillips curve. The explicit use of microfoundations, of
course, places additional structure on the relation and also leads to some important
differences in details.
Despite the advances in theoretical modeling, accompanying econometric analysis
of the “new Phillips curve” has been rather limited, though with a few notable exceptions.3 The work to date has generated some useful findings, but these findings have
also raised some troubling questions about the existing theory. As we discuss below,
it appears difficult for these models to capture the persistence in inflation without appealing either to some form of stickiness in inflation that is hard to motivate explicitly
or to adaptive expectations, which also poses difficulty from a modeling standpoint.
In addition, with quarterly data, it is often difficult to detect a statistically significant
effect of real activity on inflation using the structural formulation implied by theory,
when the measure of real activity is an output gap (i.e., real output relative to some
measure of potential output). Failure to find a significant short run link between real
activity and inflation is obviously unsettling for the basic story.
In this context, we develop and estimate a structural model of the Phillips curve.
Our approach has three distinctive features. First, in the empirical implementation,
we use a measure of real marginal cost in place of an ad hoc output gap, as the theory
suggests. As will become apparent, a desirable feature of a marginal cost measure
is that it directly accounts for the impact of productivity gains on inflation, a factor
1

For recent work that explores how the appropriate course of monetary policy depends on the
nature of short run inflation dynamics, see Svensson (1997a, 1997b), Clarida, Gali and Gertler
(1997b), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997b), McCallum and Nelson (1998), King and Wolman (1998),
and Erceg, Henderson and Levin (1998).
2
See Goodfriend and King (1997) for a comprehensive survey.
3
Examples of work that attempts to estimate the new Phillips curve include, Chada, Masson
and Meredith (1992), Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Fuhrer (1997), and Roberts (1997, 1998). For
discussions of the traditional empirical literature on the Phillips curve, see King and Watson (1994),
Gordon (1996) and Lown and Rich (1997).

1

that simple output gap measures often miss. In this respect, our approach is complementary to Sbordone (1998), though she uses a different methodology to empirical
assess the model than we do.4 Second, we extend the baseline theory underlying
the new Phillips curve to allow for a subset of firms that set prices according to a
backward looking rule of thumb. Doing so allows us to directly estimate the degree
of departure from a pure forward looking model needed to account for the observed
inflation persistence. Third, we identify and estimate all the structural parameters of
the model using conventional econometric methods. The coefficients in our structural
inflation equation are “mongrel” functions of two key model primitives: the average
duration that an individual price is fixed (i.e., the degree of price “stickiness”) and the
fraction of firms that use rule of thumb behavior (i.e., the degree of “backwardness”).
As we show, several results stand out and appear to be quite robust: (a) Real
marginal costs are indeed a statistically significant and quantitatively important determinant of inflation, as the theory predicts; (b) Forward looking behavior is very
important: our model estimates suggest that roughly sixty to eighty percent of firms
exhibit forward looking price setting behavior; (c) Backward looking behavior is statistically significant though, in our preferred specifications, is of limited quantitative
importance. Thus, while the benchmark pure forward looking model is rejected on
statistical grounds, it appears still to be a reasonable first approximation of reality;
(d) The average duration a price is fixed is considerable, but the estimates are in line
with survey evidence.
Taken as whole, our results are supportive of the new, theory-based Phillips curves.
But they also raise a puzzle. Traditional explanations of inertia in inflation (and hence
the costs of disinflations) rely on some form of “backwardness” in price setting. To
the extent this backwardness is not quantitatively important, as we seem to find,
the story needs to be re-examined. In our view, the “black box” to investigate is
the link between aggregate activity and real marginal costs. To the extent they are
reasonably characterized by unit labor costs, real marginal costs tend to lag output
over the cycle rather than move contemporaneously, in contrast to the prediction of
the standard sticky price macroeconomic framework.5 In this respect, our analysis
suggests that a potential source of inflation inertia may be sluggish adjustment of
real marginal costs to movements in output. We elaborate on this possibility in the
conclusion.
4

Sbordone (1998) explores how well the model fits the data conditional on different choices of
a parameter that governs the degree of price rigidity. Our approach is to directly estimate the
structural parameters using an instrumental variables procedure that is based on the orthogonality
conditions that evolve from the underlying theory. In addition, we develop a general model that
nests the pure forward looking model as a special case. Doing so allows us to test directly the
departure from the pure forward looking model that is required to explain the data. Despite the
sharp differences in methodology, the main conclusions we draw are very similar to hers, as we
discuss later.
5
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1997) also stress that the standard sticky price framework
does not seem to explain the cyclical behavior of marginal cost.

2

The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews the basic theory underlying the
new Phillips curve and discusses the existing empirical literature. We make clear
why specifications based on the output gap are likely to be unsuccessful. Section 3
then presents estimates of the new Phillips curve using a measure of real marginal
cost, and shows that with this specification the theory does a reasonably good job of
describing the data. To explore further the issue of how well the theory captures the
inertia in inflation, section 4 extends the model to allow for a subset of firms that use
rule of thumb behavior. It then presents estimates of the resulting augmented Phillips
curve and a variety of robustness exercises. In addition, we construct a measure of
“fundamental inflation” based on the solution to the estimated model that relates
inflation to a discounted stream of expected future marginal costs, as well as lagged
inflation. We in turn show that this measure does a good job of describing the actual
path of inflation, including the recent period. Section 5 concludes.

2

The New Phillips Curve: Background Theory
and Evidence

In this section we review the recent theory that generates an estimable Phillips curve
relation. We then discuss some of the pitfalls involved in estimating this relation
and how the literature has dealt with these issues to date. Finally, we describe our
approach.

2.1

A Baseline Model

The typical starting point for the derivation of the new Phillips curve is an environment of monopolistically competitive firms that face some type of constraints on
price adjustment. In the most common incarnations, the constraint is that the price
adjustment rule is time dependent. For example, every period the fraction X1 of firms
set their prices for X periods. The scenario is in the spirit of Taylor’s (1980) staggered
contracts model. A key difference is that the pricing decision evolves explicitly from
a monopolistic competitor’s profit maximization problem, subject to the constraint
of time dependent price adjustment.
In general, however, aggregation is cumbersome with deterministic time dependent
pricing rules at the micro level: It is necessary to keep track of the price histories of
firms. For this reason, it is common to employ an assumption due to Calvo (1983)
that greatly simplifies the aggregation problem.6 The idea is to assume that in any
6

Examples of frameworks that employ the Calvo assumption include Yun (1996), King and Wolman (1995), Woodford (1996), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997a, 1997b), Clarida, Gali and Gertler
(1997a), McCallum and Nelson (1998), and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1998). For a general equilibrium sticky price model based on the Taylor (1980) formulation, see Chari, Kehoe and
McGratten (1996) and Kiley (1997).

3

given period each firm has a fixed probability 1 − θ that it may adjust its price during
that period and, hence, a probability θ that it must keep its price unchanged. This
probability is independent of the time elapsed since the last price revision. Hence, the

k−1
1
= 1−θ
. Thus,
average time over which a price is fixed is given by (1 − θ) ∞
k=0 kθ
for example, with θ = .75 in a quarterly model, prices are fixed on average for a year.
Because the adjustment probabilities are independent of the firm’s price history, the
aggregation problem is greatly simplified.
We can derive the new Phillips curve by proceeding as follows7 : Assume that firms
are identical ex ante, except for the differentiated product they produce and for their
pricing history. Assume also that each faces a conventional constant price elasticity
of demand curve for its product. Then it is possible to show that the aggregate price
level pt−1 evolves as a convex combination of the lagged price level pt and the optimal
reset price p∗t (i.e. the price selected by firms that are able to change price at t), as
follows:
pt = θ pt−1 + (1 − θ) p∗t

(1)

where each variable is expressed as a percent deviation from a zero inflation steady
state. Intuitively, the fraction 1−θ of firms that set their price at t all choose the same
price p∗t since they are identical (except for the differentiated product they produce).
By the law of large numbers, further, the index of prices for firms that do not adjust
during the period is simply equal to the lagged price level.
Let mcnt be the firm’s nominal marginal cost at t (as a percent deviation from
the steady state) and let β denote a subjective discount factor. Then, for a firm
that chooses price at t to maximize expected discounted profits subject to the time
dependent pricing rules given by the Calvo formulation, the optimal reset price may
be expressed as:
p∗t = (1 − βθ)

∞


(βθ)k Et {mcnt+k }

(2)

k=0

In setting its price at t, the firm takes account of the expected future path of
nominal marginal cost, given the likelihood that its price may remain fixed for multiple
periods. Note that in the limiting case of perfect price flexibility (θ = 0), the firm
simply adjusts its price proportionately to movements in the current marginal cost.
The future becomes relevant only when there is price rigidity (i.e., θ > 0).
7

For an explicit derivation, see, e.g., Goodfriend and King (1997), King and Wolman (1996), or
Woodford (1996).

4

2.1.1

Inflation and Marginal Cost

The Calvo formulation leads to a Phillips curve with properties reasonably similar to
the standard staggered price formulation, but at the same time it is more tractable.8
From the standpoint of estimation, further, the parsimonious representation is highly
advantageous.
Let π t ≡ pt − pt−1 denote the inflation rate at t, and mct the percent deviation of
the firm’s real marginal cost from its steady state value. By combining equations (1)
and (2) it is possible to derive an inflation equation of the form:
π t = λ mct + β Et {π t+1 }

(3)

where the coefficient λ ≡ (1−θ)(1−βθ)
depends on the frequency of price adjustment θ
θ
and the subjective discount factor β.
Intuitively, because firms’ (a) mark up price over marginal costs, (b) are forward
looking, and (c) must lock into a price for (possibly) multiple periods, they base
their pricing decisions on the expected future behavior of marginal costs. Iterating
equation (3) forward yields
πt = λ

∞

k=0

β k Et {mct+k }

(4)

The benchmark theory thus implies that inflation should equal a discounted stream
of expected future marginal costs.
2.1.2

Marginal Cost and the Output Gap

Traditional empirical work on the Phillips curve emphasizes some output gap measure
as the relevant indicator of real economic activity, as opposed to marginal cost. Under
certain assumptions, however, there is an approximate log-linear relationship between
the two variables. Let yt denote the log of output; yt∗ the log of the “natural” level of
output (the level that would arise if prices were perfectly flexible); and xt ≡ yt − yt∗
the “output gap”. Then, under certain conditions one can write:9
mct = κ xt

(5)

where κ is the output elasticity of marginal cost.
8

Roberts (1997) demonstrates that the Calvo (1983) and Taylor (1980) models have very similar
implications for inflation dynamics. Kiley (1997), however, shows that differences can emerge if the
elasticity of inflation with respect to real marginal cost is large. Our estimates below point to a
relatively small elasticity. Nonetheless, extending our analysis to allow for alternative forms of price
staggering would be a useful undertaking.
9
In the standard sticky price framework without variable capital (e.g, Rotemberg and Woodford
(1997)), there is an approximate proportionate relation between marginal cost and output. With
variable capital the relation is no longer proportionate. Simulations suggest, however, that the
relation remains very close to proportionate.

5

Combining the relation between marginal cost and the output gap with equation
(3) yields a Phillips curve-like relationship:
π t = λκ xt + β Et {πt+1 }

(6)

As with the traditional Phillips curve, inflation depends positively on the output
gap and a “cost push” term that reflects the influence of expected inflation. A key
difference is that it is Et {π t+1 } as opposed to Et−1 {πt } (generally assumed to equal
πt−1 ) that matters. As a consequence, inflation depends exclusively on the discounted
sequence of future output gaps. This can be seen by iterating equation (6) forward,
which yields:
π t = λκ

2.2

∞


k=0

β k Et {xt+k }

(7)

Empirical Issues

Reconciling the new Phillips curve with the data, has not proved to be a simple task.
In particular, equation (6) implies that current change in inflation should depend
negatively on the lagged output gap. To see, lag equation (6) one period; and then
assume β  1 to obtain
π t = −λκ xt−1 + π t−1 + εt

(8)

where εt ≡ π t − Et−1 π t . But estimating equation (8) with U.S. data, and using
(quadratically) detrended log GDP as a measure of the output gap yields
π t = 0.081 xt−1 + πt−1 + εt

(9)

i.e., the inflation rate depends positively on the lagged output gap rather than negatively: The estimated equation, unfortunately, resembles the old curve rather than
the new!
The essential problem, as emphasized by Fuhrer and Moore (1995), is that the
benchmark new Phillips curve implies that inflation should lead the output gap over
the cycle, in the sense that a rise (decline) in current inflation should signal a subsequent rise (decline) in the output gap. Yet, exactly the opposite pattern can be found
in the data. The top panel in Figure 1 presents the cross-correlation of the current
output gap (measured by detrended log GDP) with leads and lags of inflation.10 As
the panel indicates clearly, the current output gap co-moves positively with future
inflation and negatively with lagged inflation. This lead of the output gap over inflation explains why the lagged output gap enters with a positive coefficient in equation
(9), consistent with the old Phillips curve theory but in direct contradiction of the
new.
10

The cross-correlations reported in figure 1 were computed on HP-detrended series over the period
1960:1-1997:4. We provide a more extensive discussion of Figure 1 in the conclusion.

6

Another discomforting feature of the new Phillips curve as given by equation
(6) is the stark prediction of no short run trade-off between output and inflation.
Put differently, equation (7) implies that a disinflation of any size could be achieved
costlessly and immediately by a central bank that could commit to setting the path
of future output gaps equal to zero. The historical experience suggests, in contrast,
that disinflations involve a substantial output loss [e.g., Ball (1994)]. It may be
possible to appeal to imperfect credibility to reconcile the theory with the data.
If, for example, the central bank cannot commit to stabilizing future output, then
reduction of inflation may involve current output losses [e.g., Ball (1995)]. While
this theory clearly warrants further investigation, there is currently, however, little
direct evidence to support it. Further, countries with highly credible central banks
(e.g., Germany) have experienced very costly disinflations [e.g., Clarida and Gertler
(1997)].
The empirical limitations of the new Phillips curve have led a number of researchers to consider a hybrid version of the new and old:
π t = δ xt + (1 − φ) Et {π t+1 } + φ π t−1

(10)

with 0 < φ < 1. The idea is to let inflation depend on a convex combination of
expected future inflation and lagged inflation. The addition of the lag term is designed
to capture the inflation persistence that is unexplained in the baseline model.11 A
further implication of the lag term is that disinflations now involve costly output
reduction.
The motivation for the hybrid approach is largely empirical. Fuhrer and Moore
(1995) appeal to Buiter and Jewitt’s (1985) relative wage hypothesis. While the
story may be plausible, it does not evolve from an explicit optimization problem,
in contrast to the benchmark formulation. Roberts (1997, 1998) instead appeals to
adaptive expectations on the part of a subset of price setters. Under his formulation,
some form of adaptive rule replaces lagged inflation.
Oddly enough, however, the hybrid Phillips curve has met with rather limited
success. In particular, the relation does not seem to provide a good characterization
of inflation dynamics at the quarterly frequency. Chadha, Masson, and Meredith
(1992), for example, obtain reasonable parameter estimates of equation (10), but
only with annual data. Roberts (1997, 1998) similarly works mainly with annual
and semi-annual data. With quarterly data, he has difficulty obtaining significant
estimates of the effect of the output gap on inflation. Fuhrer (1997) is able to obtain
11

A special case of equation (10) with φ = 0.5 is the widely used “sticky inflation” model of
Buiter and Jewitt (1985) and Fuhrer and Moore (1995):
(πt − πt−1 ) =

δ
xt + (Et πt+1 − πt )
0.5

(11)

Under this formulation, the change in the inflation rate is related the expected path of the future
output gaps.

7

a significant output gap coefficient with quarterly data, but only when the model is
heavily restricted. In this instance the estimated model is consistent with the old
Phillips curve: expected future inflation does not enter significantly in the inflation
equation; lagged inflation enters with a coefficient near unity, as in the traditional
framework.

2.3

Shortcomings

There are, however, several problems with this approach that could possibly account
for the empirical shortcomings. First, conventional measures of the output gap xt
are likely to be ridden with error, primarily due to the unobservability of the natural
rate of output yt∗ . 12 A typical approach (followed above) to measuring yt∗ is to use
a fitted deterministic trend. Alternatives are to use the Congressional Budget Office
(CBO) estimate or instead use a measure of capacity utilization as the gap variable.
It is widely agreed that all these approaches involve considerable measurement error.
To the extent there is significant high frequency variation in yt∗ (e.g., due to supply
shocks) mismeasurement could distort the estimation of an inflation equation like (6)
or (10).13 Though, whether correcting for measurement error alone could reverse the
lead-lag pattern between the output gap and inflation that is apparent from Figure
1 is problematic in our view.
A more fundamental issue, we believe, is that even if the output gap were observable the conditions under which it corresponds to marginal cost may not be satisfied.
Our analysis of the data suggests that movements in our measure of real marginal
cost (described below) tend to lag movements in output, in direct contrast to the
identifying assumptions that imply a co-incident movement. This discrepancy, we
will argue, is one important reason why structural estimation of Phillips curves based
on the output gap have met with limited success, at best.

2.4

Our Approach

In light of the difficulties with using the output gap, we instead use in the empirical
analysis below measures of real marginal cost, in a way consistent with the theory. In
other words, we estimate (3) instead of (6). Since real marginal cost is not directly
observable, we use restrictions from theory to derive a measure based on observables.
Conditional on our measure of real marginal cost, we can then obtain estimates of the
structural parameters in equation (3), including the frequency of price adjustment θ,
12

This issue is currently of great practical importance in the U.S.: in recent years the measured
output gap is well above trend, but inflation is well below trend. It thus appears that mismeasurement of the true output gap is confounding the ability of traditional Phillips curves to explain the
data. See Lown and Rich (1997).
13
For example, in the presence of nominal rigidities, supply shocks are likely to move detrended
output and the true output gap in opposite directions [Gali (1999)]. In addition, unobserved supply
shocks could potentially account for some of the explanatory power of lagged inflation.

8

the parameter that governs the degree of price stickiness (i.e., the average period a
price remains fixed.)
We also derive an econometric specification that permits us to assess the degree
to which the new Phillips curve can account for the inertia in inflation. In particular,
we derive a “hybrid Phillips” curve that nests the new Phillips curve as a special case,
but allows for a subset of firms use a backward looking rule of thumb to set prices.
The advantage of proceeding this way is that the coefficients of our hybrid Phillips
curve will be functions of two key parameters: the frequency of price adjustment
and the fraction of backward looking price setters. Note that the latter parameter
provides a direct measure of the departure from a pure forward looking model needed
to account for the persistence in inflation.
In the next section we present estimates of the new Phillips curve, and in the
subsequent one we present estimates of our hybrid Phillips curve.

3

New Estimates of the New Phillips Curve

We first describe our econometric specification of the new Phillips curve, along with
our general estimation procedure. We then present both reduced form and structural
estimates of the model.

3.1

Econometric Specification

We begin by describing how we obtain a measure of real marginal cost. For simplicity,
we restrict ourselves to the simplest measure of marginal cost available, one based on
the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology. Let At denote technology, Kt capital,
and Nt labor. Then output Yt is given by
Yt = At Ktαk Nt αn

(12)

Real marginal cost is then given by the ratio of the wage rate to the marginal
1
t
product of labor, i.e., MCt = W
. Hence, given equation (12) we have:
Pt ∂Yt /∂Nt
MCt =

St
αn

(13)

where St ≡ WPttYNtt is the labor income share (equivalently, real unit labor costs).14 .
Letting lower case letters denote percent deviations from the steady state we have:
mct = st
14

(14)

Interestingly, Lown and Rich (1997) show that augmenting the growth of a traditional Phillips
curve with the growth rate of nominal unit labor costs greatly improves the fit. We also stress the
role of unit labor costs, except that in our approach, (the log level) of real unit labor costs enters as
the relevant gap variable, as the theory suggests.

9

Combining equations (14) and (3) yields the inflation equation:
π t = λ st + β Et {πt+1 }

(15)

where the coefficient λ is given by
(1 − θ)(1 − βθ)
(16)
θ
Since under rational expectations the error in the forecast of π t+1 is uncorrelated with
information dated t and earlier, it follows from equation (14) that
λ=

Et {(π t − λ st − β πt+1 ) zt } = 0

(17)

where zt is a vector of variables dated t and earlier (and, thus, orthogonal to the
inflation surprise in period t + 1). The orthogonality condition given by equation (17)
then forms the basis for estimating the model via Generalized Method of Moments
(GMM).
The data we use is quarterly for U.S. over the period 1960:1 to 1997:4. We use the
(log) labor income share in the non-farm business sector for st . Our inflation measure
is the percent change in the GDP deflator. We use the overall deflator rather than the
non-farm deflator for most of our analysis because we are interested evaluating how
well our model accounts for the movement in a standard broad measure of inflation.
We show, however, that our results are robust to using the non-farm deflator. Finally,
our instrument set includes four lags of inflation, the labor income share, output gap,
the long-short interest rate spread, wage inflation, and commodity price inflation.

3.2

Reduced Form Evidence

We first report our estimate of equation (17). We refer to this evidence as “reduced
form” since it contains an estimate of the overall slope coefficient on marginal cost,
λ, but not of the structural parameter θ (the measure of price rigidity) that underlies
λ (see equation 16). The resulting estimated equation is given byλ
π t = 0.023 st + 0.942 Et {π t+1 }
(0.012)

(0.045)

Overall, the estimated new Phillips curve is quite sensible. The slope coefficient
λ on real marginal cost is positive and significant, as is consistent with the a priori
theory. The estimate of the coefficient on expected inflation, the subjective discount
factor β, is also reasonable, particularly after accounting for the sampling error implied by the estimated standard deviation.15 Thus, at first pass, it appears that the
new Phillips curve provides a reasonable description of inflation.
15

In particular, the estimate of β is within two standard deviations of typical values for this
parameter that are used in the literature (e.g., 0.99).

10

To highlight the virtues of using real marginal cost as the relevant real sector
driving variable in the new Phillips curve, we reestimate equation (6), using detrended
log GDP as a proxy for the output gap xt :
π t = − 0.016 xt + 0.988 Et {πt+1 }
(0.005)

(0.030)

The model clearly doesn’t work in this case: the coefficient associated with the
output gap is negative and significant, which is at odds with the prediction of the
theory. This finding, of course, is completely consistent with our earlier result that,
when the model is reversed and estimated in the form of the old Phillips curve, the
coefficient on the lagged output gap is positive (see equation (9)). Thus, it is the
use of real marginal cost over the output gap, and not the estimation strategy, that
accounts for the econometric success of the new Phillips curve.

3.3

Structural Estimates

We now redo the exercise in a way that allows us to obtain direct estimates of the
structural parameter θ. In particular, we substitute the relation for λ, equation (16),
into equation (17) to obtain an econometric specification that is nonlinear in the
structural parameters θ and β.
One econometric issue we must confront is that, in small samples, nonlinear estimation using GMM is sometimes sensitive to the way the orthogonality conditions are
normalized. For this reason, we use two alternative specifications of the orthogonality
conditions as the basis for our GMM estimation procedure.16 The first specification
takes the form
Et {(θ π t − (1 − θ)(1 − βθ) st − θβ πt+1 ) zt } = 0

(18)

while the second is given by:
Et {(π t − θ−1 (1 − θ)(1 − βθ) st − β πt+1 ) zt } = 0

(19)

We estimate the structural parameters θ and β using a nonlinear instrumental
variables estimator, with the set of instruments the same as is in the previous case.
For robustness, we consider two alternatives to the benchmark case. In the first
alternative we restrict the estimate of the discount factor β to unity. In the second, we
use the non-farm GDP deflator as opposed to the overall deflator. Finally, we estimate
each specification using the two different normalizations, as given by equations (18)
and (19).
The results are reported in Table 1. The first two columns give the estimates
of θ and β. The third then gives the implied estimate of λ, the reduced form slope
16

Among the possible normalizations we have chosen the two which we view as most natural. The
first one appears to minimize the non-linearities, while the second normalizes the inflation coefficient
to unity. See, e.g., Fuhrer, Moore, and Schuh (1995) for further discussion of the normalization issue.

11

coefficient on real marginal cost. In general, the structural estimates tell the same
overall story as the reduce form estimates. The implied estimate of λ is always positive
and is highly significant in every case but one (restricted β, normalization (2)). The
estimate of β in the unrestricted case is somewhat low, but not unreasonably so, given
the sampling uncertainty.
The estimate of the structural parameter θ is somewhat large and also somewhat
sensitive to the normalization in the GMM estimation. Using method (1), we estimate
θ to be around 0.83 with a small standard error, which implies that prices are fixed for
between roughly five and six quarters on average. That period length is close to the
average price duration found in survey evidence, though perhaps on the high side.17
Method (2) yields a slightly higher estimate of θ, around 0.88. Since λ is decreasing
in θ (greater price rigidity implies that inflation is less sensitive to movements in real
marginal cost), the higher estimates of θ implies a lower estimate of λ for method (2).
For several reasons, however, our estimates of the degree of price rigidity are likely
to be upward biased. First, it is likely that the labor share does not provide an exact
measure of real marginal cost. In this instance, the estimate of the slope coefficient
λ is likely to be biased towards zero. This translates into upward bias of θ, given the
inverse link between the two parameters. Second, the underlying theory that is used
to identify θ from estimates of λ, assumes a constant markup of price over marginal
cost in the absence of prices rigidities. If the markup in the frictionless benchmark
model were countercyclical, as much recent theory has argued, the implied estimate
of θ would be lower.18 With a countercyclical markup, desired price setting is less
sensitive to movements in marginal cost, which could help account for low overall
sensitivity of inflation to the labor share.
The model also works well in the sense that we do not reject the overidentifying
restrictions. Though we do not report the results here, the p-values for the null
hypothesis that the error term is uncorrelated with the instruments are all in the
range of 0.9 or higher. This kind of test has low power, however, since it is not
applied against any specific alternative hypothesis. In the next section we develop a
more refined test to measure how well the model accounts for inflation dynamics.

4

A New Hybrid Phillips Curve

We now explicitly address the issue of how well the new Phillips curve captures the
apparent inertia in inflation. To do so, we extend the basic Calvo model to allow
for a subset of firms that use a backward looking rule of thumb to set prices. Our
formulation allows us to estimate the fraction of firms that lies in this subset. By
doing so we obtain a measure of the residual inertia in inflation that the baseline new
17

See Taylor (1998) for an overview of that evidence.
See, e.g., Kimball (1995) for an illustration of a countercycical desired markup in the context of
a sticky price model.
18

12

Phillips curve leaves unexplained.19

4.1

Theoretical Formulation

We continue to assume, as in Calvo’s model, that each firm is able to adjust its price
in any given period with a fixed probability 1 − θ that is independent of the time the
price has been fixed. We depart from Calvo by having two types of firms co-exist. A
fraction 1 − ω of the firms, which we refer to as “forward looking,” behave like the
firms in Calvo’s model: they set prices optimally, given the constraints on the timing
of adjustments and using all the available information in order to forecast future
marginal costs. The remaining firms, of measure ω, which we refer to as “backward
looking,” instead use a simple rule of thumb that is based on the recent history of
aggregate price behavior.
The aggregate price level now evolves according to:
pt = θ pt−1 + (1 − θ) p∗t

(20)

where p∗t is an index for the prices newly set in period t. Let pft denote the price set
by a forward looking firm at t and pbt the price set by a backward looking firm. Then
the index for newly set prices may be expressed as
p∗t = (1 − ω) pft + ω pbt

(21)

Forward looking firms behave exactly as in the baseline Calvo model described
above. Accordingly, pft may be expressed as
pft = (1 − βθ)

∞


(βθ)k Et {mcnt+k }

(22)

k=0

We assume that backward looking firms obey a rule of thumb that has the following
two features: (a) no persistent deviations between the rule and optimal behavior; i.e.,
in a steady state equilibrium the rule is consistent with optimal behavior; (b) the
price in period t given by the rule depends only on information dated t − 1 or earlier.
We also assume that the firm is unable to tell whether any individual competitor is
backward looking or forward looking.
These considerations lead us to a rule that is based on the recent pricing behavior
of the firm’s competitors, as follows:
pbt = p∗t−1 + π t−1

(23)

In other words, a backward looking firm at t sets its price equal to the average price
set in the most recent round of price adjustments, p∗t−1 , with a correction for inflation.
19

Thus, by adding rule-of-thumb price setters, we measure the departure from the baseline forward
looking model similar to the way that Campbell and Mankiw (1989) used rule-of-thumb consumers
to test the life-cycle/ permanent income hypothesis.

13

Importantly, the correction is based on the lagged inflation rate, i.e., lagged inflation
is used in a simple way to forecast current inflation.
Though admittedly ad hoc, the rule has several appealing features. First, as long
as inflation is stationary, the rule converges to optimal behavior over time.20 Second,
the rule implicitly incorporates information about the future in a useful way, since
the price index p∗t−1 is partly determined by forward looking price setters. Thus,
to the extent the percent difference between the forward and backward price is not
large, the loss to a firm from rule of thumb behavior will be second order, for the
usual arguments due to the envelope theorem. This is more likely to be the case if
backward looking price setters are a relatively small fraction of the population.21
We obtain our hybrid Phillips curve by combining equations (20), (21), (22), and
(23):
π t = λ mct + γ f Et {π t+1 } + γ b π t−1

(24)

λ ≡ (1 − ω)(1 − θ)(1 − βθ)φ−1
γ f ≡ βθφ−1

(25)

where

γ b ≡ ωφ−1
with φ ≡ θ + ω [1 − θ(1 − β)].
This specification differs from the hybrid model used in recent empirical research
(discussed in the previous section) in two fundamental ways. First, real marginal cost
as opposed to the output gap is the forcing variable. Second, all the coefficients are
explicit functions of three model parameters: θ, which measures the degree of price
stickiness; ω, the degree of “backwardness” in price setting, and the discount factor
β.
Two special cases provide useful benchmarks: First, when ω = 0, all firms are
forward looking and the model converges to the benchmark new Phillips curve introduced in the previous section. Second, when β = 1, then γ f + γ b = 1, which
implies that the model takes the form of hybrid equation discussed earlier (except
that marginal cost and not the output gap appears now as the driving force).
20

More precisely, as long as inflation is stationary, there are no persistent deviations between the
rule and optimal behavior; this can be seen by noting that pbt − pt = θ(1 − θ)−1 π t
21
When backward looking price-setters are a relatively small fraction of the population, the index
of newly set prices p∗t is dominated by forward looking price setters. Given that pbt closely tracks
p∗t−1 , the backward looking price will be close on average to the forward looking price. We have
conducted simulations of a complete model that bear out this logic.

14

4.2

Estimation and Results

In this section we present estimates of the previous structural model and also evaluate
its overall performance vis-a-vis the data. As in the previous section we use the labor
share to measure real marginal cost. The empirical version of our hybrid Phillips
curve is accordingly given by:
πt = λ st + γ f Et {πt+1 } + γ b πt−1

(26)

together with equation (25), which describes the relation between the reduced form
and structural parameters.
We estimate the structural parameters β, θ, and ω using a non-linear instrumental
variables (GMM) estimator. The instrument set is the same as we used in the previous
exercises. To address the small sample normalization problem with GMM that we
discussed earlier, we again use two alternative specifications of the orthogonality
conditions, one which does not normalize the coefficient on inflation to be unity
(method 1) and one which does (method 2):
Et {(φ π t − (1 − ω)(1 − θ)(1 − βθ) st − θβ πt+1 ) zt } = 0

(27)

Et {(π t − (1 − ω)(1 − θ)(1 − βθ)φ−1 st − θβφ−1 πt+1 ) zt } = 0

(28)

Table 2 presents the estimates of equation (26) As in the previous section, we
consider three cases: the baseline model; the model with β restricted to unity; and the
non-farm deflator substituted for the overall GDP deflator. The first three columns
give the estimated structural parameters. The next three give the implied values of
the reduced form coefficients (see equation 25).
Overall, the estimates are consistent with the underlying theory. The results,
further, are reasonably consistent across specifications, though the precise estimate
of the fraction of backward looking price-setters is somewhat sensitive to the use of
method (1) versus method (2).
We begin with the baseline case. With method 1, the parameter θ is estimated to
be about 0.81 with standard error 0.02, which implies that prices are fixed for roughly
five quarters on average.22 That period length may seem a bit long, but is not far
off from survey evidence which suggests three to four quarters.23 Method 2 yields an
estimate that is not statistically different.
We now turn to the estimate of the fraction of backward looking price setters.
With method 1, the parameter ω is estimated to be 0.26 with a standard error
0.06, implying that roughly quarter of price setters are backward looking. Thus,
22

Interestingly, Sbordone (1998) finds that the value of the price adjustment parameter that
maximizes the goodness of fit of the data by Watson’s (1993) criterion also corresponds to an
average of five quarters between adjustments. Thus, despite the difference in methodology, our
results line up very closely with hers.
23
For a discussion of the survey evidence, see Rotemberg and Woodford (1997a). Our sub-sample
estimates (reported shortly) yield numbers directly in line with this evidence.

15

the pure forward looking model is rejected by the data. However, the quantitative
importance of backward looking behavior for inflation dynamics is not large. The
implied estimates for the reduced form coefficients on lagged versus expected future
inflation are 0.25 (for γ b ) and 0.68 (for γ f ). Method 2 yields a higher estimate of
ω, 0.49, implying that nearly half of price setters are backward looking. However,
forward looking behavior remains predominant: The implied estimate of γ f is 0.59
versus 0.38 for γ b .
Thus, while the results suggest some imprecision in the estimate of the degree of
backwardness, the central conclusions do not change across methods (1) and (2): In
accounting for inflation dynamics, forward looking behavior is more important than
backward looking behavior. In either case the estimate of the coefficient on expected
future inflation in equation (26) lies well above the coefficient on lagged inflation.
It is also true in either case that the estimates of the primitive parameters yield an
estimate of the slope coefficient on the labor share λ that is positive and significant.24
Thus, we are able to identify (in a robust manner) a significant impact of marginal
costs on inflation.
It is also the case the model estimated using method (1) does a better job of
tracking actual inflation the model based on method (2) estimates. (In section 4.4
we make precise the sense in how we evaluate the ability of the model to track the
data.) To the extent that this provides a ground for preferring method (1), we can
conclude that not only is forward looking behavior predominant but, given the small
estimate of the degree of backwardness, the pure forward looking model may do a
reasonably good job of describing the data.
The estimate of β is reasonably similar across the two methods, but somewhat
on the low side at roughly 0.90. We thus next explore the implications of restricting
β equal to unity, as implied in the standard hybrid case. Interestingly, there is little
impact on the estimates of the other primitive parameters. Thus, restricting β to a
plausible range does not affect the results in any significant way.
Finally, we consider the use of the non-farm deflator. Interestingly, there is no
significant impact on the estimate of the degree of price rigidity. However, the estimate of the degree of backwardness drops. Indeed, with method (1), the estimate
of ω is only 0.07. Though somewhat larger with method 2, it is still just 0.239. In
either case, backward looking behavior is not quantitatively important. Overall, the
pure forward looking model may provide a reasonably good description of inflation,
as measured by the non-farm deflator.
24

We note that the link between inflation and marginal cost is related to Benabou’s (1992) finding
using retail trade data that inflation is inversely related to the markup (which he measured as the
inverse of the labor share). He interpreted the findings as evidence that the markup may depend on
inflation, whereas in our model, causation runs from marginal cost to inflation. Sorting out possible
simultaneity is an interesting topic for future research. We note, however, that our model has the
additional implication that inflation should be related to a discounted stream of future marginal
costs, and we shortly demonstrate that this appears to be the case.

16

4.3

Robustness Analysis

We now consider two robustness exercises.25 The first allows extra lags of inflation to
enter the right hand side of the equation for inflation. The second explores sub-sample
stability.
We next add three additional lags of inflation to the baseline case (equation (26)).
Here the idea is to explore whether our estimated importance of forward looking
behavior may reflect not allowing for sufficient lagged dependence. Put differently,
since we use four lags of inflation in our instrument set, we may be inadvertently
biasing our “horse race” between expected future inflation and one quarter lagged
inflation in favor of the former. The way to address this issue is to add the three
additional lags of inflation to the right hand side, and then determine wether they
have any predictive power for current inflation, πt , beyond the signalling power they
have for expected future inflation, Et {π t+1 }.
Table 3 report the results. The parameter ψ denotes the sum of the coefficients
on the three additional inflation lags. Since the estimates do not change much across
method (1) and (2), we only report results for the former case. The overall effect of
the additional lags is quite small, especially when the GDP deflator is used as the
measure of inflation. The estimate of ψ is only 0.09 in the baseline case, and not
significantly different from zero when β is restricted to unity. When the non-farm
deflator is used the estimate of ψ rise to 0.21 with a standard error of 0.06. However,
in this instance the first lag of inflation is not significantly different, so that the
overall effect of lagged inflation is minimal. Thus, even though a total of four lags of
inflation enters the right hand side, forward looking behavior still predominates. It
thus appears that we account for inflation inertia with minimal reliance on arbitrary
lags.
Finally, we consider sub-sample stability. Table 4 reports estimates over the intervals 60:1-79:4, 70:1-89:4, and 80:1-97:4. Again, since the conclusions we draw
are unaffected by the normalization used, we restrict attention to method (1).
Overall, the broad picture remains unchanged. Marginal costs have a significant
impact on short run inflation dynamics of roughly the same quantitative magnitudes
as suggested by the full sample estimates. Forward looking behavior is always important. For the GDP deflator, in the first two sub-periods, the estimate of ω is
close to the full sample estimate; i.e. roughly 0.25. Interestingly, though, in the last
sub-period the estimate of ω drops in half to about 0.12. The pattern is the opposite for the non-farm deflator: estimates of ω near zero for the first two sub-samples
(which correspond to the full-sample estimates), but rising slightly to 0.22 in the last
sub-sample.
Another interesting result with the GDP deflator is that the estimate of θ for the
25

In an earlier version of the paper we also allowed for increasing returns (in the form of overhead
labor) in constructing the measure of marginal cost. Since this modification does not affect the
results, we do not report the exercise here.

17

first two sub-samples drops from the full sample estimate of 0.8 to the range 0.75 −
0.77. The important implication is that pre-1990, the estimated average duration a
price is fixed is around four quarters, which is directly in line with the survey evidence.
For the last sample, 1980:1 -1997:4, the estimate of θ rises to roughly 0.85, implying
duration of six quarters. The longer duration might reflect the fact that inflation was
lower over the last sub-sample. As a consequence, the average length between price
adjustments may have increased (as, for example, a model of state-dependent pricing
might imply.)

4.4

Actual vs. Fundamental Inflation

Our econometric Phillips curve, as given by equation (26), takes the form of a difference equation for inflation, with expected real marginal costs as the forcing variable.
The solution for inflation implied by the model will depend on a discounted stream
of expected future marginal costs, as well as lagged inflation. As a way to assess the
model’s goodness-of-fit, we consider how well the solution to the difference equation
lines up against the actual data. We term our model-based measure of inflation “fundamental” inflation because it is analogous to Campbell and Shiller’s (1987) construct
of fundamental stock prices in terms of forecasts of discounted future dividends.
Our baseline estimates of γ b and γ f imply the existence of one stable and one
unstable root associated with the stationary solution to the difference equation for
inflation given by (26). Let δ 1 ≤ 1 denote the stable root and δ 2 ≥ 1 denote the
unstable root. The model’s solution is then given by:


λ
π t = δ 1 π t−1 +
δ2γf




∞ 

1 k
k=0

δ2

Et {st+k }

(29)

The lagged term in equation (29) arises from the presence of backward looking price
setters. In the benchmark case with pure forward looking behavior, the lagged term
disappears (i.e., δ 1 = 0).
Let It = {π t , πt−1,..., zt , zt−1 , ...} where zt is a vector of variable other than inflation
observed as of time t. Taking expectations conditional on It on both sides of (29):


λ
πt = δ 1 πt−1 +
δ2 γ f




∞ 

1 k
k=0

δ2

E[ st+k | It ] ≡ π∗t

(30)

We construct our measure of fundamental inflation π ∗t using equation (30) based on
It = {π t , π t−1,..., st , st−1 , ...}. Figure 2 plots fundamental inflation π∗t versus actual
inflation π t . 26
26

In experimentation, we found that the model estimates based on method (1) do better in terms
of tracking inflation than those based on method (2). Specifically, we found that the sum of squares
of deviations between actual and fundamental inflation is lowest with method (1). We thus report
only method (1) estimates in performing the exercise.

18

Overall fundamental inflation tracks the behavior of actual inflation very well.27
It is particularly interesting to observe that it does a good job of explaining the recent
behavior of inflation. During the past several years, of course, inflation has been below
trend. Output growth has been above trend, on the other hand, making standard
measures of the output gap highly positive. As a consequence, traditional Phillips
curve equations have been overpredicting recent inflation.28 However, because, real
unit labor costs have been quite moderate recently despite rapid output growth, our
model of fundamental inflation is close to target.

5

Conclusions

Our results suggest that, conditional on the path of real marginal costs, the baseline
new Phillips curve with forward looking behavior may provide a reasonably good
description of inflation dynamics. When tested explicitly against an alternative that
allows for a fraction of price setters to be backward looking, the structural estimates
suggest that this fraction, while statistically significant, is not quantitatively important. One qualification, however, is that there is some imprecision in our estimates
of the importance of backward looking behavior. Yet, across all specifications forward looking behavior remains dominant. In the estimated hybrid Phillips curve, the
weight on inflation lagged one quarter is generally small. Further, additional lags of
inflation beyond one quarter do not appear to matter much at all. Taken as a whole,
accordingly, the results suggest that it is worth searching for explanations of inflation
inertia beyond the traditional ones that rely heavily on arbitrary lags.
One important avenue to investigate, we think, involves the cyclical behavior of
real marginal cost. Figure 1 presents sets of cross-correlations that help frame the
issue. The data are quarterly from 1960:1-1997:4 and HP-detrended. The top panel,
discussed earlier, displays the cross-correlation of inflation (the percent change in
the GDP deflator) with the output gap (i.e., detrended log GDP). The middle one
compares the output gap and the labor income share (our measure of real marginal
costs), while the last one looks at the labor share and inflation.
Among other things, the figure makes clear why real unit labor costs outperforms
the output gap in the estimation of the new Phillips curve. As the top panel indicates,
the output gap leads inflation, rather than vice-versa, in direct contradiction of the
theory (see equation (7)). In contrast, as the third panel indicates, real unit labor
costs exhibit a strong contemporaneous correlation with inflation. Further, lagged
inflation is positively correlated with current unit labor costs, consistent with the
27

Sbordone (1998) similarly finds that inflation is well explained by a discounted stream of future
real marginal costs, though using a quite different methodology to parametrize the model.
28
An exception is Lown and Rich (1997). Because they augment a traditional Phillips curve
with the growth in nominal unit labor costs, their equation fares much better than the standard
formulation. Though the way unit labor costs enters our formulation is quite different, it is similarly
the sluggish behavior of unit labor costs that helps the model explain recent inflation.

19

theory. Thus, (with the benefit of this hindsight), it is perhaps not surprising why
real unit labor costs enters the structural inflation equation significantly and with the
right sign. The middle panel completes the picture: the labor income share lags the
output gap in much the same way as does inflation. The lag in the response of real
unit labor costs explains why the output gap performs poorly in estimates of the new
Phillips curve.
It is also true that the sluggish behavior of real marginal cost might help account
for the slow response of inflation to output and thus (possibly) why disinflations
may entail costly output reductions.29 For this reason, modifying existing theories to
account for the rigidities in marginal costs suggested by Figure 1 could offer important
insights for inflation dynamics.30 Given the link between unit labor costs and marginal
costs, a candidate source for the necessary friction is wage rigidity. Indeed, a likely
reason for the strong counterfactual contemporaneous positive correlation between
output and real marginal cost in the standard sticky price framework is the absence of
any type of labor market frictions [see, e.g., the discussion in Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (1997)]. At this stage, one cannot rule out whether it is nominal or real
wage rigidities that can provide the answer. Both seem worth exploring.
29

Interestingly, Blanchard and Muet (1992) find that disinflations in France have been associated
with declines in real unit labor costs. In this respect it seems worth exploring data from other
countries.
30
The existing literature on business cycle models that features sticky prices has long emphasized
the need to incorporate real rigidities (see, e.g., Blanchard and Fischer (1989) and Ball and Romer
(1990)). Typically, however, the discussion is in terms of trying to explain a large response of output
to monetary policy: Real rigidities help flatten the short run marginal cost curve. However, it is
also the case, as we have been arguing, that real rigidities may be needed to account for inflation
dynamics, and in particular the sluggish response of inflation to movements in output.

20

REFERENCES
Ball, Laurence (1994): “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio ?,” in G. Mankiw,
ed., Monetary Policy, Chicago University Press.
Ball, Laurence (1995), “Disinflation with Imperfect Credibility,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35, 5-24.
Ball, Laurence and David Romer (1990), “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality
of Money,” Review of Economic Studies, 183-204.
Blanchard, Olivier and Pierre Alain Muet (1992), “Competitiveness Through Disinflation: An Assessment of the French Macro-Strategy,” mimeo, M.I.T.
Blanchard, Olivier and Stanley Fischer (1989), Lectures on Macroeconomics, M.I.T.
Press.
Benabou, Roland, (1992), “Inflation and Markups: Theories and Evidence from
the Retail Trade Sector, European Economic Review, 36, 566-574.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, (1998), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in the Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Michael Woodford eds.
Buiter Willem and Ian Jewitt, “Staggered Wage Setting with Real Wage Relativities: Variations on a Theme of Taylor,” in Macroeconomic Theory and Stabilization
Policy ( University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor), 183-199.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989), “Consumption, Income and
Interest Rates: Re-interpreting the Times Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, edited by Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer (M.I.T. Press).
Campbell, John Y. and Robert Shiller (1987), “Cointegration and Tests of the
Present Value Relation,” Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.
Chadha, Bankim, Paul R. Masson and Guy Meredith (1992), “Models of Inflation
and the Costs of Disinflation,” IMF Staff Papers, vol.39, no. 2, 395-431.
Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe and Ellen McGratten, (1996), “Sticky Price Models of
the Business Cycle: The Persistence Problem,” manuscript, University of Minnesota.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (1997), “Sticky
Price and Limited Participation Models: A Comparison,” European Economic Review, 41, 1201-1249.
Clarida, Richard and Mark Gertler(1997), “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy,” in Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategies, Christina and David
Romer editors.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, (1997a), “Monetary Policy Rules
and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1997b): “The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
21

Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson and Andrew Levin (1998), “OutputGap and Price Inflation Volatilities: Reaffirming Tradeoffs in an Optimizing Model,”
mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Fischer, Stanley, (1997): “Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy 85, 163-190.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and George R. Moore (1995): “Inflation Persistence”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, No. 440, February, pp 127-159.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. (1997): “The (Un)Importance of Forward-Looking Behavior in
Price Specifications,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, no. 3, 338-350.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., Geoffrey Moore, and Scott Schuh (1995): “Estimating the
Linear-Quadratic Inventory: Maximum Likelihood versus Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35, 115-157.
Galí, Jordi (1999): “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review, March
Ghezzi, Piero, (1997), “Backward Looking Indexation, Credibility and Inflation
Persistence,” John Hopkins University, mimeo.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King (1997): “The New Neoclassical Synthesis
and the Role of Monetary Policy” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.
Gordon, Robert J.(1996), “Time-Varying NAIRU and its Implications for Economic Policy, NBER Working Paper No. 5735.
Jeanne, Olivier, (1998), “Generating Real Persistent Effects of Monetary Shocks:
How Much Nominal Rigidity Do We Really Need?” European Economic Review no.
6, 1009-1032.
Kiley, Michael T.(1997), “Staggered Price Setting and Real Rigidities,” Federal
Reserve Board FEDS working paper no. 1997-46.
Kimball, Miles S. (1995): “The Quantitative analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist
Model,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 27, no. 4, 1241-1278.
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman, (1996): “Inflation Targeting in a St.
Louis Model of the 21st Century” NBER Working Paper No. 5507.
King, Robert G. and Alexander L. Wolman, (1998): “What Should The Monetary
Authority Do When Prices Are Sticky?” forthcoming in Monetary Policy Rules, J.
Taylor, ed, The University of Chicago Press.
King Robert G. and Mark Watson (1994), “The Post-War U.S. Phillips Curve: A
Revisionist Econometric History,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy,
157-219.
Lown Cara S. and Robert W. Rich (1997), “Is There An Inflation Puzzle,” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review, 51-69.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1998): “Performance of Operational
Policy Rules in an Estimated Semi-Classical Structural Model,” forthcoming in Monetary Policy Rules, J. Taylor, ed, The University of Chicago Press.
Roberts, John M. (1997): “Is Inflation Sticky? ”, Journal of Monetary Economics,
No. 39, pp 173-196.
22

Roberts, John M. (1998): “Inflation Expectations and the Transmission of Monetary Policy,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1997a): “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the Evolution of Monetary Policy,” mimeo
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997b): “Interest Rate Rules in a Estimated Sticky Price Model,” mimeo, Princeton University.
Sbordone, Argia, M., “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: Testing Models of Pricing,”
mimeo, Princeton University.
Svensson, Lars E. O., (1997a), “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and
Monitoring Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review 41, June, pp. 1111-47.
Svensson, Lars E. O., (1997b), “Inflation Targeting: Some Extensions”, NBER
Working Paper No. 5962, March.
Taylor, John B. (1980): “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal
of Political Economy, 88, 1-23.
Watson, Mark, (1993). “Measures of Fit For Calibrated Models,” Journal of
Political Economy, 101-141.
Woodford, Michael (1996): “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price
Stability?”, NBER Working Paper No. 5684, July .
Yun, Tack (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and
Business Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 37, 1996, pp 345-370.

23

Table 1
Estimates of the New Phillips Curve
θ
GDP Deflator
(1)
(2)
Restricted β
(1)
(2)
NFB Deflator
(1)
(2)

0.829

(0.013)

0.884

β

0.926

(0.024)

0.941

(0.020)

(0.018)

0.829

1.000

0.915

1.000

(0.016)

(0.035)

0.836

(0.015)

0.884

(0.023)

0.957

(0.018)

0.967

(0.016)

λ

0.047

(0.008)

0.021

(0.007)

0.035

(0.007)

0.007

(0.006)

0.038

(0.008)

0.018

(0.008)

Note: Table 1 reports GMM estimates of the structural parameters of
equation (15). Rows (1) and (2) correspond to the two specifications of
the orthogonality conditions found in equations (18) and (19) in the text,
respectively. Estimates are based on quarterly data and cover the sample
period 1960:1-1997:4. Instruments used include four lags of inflation, labor
income share, long-short interest rate spread, output gap, wage inflation,
and commodity price inflation. A 12 lag Newey-West estimate of the
covariance matrix was used. Standard errors are shown in brackets.

Table 2
Estimates of the New Hybrid Phillips Curve
ω
GDP Deflator
(1)
(2)
Restricted β
(1)
(2)
NFB Deflator
(1)
(2)

0.265

(0.031)

0.486

(0.040)

0.244

(0.030)

0.522

(0.043)

0.077

(0.030)

0.239

(0.043)

θ

0.808

(0.015)

0.834

β

0.885

(0.030)

0.909

(0.020)

(0.031)

0.803

1.000

0.838

1.000

(0.017)

(0.027)

0.830

(0.016)

0.866

(0.025)

0.949

(0.019)

0.957

(0.021)

γb
0.252

(0.023)

0.378

(0.020)

0.233

(0.023)

0.383

(0.020)

0.085

(0.031)

0.218

(0.031)

γf
0.682

(0.020)

0.591

(0.016)

0.766

(0.015)

0.616

(0.016)

0.871

(0.018)

0.755

(0.016)

λ

0.037

(0.007)

0.015

(0.004)

0.027

(0.005)

0.009

(0.003)

0.036

(0.008)

0.015

(0.006)

Note: Table 2 reports GMM estimates of parameters of equation (26).
Rows (1) and (2) correspond to the two specifications of the orthogonality conditions found in equations (27) and (28) in the text, respectively.
Estimates are based on quarterly data and cover the sample period 1960:11997:4. Instruments used include four lags of inflation, labor income share,
long-short interest rate spread, output gap, wage inflation, and commodity price inflation. A 12 lag Newey-West estimate of the covariance matrix
was used. Standard errors are shown in brackets.

Table 3
Robustness Analysis: Extra Inflation Lags
ω
GDP Deflator
Restricted β
NFB Deflator

0.244

(0.062)

0.291

(0.039)

0.018

(0.041)

θ
0.860

β
0.772

ψ
0.090

(0.025)

(0.054)

(0.040)

0.787

1.000

-0.025

(0.023)

0.922

(0.023)

0.779

(0.050)

(0.014)

0.208

(0.058)

γb
0.231

(0.050)

0.270

(0.028)

0.019

(0.043)

γf
0.628

(0.033)

0.729

(0.021)

0.767

(0.046)

λ
0.033

(0.007)

0.029

(0.006)

0.022

(0.007)

Note: Table 3 reports GMM estimates of a version of equation (26) with
three extra lags of inflation added. ψ represents the sum of the coefficients
of the extra lags. using the specification of the orthogonality conditions
found in equation (27) in the text. Estimates are based on quarterly data
and cover the sample period 1960:1-1997:4. Instruments used include four
lags of inflation, labor income share, long-short interest rate spread, output
gap, wage inflation, and commodity price inflation. A 12 lag Newey-West
estimate of the covariance matrix was used. Standard errors are shown in
brackets.

Table 4
Robustness Analysis: Subsample Stability
ω
GDP Deflator
60:1-79:4
70:1-89:4
80:1-97:4
Restricted β
60:1-79:4
70:1-89:4
80:1-97:4
NFB Deflator
60:1-79:4
70:1-87:4
80:1-97:4

0.244

(0.027)

0.222

(0.026)

0.116

(0.022)

0.233

(0.022)

0.196

(0.026)

0.116

(0.022)

-0.043
(0.022)

0.066

(0.018)

0.219

(0.023)

θ

0.770

(0.017)

0.756

(0.014)

0.843

β

0.892

(0.027)

0.820

(0.036)

0.773

(0.007)

(0.030)

0.753

1.000

0.734

1.000

0.843

1.000

(0.016)

(0.017)

(0.007)

0.799

(0.012)

0.785

(0.013)

0.823

(0.008)

0.948

(0.012)

0.913

(0.020)

0.778

(0.046)

γb
0.245

(0.022)

0.234

(0.024)

0.123

(0.021)

0.236

(0.018)

0.211

(0.025)

0.339

(0.020)

-0.057
(0.030)

0.078

(0.020)

0.219

(0.023)

γf
0.691

(0.016)

0.653

(0.028)

0.696

(0.027)

0.763

(0.015)

0.788

(0.018)

0.539

(0.026)

1.001

(0.015)

0.846

(0.017)

0.638

(0.034)

λ

0.054

(0.007)

0.07

(0.010)

0.051

(0.006)

0.047

(0.006)

0.060

(0.007)

0.020

(0.004)

0.066

(0.008)

0.913

(0.020)

0.049

(0.005)

Note: Table 4 reports GMM estimates of parameters of equation (26)
for alternative sample periods, using the specification of the orthogonality conditions found in equation (27) in the text. Estimates are based
on quarterly data. Instruments used include four lags of inflation, labor
income share, long-short interest rate spread, output gap, wage inflation,
and commodity price inflation. A 12 lag Newey-West estimate of the
covariance matrix was used. Standard errors are shown in brackets.

Figure 1: Dynamic Cross-Correlations
Output Gap (t), Inflation (t+k)
0.56
0.42
0.28
0.14
0.00
-0.14
-0.28
-0.42
-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

Output Gap (t), Labor Share (t+k)
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Labor Share (t), Inflation (t+k)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
-0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Figure 2. Inflation: Actual vs. Fundamental
12.5

10.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0
61

64

67

70

73
actual

76

79

82

85

fundamental

88

91

94

97

