                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PROTECTING THEIR INTELLECTUAL ASSETS:
                      APPROPRIABILITY CONDITIONS AND WHY U.S.
                       MANUFACTURING FIRMSPATENT (OR NOT)


                                          Wesley M. Cohen
                                          Richard R. Nelson
                                            John P. Walsh


                                         Working Paper 7552
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7552

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2000


We wish to thank the following for helpful comments and suggestions: Ashish Arora, Anthony Arundel, John
Baldwin, Marco Ceccagnoli, Akira Goto, Shane Greenstein, Dominique Guellec, Bronwyn Hall, Isabelle Kabla,
Steven Kiepper, Jean Lanjouw, Josh Lerner, Dan Levinthal, Mark Meyers, Arid Pakes, Cecil Quillen, Mike
Scherer, Manuel Trajtenberg, Sidney Winter and participants in the OECD Conference on New Indicators for
the Knowledge-Based Economy (Paris) and the International Conference on the Economic and Econometrics
of Innovation (Strasbourg). We also wish to acknowledge the influence of the proceedings of the April, 1998
Stanford Conference on Intellectual Property. We also thank Marco Ceccagnoli, Scott Jaspan and Jeff Vitek
for research assistance. Finally, we gratefully acknowledge research support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation and the Center for Global Partnership. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Wesley M. Cohen, Richard R. Nelson and John P. Walsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and
Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not)
Wesley M. Cohen, Richard R. Nelson and John P. Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 7552
February 2000
                                           ABSTRACT
       Based on a survey questionnaire administered to 1478 R&D labs in the U.S. manufacturing
sector in 1994, we find that firms typically protect the profits due to invention with a range of
mechanisms, including patents, secrecy, lead time advantages and the use of complementary
marketing and manufacturing capabilities. Of these mechanisms, however, patents tend to be the least
emphasized by firms in the majority of manufacturing industries, and secrecy and lead time tend to
be emphasized most heavily. A comparison of our results with the earlier survey findings of Levin
et al. [1987] suggest that patents may be relied upon somewhat more heavily by larger firms now than
in the early 1980s. For the protection of product innovations, secrecy now appears to be much more
heavily employed across most industries than previously. Our results on the motives to patent indicate
that firms patent for reasons that often extend beyond directly profiting from a patented innovation
through either its commercialization or licensing. In addition to the prevention of copying, the most
prominent motives for patenting include the prevention of rivals from patenting related inventions
(i.e., "patent blocking"), the use of patents in negotiations and the prevention of suits. We find that
firms commonly patent for different reasons in "discrete" product industries, such as chemicals, versus
"complex" product industries, such as telecommunications equipment or semiconductors. In the
former, firms appear to use their patents commonly to block the development of substitutes by rivals,
and in the latter, firms are much more likely to use patents to force rivals into negotiations.


Wesley M. Cohen                                                Richard R. Nelson
Professor of Economics and Social Science                      George Blumenthal Professor
Department of Social and Decision Sciences                     International and Public Affairs,
Carnegie Mellon University                                     Business and Law
Pittsburgh, PA. 15213                                          1403 International Affairs
and NBER                                                       Columbia University
wc02@andrew.cmu.edu                                            New York, New York 10027
                                                               rrn2@columbia.edu

John Walsh
Professor of Sociology
Department of Sociology
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60607
jwalsh@uic.edu
 1. Introduction
        Industrial R&D is widely seen as a key driver of productivity and economic
growth. In 1996, U.S. firms spent almost 120 billion dollars on R&D, in large part
because they expected to appropriate a substantial part of the return. Many believe that
patent rights are essential to the protection of this return to invention and are
consequently a key inducement to R&D.

        This belief in the importance of patents and intellectual property protection has
underpinned a two-decade trend towards a strengthening of patent protection in the U.S.
In 1982, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit was established to make patent
protection more uniform and indirectly strengthen it. Since then, patent rates, plaintiff
success rates in infringement suits and the number of infringement suits filed have all
increased substantially (Kortum and Lerner [1999], Lanjouw and Lerner [1997], Merz
and Pace [1994], Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts [1997, Table C-2A]). Since
the early 1980's, we have also witnessed an expansion of what can be patented. Diamond
vs. Chakrabarty established the patentability of new life forms and the State Street court
decision of 1998 has extended patent coverage broadly to business applications of
software and financial service products. Since the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and
subsequent legislation, we have also witnessed an expansion of who can patent, with an
extension of eligibility to those conducting research with public funds, including
universities and government labs.' A similar strengthening and broadening in patent is
also underway in Japan and Europe.

        Curiously enough, these policy changes have been made despite a forty year
legacy of empirical findings in economics that call into question whether patent
protection—no less stronger patent protection--advances innovation in a substantial way
in most industries. The work of Scherer et al. [1959], Mansfield [1986], Mansfield et al.
[1981], and Levin et al. [1987] suggest that patent protection is important in only a few
industries, most notably pharmaceuticals.2 Mansfield's [1986] survey research study
sharpened the issue by finding that the absence of patent protection would have had little
or no impact on the innovative efforts of a majority of firms in most industries. Again,
pharmaceuticals was a clear exception.

       If, however, patents were not effective in protecting the returns to innovation in
most industries, how did firms profit from their innovations? Scherer et al. [1959] and the
subsequent survey research study conducted by Levin, KJevorick, Nelson and Winter
[1987] (henceforth referred to as the "Yale" survey) addressed this question. Levin et al.

'Since waivers had been provided permitting the patenting of publicly supported research before
Bayh-Dole, this was not as much of an extension of who can patent as it appeared.
2
    Taylor and Silberston [1973] obtained similar results for the United Kingdom.



                                                                                             2
[1987] explicitly inquired about the mechanisms in addition to patents that firms could
use to appropriate returns from their innovations. These included the exploitation of lead
time, moving rapidly down the learning curve, the use of complementary sales and
service capabilities and secrecy. The Yale Survey found differences across industries and
between product and process innovations in the effectiveness of the appropriability
mechanisms employed. Also, often more than one of these mechanisms were judged
effective. In most industries, including the most R&D intensive industries (again except
drugs), firms did not report patents as one of the important ways in which they profited
from their innovations, but reported reliance chiefly upon other mechanisms.

        This paper presents results on the nature and strength of appropriability conditions
from the Carnegie Mellon Survey (CMS) on Industrial R&D in the U.S. manufacturing
sector administered in 1994. The portion of the Carnegie Mellon questionnaire concerned
with appropriability conditions builds on the original Yale survey, and attempts to
improve upon it with respect to question wording, definition of response scales, and
sampling strategy. Aside from reaping the returns from these improvements, there are,
however, other substantive reasons for walking over the terrain explored in the Yale
survey and related work. First, we are concerned with whether appropriability conditions
may have changed over time. Despite a suggestion in the literature that appropriability
conditions are stable, enduring drivers of technical advance (cf. Cohen and Levin [1989]),
appropriability conditions in the United States may have changed since the original Yale
survey with the 1982 creation of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit and the
more aggressive enforcement of patent rights noted above. We will compare our findings
with the earlier Yale survey to see if these changes in the legal environment have been
associated with changes in the reported effectiveness of patents, as well as whether the
reported effectiveness of the other appropriability mechanisms have changed. To
prefigure our findings, we find that although patents may have increased in importance
among large firms, they are still not one of the major mechanisms in most industries
when the views of all firms are considered. We also find the importance of secrecy to
have increased dramatically since the Yale survey.

    The Yale study did not ask why firms apparently patented their inventions even
though patents were not effective in protecting those inventions.3 Thus, while resolving
one puzzle, the Yale survey posed another. The question of why firms patent is,
however, more than simply an empirical puzzle; it speaks to whether firms use patents in
ways that are consistent with the ultimate purpose of patent law, namely to promote
technical advance, or, as stated in the U.S. Constitution, "to promote the progress of
science and useful arts" (U.S. Constitution, Art. 1, Sectn. 8). In thispaper, we explore

 For example, despite the relative inefficacy of patents outside the chemical industry, Mansfield
[1986] found that all twelve of his sample industries patented at least half of their patentable
inventions during the 198 1-1983 period.

 Patents are supposed to do this in two ways. First, by excluding others from exploiting an idea,
patents are supposed to confer a legal monopoly over the use of the idea, and thereby generate ex
post rents, the expectation of which provide an incentive to invent, and, as some claim, an


                                                                                                3
why firms patent despite reporting patents to be relatively ineffective (for most industries)
in protecting returns to innovation. In brief, we find that firms can profit from patents in
ways other than protecting the profits that may directly accrue to the commercialization
or sale (i.e., licensing) of a patented innovation. Other reasons for patenting—found to
vary by industry--include blocking rivals from patenting related inventions, protection
against infringement suits, and using patents in negotiations over technology rights.

    In Section 2, we briefly discuss our method of data collection and describe the
dataset. Section 3 discusses the effectiveness of different appropriability mechanisms and
how that effectiveness has changed over time. Section 4 presents our findings on why
firms do and do not patent. Section 5 discusses the implications of our findings.


2. Data and Method
       The data come from a survey of R&D managers administered in 1994. The
population sampled are all the R&D labs or units located in the U.S. conducting R&D in
manufacturing industries as part of a manufacturing firm. The sample was randomly
drawn from the eligible labs listed in the Directory of American Research and
Technology or belonging to firms listed in Standard and Poor's COMPUSTAT, stratified
by 3-digit SIC industry.5 In our survey, we asked R&D unit or lab managers to answer
questions with reference to the "focus industry" of their R&D lab or unit, defined as the
principal industry for which the unit was conducting its R&D. We sampled 3240 labs,6
and received 1478 responses, yielding an unadjusted response rate of 46% and an
adjusted response rate of 54%7 Our survey data are supplemented with published data
on firm sales and employees from COMPUSTAT, Dun and Bradstreet, Moody's, Ward's
and similar sources.



incentive to commercialize the patented invention as well (Scherer [19801). Second, patents are
also supposed to contribute to the inventive efforts of others by publicly disclosing the details of
the protected invention.

     also oversampled Fortune 500 firms.
6
     each case, we verified the contact information by telephone before mailing the survey.
Data were collected from May to December, 1994. We mailed a questionnaire to the contact
person at each lab with a cover letter describing the purpose of the research and ensuring
confidentiality. Follow-ups were conducted following Dillman's method (Dillman [1978]).

 A nonrespondent survey allowed us to determine what percent of nonrespondents were not in
our target population. The results showed that 28% of nonrespondents were ineligible for the
survey because they either did no manufacturing or did no R&D. Excluding these from our
denominator, as well as respondents who should not have been sampled, yields an adjusted
response rate of 54% of eligible respondents.



                                                                                                  4
        To inform our interpretation of some of our findings, we also supplemented our
survey results with interviews of R&D managers and intellectual property officers. We
conducted 18 interviews at nine U.S. firms. The interviews typically lasted about one
hour, and often included more than one respondent.

        For the analysis in this paper, we restricted our sample to firms with at least
$5,000,000 in sales or business units of at least 20 people, yielding a sample of 1165
cases. This sample includes firms ranging from less than 25 to over 100,000 employees,
with annual sales ranging from less than $1,000,000 to over $60 billion. The median firm
has 3309 employees and annual sales of $555 million. The average firm has 22,027
employees and sales of $4.5 billion. The business units range from fewer than 10
employees to over 50,000, with annual sales from zero to over $30 billion. The median
business unit has 450 employees and $120 million in sales. The average business unit
has 4401 employees and sales of $1.72 billion. The average R&D intensity (R&D dollars
divided by total sales) for the firms is 3.35%.

        For the purpose of presentation in the tables below, our observations are grouped
into 34 ISIC groups which are aggregated at the two or three digit level. For some
analyses, we disaggregate our data more finely into 66 industries, defined roughly at the
three digit SIC level.8


3. Appropriability Mechanisms: Use and Change over Time
       In this section, we review our results on the effectiveness of different mechanisms
through which firms appropriate the returns to their product and process innovations,
including patents, secrecy, lead time, complementary sales and service and
complementary manufacturing facilities and know-how.9

       To measure the effectiveness of appropnability mechanisms, we asked
respondents to report the percentage of their product and process innovations for which
each appropriability mechanism had been effective in protecting the "firm's competitive
advantage from those innovations" during the prior three years. The five response
categories were: 1.) less than 10%; 2.) 10% through 40%; 3.) 41% through 60%; 4.) 61%
through 90%; and 5.) greater than 90%. This response scale reflects how central a
mechanism is to firms' strategies of appropriating rents to their innovations in the sense

 Although the level of industry aggregation for the sample is defined as finely as the four digit
SIC code level for almost all the observations, we rarely conduct analyses below the three-digit
level because we are less confident in the accuracy of our industry assignments below that level.

  In addition to this list of mechanisms, our questionnaire also included complexity. Although a
feature of products or processes that can indeed affect appropriability, complexity is not,
however, something that managers can particularly choose to exploit. In this regard, it differs
from the other mechanisms considered and is not featured.



                                                                                               5
that it reflects both the frequency with which a mechanism is employed and the
effectiveness of that mechanism given its use.'° This response scale offers two
advantages over the exclusively subjective measures of mechanism "effectiveness" or
"importance" employed in prior studies. It allows us to infer whether appropriability
mechanisms are used together, and makes responses more interpretable than exclusively
subjective scales." One limitation of this scale, however, is that it may not index the
return to using any particular appropriability mechanism due to the skewness in the
distribution of the value of innovations. For example, patents or secrecy may effectively
protect only ten percent of a firm's innovations, but that ten percent may account for 90%
of the value of all of its innovations.


3.1 Relationships among Appropriability Mechanisms

        Tables 1 and 2, respectively, provide the mean percentage of product and process
innovations (computed on the basis of response category midpoints), by industry, for
which each appropriability mechanism was judged to be effective. Reading across the
rows indicates that firms in most industries rely upon more than one mechanism to
protect their innovations. Table 1 shows that some R&D intensive industries, such as
drugs and medical equipment, report relatively high effectiveness scores for every
mechanism (except for "other legal"). Most industries tend to report high effectiveness
scores for two or more mechanisms. For example, semiconductors, machine tools and
aerospace emphasize secrecy and lead time. Autoparts rely heavily on secrecy, lead time
and complementary manufacturing capabilities. A small handful of industries report a
relatively high score for only one mechanism. For example, the communications
equipment computer, steel, and car and truck industries indicate the key mechanism to be
lead time. With regard to the protection of new processes, Table 2 reveals a different
pattern. Secrecy is commonly the dominant mechanism, as in the chemicals industries,
semiconductors and others. Finally, some industries such as electrical equipment score
low on all mechansims, suggesting that appropriability is low overall.

       The cross-column sums of 200% to 300% in Tables 1 and 2 also suggest that
firms at least occasionally rely upon more than one mechanism to protect the same
innovation. There are several circumstances in which this may occur. For example,
appropriability mechanisms may be linked causally, as when a complementary marketing



  Regarding secrecy, most firms typically want to keep most inventions secret at some point in
their development. We assume, however, that when asked to estimate the percentage of
innovations for which secrecy effectively protects returns, firms would only consider those
innovations for which secrecy played a significant role. Responses from the Japanese version of
the survey, as well as those from the earlierYale survey support this judgment.

"The scale still, however, requires a subjective judgment of when a mechanism is "effective" in
protecting an innovation.



                                                                                              6
capability or a patent confers a lead time advantage.'2 Different mechanisms may also be
relied upon at different stages in a given innovation process. Firms may initially rely
upon secrecy prior to the commercialization of a new product, but subsequently try to
retain competitive advantage through the use of a patent and/or aggressive marketing and
lead time. Different mechanisms may even be employed at the same time for a given
innovation when an innovation is comprised of separately protectable components or
features. Arora [1997], for example, describes how chemical firms will sometimes
protect an innovation by applying for one or more patents on different elements of an
innovation, while keeping other elements secret.

        To explore the ways that appropri ability mechanisms tend to be employed
together, we conducted a series of factor analyses on our appropriability mechanism
effectiveness scores at both the industry and respondent levels. ' For these analyses, we
employ a more disaggregate industry definition than that reflected in Table 1, yielding 66
industries with four or more observations. The factor analysis should suggest whether
there are underlying features of industries or of the mechanisms themselves that yield
systematic links across selected mechanisms. These features may be associated with the
technologies of the manufacturing process or product, the nature of competitive
interaction, or differences in the way the policy environment, particularly intellectual
property law, may impact different industries.

        Presented in Table 3, the results of the analysis suggest three factors.'4
Explaining the preponderance of the variance in the correlation matrix, the first factor is
largely comprised of complementary capabilities, including sales and service and
manufacturing capabilities, and lead time.'5 The second factor contains the two patent


12
  Although we have considered how appropriability mechanisms may be used together, it is also
possible that some mechanisms may be employed instead of one another. If one assumes, for
example, that a patent fully discloses the key information describing an invention, secrecy is no
longer a viable mechanism for appropriation once such a patent is issued (although its use may
have been viable up until issuance).

  We analyzed the responses to the questions regarding the protection of product and process
innovations together since these scores were often highly correlated with one another. These
correlations range from .62 (between complementary manufacturing capabilities and know-how
in protecting new processes and products) to .74 (between complementary sales and service
capabilities in protecting new processes and products).
' The results presented in Table 3 are computed using a minimum eigenvalue of 1.0 to determine
the number of factors and orthogonal (vanmax) rotation to determine the loadings. The first
factor, with an eigenvalue of 3.56, explains 30% of the variance in the correlation matrix. The
second has an eigenvalue of 1.90, explaining 16% of the variance and the third has an eigenvalue
of 1.36, explaining 11% of the variance.
'    The critical role of firms' sales and service and manufacturing capabilities, and the
complementarity of these mechanisms with lead time confirm Teece's [1986] argument that the


                                                                                               7
measures (product and process) as well as other legal mechanisms (which also cross-load
with the first factor). The third factor is process and product secrecy.

         Although changing the level of aggregation at which industries are defined alters
the results of the factor analysis presented in Table 3 somewhat, the pattern in which
there is one factor dominated by complementary capabilities and another distinct factor
associated with patent protection is robust and consistent with the earlier findings of
Levin et al. [1987]. This pattern also holds when the factor analysis is conducted at the
respondent as well as the industry level.'6 The most fragile result of the factor analysis is
                                              '
that secrecy does not always constitute its own factor since it occasionally loads with
patents or complementary capabilities.

           Thus, our findings suggest that firms commonly employ a variety of mechanisms
to protect their inventions. The factor analysis also suggests that some of these,
notably complementary capabilities and lead time, are so closely tied to one another that
they may be collectively viewed as defining a distinct appropriability "strategy."
Moreover, given the close link between complementary capabilities and lead time, what
we actually have is not five or six distinct mechanisms, but three different "strategies,"
which include the exploitation of complementary capabilities and lead time, legal
mechanisms (notably patents) and secrecy. Also, the close links between the mechanisms
used for product and process innovations in an industry suggest that appropriability
depends on complementarities between product and process protection for all the
mechanisms.'8



private value of an innovation will often depend heavily upon the capabilities of the firm which
exploits it.
16
  At the individual level, the first factor (explaining 28% of the variance) consists of
complementary sales/service and complementary manufacturing capabilities, other legal
mechanisms, and lead time, for product and process (with process lead time cross-loading with
secrecy in the second factor). The second factor (explaining 15%) includes process and product
secrecy, as well as a crossloading of process lead time. The last factor (12%) is process and
product patents.
'    One other somewhat fragile result is that, in some of the factor analyses, lead time also
partially loads on patenting, suggesting that one role of patents may simply be to slow down
competitors, rather than preclude them from imitating altogether.
' A caution should be added to our interpretation of our factor analysis. Our finding that firms
use a range of appropriability mechanisms does not imply that they are choosing from a menu of
possible mechanisms. Rather, the effectiveness (and use) of a particular mechanism is at least
partly dictated by the technology itself, the complexity of the product, the nature of the
innovation (e.g., secrecy being well-suited for process innovation), the nature of the production
process (e.g., complex, capital intensive continuous production may rely heavily on
manufacturing capabilities), the nature and intensity of competition within an industry (e.g., the
relative importance of price versus being cutting edge), and so on. Future research might


                                                                                                   8
        Although suggesting that the effectiveness of these three strategies are
independent of one another, the factor analysis does not imply that the strategies are not
used together on occasion (i.e. if used together, one might think of their cumulative
effect as being additive). Indeed, as Tables 1 and 2 show, they are. For example, no
industry relies exclusively on patents. Even pharmaceutical firms emphasize
complementary capabilities and being first to market in addition to patents. Also, the
fact that patents tend to be used with some other mechanism may partially explain why,
although judged to be relatively ineffective, patents are applied for as often as they are;
they may simply add sufficient value at the margin when used with other mechanisms.


3.2. Relative Effectiveness of Individual Appropriability Mechanisms

        In this subsection, we compare the "effectiveness" of the different appropriability
mechanisms on the basis of the percentages of innovations reported to be effectively
protected by each. In light of our finding that industries typically employ numerous
mechanisms, and often for the same innovation, a finding that one mechanism is effective
for a greater percentage of innovations on average within an industry is best interpreted as
suggesting that that mechanism is more central to the appropriability strategies for firms
overall in that industry, not that other mechanisms are unimportant or do not yield
substantial returns.

        Summarizing in one bar chart the effectiveness scores for the appropriability
mechanisms for product innovations for the aggregate sample, Figure 1 shows that
patents are unambiguously the least central of the major appropriability mechanisms
overall (significantly below complementary sales/service, t=6.09, p<.0001), reflecting
their subordinate role in the preponderance of industries. Table 1, however, indicates that
a handful of industries are distinguished by greater reported patent effectiveness. In
medical equipment and drugs, patents are reported to be effective for more than 50% of
product innovations, and in special purpose machinery, computers and autoparts, the
effectiveness scores range from 40% to 50% of product innovations.'9 Table 1 also
indicates, however, that in no industry are patents identified as the most effective
appropriability mechanism.


fruitfully examine factors that can explain industry and firm differences in appropriability
strategies.
'   In this paper, when reporting industry-level scores and comparisons, we will typically report
industries as being "high" or "low" relative to other industries based on some threshold (e.g.,
more than 50% of innovations, or being above the mean). There is, however, significant
intraindustry variance in these scores and it is often not possible to reject the hypothesis that a
given industry's score is equal to the next highest scoring industry. The implications of the
intraindustry variance of these scores for our ability to precisely rank the more R&D intensive
industries in our sample is discussed in detail in Cohen and Walsh [19981.



                                                                                                      9
       In our aggregate results displayed in Figure 1, secrecy and lead time are ranked
comparably overall as the two most effective appropriability mechanisms for product
innovations, with scores at just over 50% for each.2° These summary evaluations reflect
the prominent role of each of the mechanisms across a wide number of industries. Table
1 indicates that secrecy is the top ranked mechanism in 17 industries and lead time is top
ranked in 13 industries.2' At the industry level, we typically observe at least one of the
two complementary capabilities (sales and service or manufacturing) ranked close to the
top-ranked mechanism.

        As presented in Figure 2, the aggregate results for process innovations differ
somewhat from those for product innovations. Secrecy is now clearly the most effective
mechanisms in aggregate (significantly above complementary manufacturing, t=6.21,
p<.0001), although it is often closely followed in some industries by the use of
complementary manufacturing capabilities, the second ranked appropriability mechanism
for protecting process innovations.22 The relatively greater emphasis on secrecy for
protecting new processes, consistent with Levin et al.'s [1987] findings, is unsurprising
because process innovations are less subject to public scrutiny and thus can be kept secret
more readily.23 Patents are reported to be less effective for process than for product
innovations (the product-process difference is significant, t=15.03, p<.0001), which is
also unsurprising since patent infringements are more difficult to detect for process than
product innovation given that the former are less public.24


20 Even with our large N, we cannot reject the hypothesis that secrecy and lead time are equal
(t=1.55, p>.lO). Both lead time and secrecy are significantly greater than complementary
manufacturing capabilities (t=6.84 and t=4.52, respectively, both p<.0001).

21 Secrecy is the most effective mechanism in food, textiles, paper, petroleum, all the chemical
industries, rubber and plastics, mineral products, metals, machine tools, electrical equipment,
motors and generators, semiconductors, and search and navigation instruments. Lead time
appears to play the most important role of all the mechanisms in steel, metal products, general
purpose machines, special purpose machines, computers, communications equipment, TV/radio,
medical equipment, precision instruments, autoparts, cars and trucks and aerospace.

22 Complementary manufacturing dominates in a number of industries such as
printing/publishing, steel, metal products, general purpose machinery, electronic components,
medical equipment, and car/truck. In the aggregate it is significantly above lead time (t=4.41,
p<.000l). Lead time, in turn, is ranked third, significantly above complementary sales and
service (t=8.52, p<.0001).

23 The absolute score for secrecy does not change between product and process innovations.
However, for process innovations, it is significantly higher than all other mechanisms, while for
product innovations, secrecy was tied with lead time.

24 Illustrating this point, one chemical company researcher stated: "If it's [the invention's] a
process, and if it's difficult to police, we'll take a second look before patenting."



                                                                                                   10
         In light of our finding that patents are relatively ineffective in protecting not only
process innovation but product as well, we need to be careful about the meaning of patent
"effectiveness." Recall that our questionnaire characterizes effectiveness in terms of the
degree to which respondents believe that patents protect the firm's competitive advantage
due to the patented inventions. Our initial piloting of the questionnaire suggests that
respondents interpreted the notion of competive advantage due to the patented innovation
as referring to returns realized via either the commercialization or licensing of the
patented inventions, not whether patents generate profit more generally in other less
direct or conventional ways. 25


3.3. Changes in the Importance of Patents and Other Appropriability Mechanisms

        An initial—and superficial—comparison of the full sample CMS results with
those of Levin et al. [1987] suggest that the relative effectiveness of patents has declined.
While patents are the last ranked mechanism for protecting process innovations in both
surveys, they were ranked last in the protection of product innovations in the CMS from
having been ranked ahead of secrecy in the earlier Yale survey. This continued low
relative standing of patents is surprising in light of the recent pro-patent changes in the
courts and in the adjudication of infringement suits noted above. The availability of the
data from the earlier Yale survey, which was administered in 1983—felicitously timed
with the patent court reforms of the early 1980s—provides the basis for a more careful,
though still limited, intertemporal comparison of effectiveness of patents, as well as that
of other appropriability mechanisms.

        To compare the CMS and Yale survey, we need to account for differences in
response scales and in the firms and industries sampled. To accommodate differences in
response scales as well as possible, we compare the relative effectiveness rankings of the
different mechanisms rather than absolute scores.26 Regarding the firm samples, while


25 In follow-on interviews to our survey, Hall and Ham [1999] also found that semiconductor
firms narrowly interpreted our survey question regarding patent effectiveness to mean whether
patents protected the profits due to the commercialization or licensing of the patented inventions,
not whether patents were profitable in some other general way.

26 The Yale survey employed a seven-point Likert scale providing subjective measures of the
effectiveness of each appropriability mechanism in "capturing and protecting the competitive
advantages of new or improved..." products or production processes. In contrast, the Carnegie
Mellon survey asked respondents to estimate, for the prior three years, the percentage of
innovations for which they considered each mechanism to be effective in protecting the firm's
"competitive advantage from those innovations." Some of the mechanisms considered also
differed somewhat between the two surveys. The Yale survey did not include product or
process complexity, "other legal mechanisms" or complementary manufacturing capabilities as
possible mechanisms. The Yale survey also included mechanisms that were not included in the
Carnegie Mellon Survey, notably "moving quickly down the learning curve," and "patents to


                                                                                                11
 the Yale survey sampled only publicly traded manufacturing firms which tend to be large
relative to the population of all firms, the CMS sampled from a much broader firm size
distribution in the manufacturing sector. To probe the sensitivity of our findings to the
different firm size distributions, we correlated the CMS effectiveness scores for all
appropriability mechanisms with firm and business unit size (controlling for industry
effects). The only statistically significant correlation coefficients greater than .11 were
those between the effectiveness of product patents and, respectively, the logs of firm size
(r=.14, p<.Ol) and business unit size (r=.22, p<.000l), suggesting that the comparative
findings for patent effectiveness may be affected by differences in the underlying firm
size distributions. Accordingly, to make our sample more comparable to that of the Yale
survey, we dropped from the CMS sample all firms with sales of less than half a billion
dollars, and then recomputed the appropriability effectiveness scores. To control for
differences in the sampled industries, we also redefined the CMS industries to conform to
the industry definitions originally used in the Yale survey. We then identified 33
identically defined industries with at least four observations in each sample (using the
truncated large firm sample from the CMS).27 We then compare both the aggregate
results between the two surveys, as well as the results for the 33 "comparison" industries.
Tables 4 and 5 give the industry-level results for the 33 industries using the Yale
definitions and the large-firm CMS sample.

         Making the firm size distributions of the two samples more comparable modestly
revises our impression that the relative effectiveness of patents has not changed ormay
have even declined. We now observe an increase in reported patent effectiveness
between the mid 1980s and 1990s, at least in some industries. The aggregate results for
the truncated, large-firm CMS sample presented in Figures 3 and 4 show the overall mean
effectiveness score for product and process patents to be almost indistinguishable from
the score for complementary sales/service (t=O.17 and t=O.15, respectively, p>.85) and
close to that of complementary manufacturing for product patents as well (t=1.07, p>.25).
However, the top mechanisms (secrecy and lead time for product, secrecy and
manufacturing capabilities for process) continue to gamer substantially higher scores (the
comparisons are all significant at least at p<.OOl). We also find that, among large firms,
patents have the highest effectiveness scores in a number of industries, including drugs,
toilet preparations, gum and wood chemicals, pipes/valves, oil field machinery,
switchgear, and autoparts. In addition, (while not the top mechanism) patents have
average scores of at least 50% in organic chemicals, fibers, turbines/generators,
motors/industrial controls, and medical equipment. Another comparison between the two
surveys is provided by Tables 4 and 5 which present the appropriability mechanism
rankings across the two surveys for the 33 identically defined industries. In the 1983 Yale
survey, product patents were ranked first or second in seven industries. In the CMS, they

secure royalty income." Thus, we should be cautious when comparing results across the two
surveys.
27
  By imposing a cutoff of four observations, we lose a good number of the 128 industries
represented in the Yale survey due to its smaller sample size.



                                                                                            12
 were ranked first or second twelve times. With regard to the protection of process
 innovation, Tables 4 and 5 show no appreciable change. Patents were ranked first or
 second in six industries in both surveys.

          Thus, although first mover advantages and complementary sales and service
 capabilities ranked well ahead of patents in the Yale survey, and secrecy and first mover
 advantages well ahead of patents in the CMS, our results suggest that between 1983 and
 1994 patents may have come to occupy a more central role in large firms' efforts to
 protect their product innovations in a growing number of industries. While patents are
 still not the dominant mechanism in most industries for protecting product innovations, it
 now appears that they can be counted among the major mechanisms of appropriation in a
 more sizeable minority of industries.

        The sharpest difference between the findings of the two surveys--and one which is
robust to differences in the firm size distributions of the two samples--concerns the role
of secrecy in protecting product innovations. Between the Yale and Carnegie Mellon
surveys, secrecy vaulted from being judged the least effective major mechanism to being
judged the most, along with lead time. Tables 4 and 5 show that for the 33 comparison
industries, secrecy never ranked either first or second in the Yale survey for the protection
of product innovations. In contrast, in our survey, secrecy ranks first or second in 24 of
the 33 industries, ahead of even lead time which ranked first or second in 18 of the 33
industries. For the protection of process innovations, secrecy is also ranked higher in the
Carnegie Mellon Survey than in the earlier Yale survey. In the Yale survey, secrecy
ranked first or second for protecting process innovations in 12 of the 33 industries, while
in the CMS, it is ranked first or second in 31 industries, far ahead of any other
mechanism.

        We do not know what is driving the apparent growth in the importance of secrecy
as an appropriability mechanism, nor do we possess data on changes over time in the
ways in which secrecy policies may be manifest (e.g., nondisclosure agreements,
strictures on publication, noncompete clauses in employment contracts, etc.). Additional
corroborating evidence suggests, however, that the result is not an artifact of differences
between the Yale and Carnegie Mellon surveys' response scales and question wording
and order. First, the result is consistent with another comparative finding between the
two surveys (discussed below), namely that concern over information disclosure has
become more prominent as a reason not to patent since the 1983 Yale survey. Second, a
1995 National Science Foundation pilot survey of 236 firms inquiring about the
importance of patents, design registration, secrecy, complexity and lead time, and
employing a subjective Likert response scale resembling that of the original Yale
questionnaire, found secrecy to be ranked just behind lead time, and much more
important than patents in protecting the returns to product innovation. Although limited
in industry coverage, these results were close to what we found, and differed from the
original Yale results in which patents clearly dominated secrecy.28 Finally, Lerner's
28
   Regarding a possible effect of question wording and order, an identical set of questions to
those employed in the CMS were included in a questionnaire administered in Japan at


                                                                                                 13
 [1994] results are also consistent with our findings when he finds, for a sample of 530
 firms, trade secret disputes to be commonplace, representing 43% of the intellectual
 property litigation in his sample.


 4. Strengths and Weaknesses of Patents
          In this section, we address two questions. First, we examinine why firms decide
 not to patent innovations, partly to learn why they report patents to be relatively
 ineffective in the preponderance of industries. Second, we examine the motives for
 patenting to gain some insight into whether the patenting practices of firms may, under
 some circumstances, broadly depart from the purpose of patent law to promote technical
 advance. We also wish to understand whether there is a disjuncture between firms'
 perceptions of patent effectiveness and their patenting behavior as the literature suggests
 and, if so, why.


4.1 Reasons Not to Patent

        In our survey, we asked firms to report which reasons contributed to the decision
not to apply for a patent on the most recent invention which they decided not to patent.
The reasons for not applying for a patent considered in our survey include: 1. difficulty in
demonstrating the novelty of an invention; 2. the amount of information disclosed in a
patent application; 3. the cost of applying; 4. the cost of defending a patent in court; 5. the
ease of legally inventing around a patent. Figure 5 indicates the percentage of
respondents indicating whether a particular reason figured into their decision not to
patent.29 Figure 6 indicates the percentage of respondents reporting whether a given
reason is the most important reason not to patent.

        Our results in Figure 5 show that ease of inventing around is the most cited reason
(significantly above novelty, t=5.10, p<.0001) and information disclosure, along with
lack of novelty, also score high.3° Figure 6 shows that the percentage of respondents
reporting concerns over disclosure and "inventing around" as their most important


approximately the same time as the CMS. Japanese respondents rated secrecy as the least
effective of the major appropnability mechanisms and rated patents as among the most effective
(Cohen, Goto, Walsh, Nagata and Nelson [1999]). Although the differences in these results may
reflect cultural or other cross-national differences, the result for Japan suggests that question
wording or order did not somehow bias the results toward secrecy.

29 To
     save space in the questionnaire, we did not distinguish between process and product
innovations for this question. We did, however, draw this distinction when we considered the
reasons to patent.
3°
  Novelty is significantly above disclosure (t=3.43, p<.OO1) and disclosure, in turn, is
significantly above application cost (t=4.64, p<.000l).


                                                                                               14
 reasons not to patent are almost equal (t=0.13, p>.85).3' We interpret these results as
 suggesting that the key reasons why patents provide limited protection are that they can
 be invented around and disclose critical information.32 Disclosure is presumably of
 particular concern when a patent can be invented around.33

        Over ten years prior to the CMS, the Yale survey also inquired about the reasons
why firms did not patent, casting their question in terms of the "limitations on the
effectiveness of patents." Levin et al. [1987] also found that an important "limitation on
the effectiveness" of patents was that competitors could legally invent around them. In
their aggregate results, no other limitation, including "patentability" (resembling our
demonstration of novelty) or concern over information disclosure were comparably
scored for either product or process innovations. Thus, concern over information
disclosure appears to have grown since the Yale survey, which is consistent with the
increased emphasis on secrecy reported above.'

        In addition to our aggregate results, we observe within-industry relationships
between reasons not to patent and firm size. Consistent with Lerner's [1995] finding that
the costs of patent litigation dissuade smaller firms from patenting, the Kendall Tau
correlation coefficient between the log of overall firm size and whether the respondent
indicated cost of defending a patent in court as a reason for not applying for a patent,
controlling for industry effects, is -.18 and significant at the .01 confidence level. The
analogous correlation with the cost of applying for a patent is -.11, which is also
significant at the .01 level.35 These findings may suggest that larger firms are better able
to spread the fixed costs of applying for and defending patents over greater levels of


31
     One chemical company executive voiced particular concern over disclosure, for example, when
he stated, "Will a patent teach our competitors and give the shop away?"
32
     An industry by industry analysis shows the same qualitative pattern.
" For
      the most important reason not to patent an invention, both disclosure and inventing around
are significantly below novelty (p<.Ol), which is not surprising given the novelty requirement for
receiving a patent. The fact, however, that a sizable number of respondents (24%) rank
disclosure as the most important reason, even above novelty, is striking.

        of the reasons found to be prominent as reasons not to patent, namely demonstration of
novelty, concern over information disclosure or ease of legally inventing around the patent,
proved to be correlated with size. Thus, the key difference regarding the importance of
information disclosure between the Yale and Carnegie Mellon survey findings appear to be
robust to differences in the underlying firm size distributions.

  These aggregate results are qualitatively confirmed in the correlations for the seventeen
industries with more than 8 observations, where 15 of the seventeen correlations between size
and defense cost are negative, and, of these 15, eight are significant at the .10 confidence level,
and 16 of the seventeen between size and application cost are negative and, of these 16, five are
significant.


                                                                                                 15
output, which may in turn explain the positive relationship noted above between reported
patent effectiveness and firm size.


4.2 Why Patent?

       Patenting activity is considerable and has grown substantially since the early
1980's in the U.S. The total number of U.S. patent grants has increased 78% to 101,419
between 1983 and 1995, and for U.S. corporations alone it has increased 72% to 44,035
(National Science Board [1998, p. A-373]). Our CMS data indicate that approximately
70% of R&D performers applied for at least one patent in the 199 1-1994 period.
Respondents also claim to apply for patents on 49% of their product innovations and 31%
of their process innovations.36

        Patenting therefore is high by historical standards and the majority of new
products are patented. Are patent propensities inconsistent, however, with firms'
evaluations of the effectiveness of patents as the literature has suggested? To address this
question, we estimate a simple logit model in which we regress a log transform of our
industry (R&D-weighted) average propensities to apply for patents for product and
process innovations, respectively, against the (R&D weighted) average industry patent
effectiveness scores. Recall that our effectiveness measures reflect each respondent's
evaluation of the percentage of product or process innovations for which patents or other
mechanisms are effective in protecting the "competitive advantage" from those
innovations. Patent application propensity is the percentage of innovations for which
patents are sought.

        The results for the regressions which includes only our measure of patent
effectiveness on the right hand side are presented in Table 6 for product innovations and
Table 7 for process innovations. We observe R-squared's of .45 and .11 for product and
process patent propensity, respectively, and both coefficient estimates are significant at


36 However, there are large differences in the propensity to patent across industries. As presented
in the appendix in Table Al, for product innovations, several industries apply for patents for
more than two thirds of their innovations, including chemicals (nec), drugs, mineral products,
and medical equipment. In contrast, there are also many industries that applied for patents on
fewer than 15% of their product innovations, including food, textiles, glass, steel and other
metals. For process innovations, the higher patenting (i.e., greater than 40%) industries include
paper, petroleum, chemicals (nec), drugs, mineral products, and communication equipment.
Lower patenting industries (i.e., less than 10%) include textiles, glass, steel, special purpose
machines, machine tools, motors/generators, electronic components, and TV/radio. The
computations for this table drop those observations where the sum of the share of process and
product innovations equals 100% because in such cases, it is likely that the respondents
misconstrued the question to mean that the numbers should sum to 100%, which was not correct.
We also assigned those respondents who had applied for no patents in the prior three years a
value of zero on propensity of patent. Finally, responses are weighted by size of R&D budget.



                                                                                               16
the .01 level. Since the argument suggesting an inconsistency between reported patent
ineffectiveness and patenting behavior has to do with the effectiveness of patents relative
to other mechanisms, and the fact (established above) that the use of patents and other
mechanisms are not mutually exclusive (and may even be complementary), we estimate a
second simple specification where the effectiveness scores for the other mechanisms are
also included. Also presented in Tables 6 and 7, the R-squared's increase to .54 for
product patent propensity and .27 for process patent propensity. Evaluated at the sample
means, the coefficient estimates from the simple bivariate regressions imply that for a one
percent increase in the percentage of innovations for which patents are reported to confer
effective protection, the share of product and process innovations for which the firm
applies for patents increases by 0.96 and 0.47 percent, respectively, with little change
when the other mechanism scores are included.

         While our results reflect a strong link between reported patent effectiveness and
patenting behavior, the R-squared's as well as the significant, positive intercept terms in
the logit regressions also suggest that our measure of the effectiveness of patents has
limited explanatory power in explaining the observed propensities to patent, particularly
for process innovations. If respondents are judging the effectiveness of patents in terms
of their protection of the returns realized through the commercialization or licensing of
patented inventions (which, per above, is what we believe), then the limited explanatory
power of patent effectiveness could reflect uses of patents that generate profits, but not
directly from the commercialization or sale of the patented inventions. To shed light on
this and other possibilities, we now turn to our examination of the reasons firms patent.

        In our survey, we asked respondents to indicate which of a list of reasons
motivated their most recent decisions to apply for a patent for a product and process
innovation, respectively. The reasons for patenting considered in our survey include the
prevention of copying, the prevention of other firm's attempts to patent a related
invention (which we call "patent blocking"), the earning of licensing revenue, use to
strengthen the firm's position in negotiations with other firms (as in cross-licensing
agreements), the prevention of infringement suits, use as a measure of internal
performance of a firms' technologists, and the enhancement of the firm's reputation.

        Figures 7 and 8 provide the aggregate results on respondents' reasons for applying
for their most recent product or process patents, respectively. Figure 7 shows that in the
aggregate, the motive of blocking rival patents on related innovations, indicated by 82%
of the respondents, is second (p<.0001) only to prevention of copying (96%) as a motive
for patenting.37 Figure 8 shows similar results for process patents, where the prevention
of copying is indicated by 78% of respondents and patent blocking, again the second
most important reason (significantly below copying but significantly above prevention of

  In a couple of industries, namely miscellaneous chemicals and steel, blocking was named as a
reason more often than the prevention of copying and in drugs, mineral products,
concrete/cement, machine tools, communications equipment and medical equipment, blocking
was named by almost as many respondents as the prevention of copying (i.e., within 5%).



                                                                                            17
suits, p<.0001), is indicated by 64%. In the aggregate, the prevention of suits occupies
third place as a reason for patenting, with 59% and 47% of respondents reporting it as a
reason for product and process patenting respectively.39 These are followed by use in
negotiations and the use of patents to "enhance reputation." Other than using patents to
measure internal performance, using patents to earn licensing revenue is the least
important reason for applying for patents, reported as a reason for patenting products and
processes by only 28% and 23% of respondents, respectively.40 Consistent with the
findings of Levin et al. [1987], this result suggests that only a minority of respondents
expect to sell their protected knowledge in disembodied form.4' After weighting our
aggregate results by the number of respondent patent applications, the numbers change
appreciably only for prevention of suits and use in negotiations, which increase to 74%
and 58%, respectively, for product patents and to 63% and 49%, respectively, for process
patents, suggesting that those firms that patent the most are disproportionately concerned
about prevention of suits and the use of patents in negotiations.42

        The legal and qualitative literature as well as our interviews suggest that the
reasons firms patent may differ across industries and technologies (cf. Warshofsky
[1994]). To probe for differences in the motives for patenting across industries, we
exploit a distinction drawn by Levin et al. [1987], Merges and Nelson [1990], Kusonoki,

  Blocking is again indicated by a greater percentage of respondents than the prevention of
copying in miscellaneous chemicals and steel, and the two reasons are tied in six industries,
including textiles, petroleum refining, rubber/plastic products, mineral products, concrete and
cement and machine tools.

     Both scores are significantly above use in negotiations (p<.000l).
4°
  Both scores are significantly below the next highest use (negotiations for product patents,
reputation for process patents, p<.0001).

   One qualification to this inference is our finding that almost half of our respondents patent
products and over a third patent processes to enhance the firm's reputation. While a sizable
fraction of these may reflect a vanity component, some of these respondents may be signaling an
intention to use their patents as the basis for approaching the capital markets or for selling the
firm outright. Supporting that such a concern motivates some patenting, we find negative
correlations between the likelihood of a respondent reporting this motive for patenting and firm
and business unit size, which is consistent with the assumption that smaller firms would more
typically use patents in this way.

420ne common theme regarding the prevention of suits that emerged from the interviews was that
firms use patents to allow themselves to be able to use their own technologies; that is, without
being sued. Firms also reported using publications in the same way (so called, "defensive
publication") when they feel that a patent will be ineffective. By publishing parts of an invention
(and keeping other parts secret), the firm can keep its freedom to commercialize a product
without risk of another firm patenting it. A communications equipment manufacturer's
executive stated, "If you don't think you can get the patent, but you are afraid someone else
might get it, you publicly publish it, so that our idea doesn't get turned around on us."



                                                                                                  18
Nonaka and Nagata [1998] and Kash and Kingston [2000] between "complex" versus
"discrete" or simple technologies. For our purpose, the key difference between a complex
and a discrete technology is whether a new, commercializable product orprocess is
comprised of numerous separately patentable elements versus relatively few. New drugs
or chemicals typically are comprised of a relatively discrete number of patentable
elements. In contrast, electronic products tend to be comprised of a larger number--often
hundreds--of patentable elements and, hence, may be characterized as complex.
Although the difference between complex versus simple technologies is typically driven
by the technology and physical character of a product, patent policy itself may also play a
role. For example, the recent ruling that gene fragements are separately patentable
suggests that the commercialization of a single biotechnology drug product may now
require rights over numerous patents.

        In complex product industries, firms often do not have proprietary control over all
the essential complementary components of at least some of the technologies they are
developing.43 Firms hold rights over technologies that others need, and vice-versa,
creating a condition of mutual dependence that fosters extensive cross-licensing. One
communications equipment manufacturer's executive stated: "Mostly, your patents are
used in horse trading. You come together and say, 'Here's our portfolio.' In our industry,
things all build on each other. We all overlap on each other's patents. Eventually we
come to some agreement: 'You can use ours and we can use yours."

        To test for differences in the uses of patents between complex and discrete
product industries, we created a dummy variable, COMPLEX, equal to "1" for complex
product industries and "0" for discrete product industhes. We then conduct a series of
comparisons to see if the use of patents differs systematically as expected between
complex and discrete product industries. We begin by looking at the use of patents in
negotiations. We find that the average for complex product industries is 54.9% of
respondents claiming that use in negotiations is an important reason to patent, while in
                                                                                 45
discrete product industnes, only 40.6% use patents in this way (z=3.79, p<.OOl).     We

  An exception was Hewlett-Packard Co.'s almost impenetrable protection of its inkjet printer
introduced in 1988. It held some 50 patents covering the technology of how ink flowed through
the printer head alone (Yoder [1994]).

   Lacking strong priors, we use the following assignment. Industries with ISIC codes less than
2900 (e.g., food, textiles, chemicals, drugs, metals and metal products) were coded as "discrete"
and those with ISIC codes of 2900 or above (e.g., machinery, computers, electrical equipment,
electronic components, instruments, and transportation equipment) were coded as "complex".
We excluded 1S1C3600 (other manufacturing). This coding scheme is similar to Kusonoki, et al.
[1998], who label these categories "material" and "system" industries. In their analyses, they
excluded food, steel and metal products on the grounds that these were difficult to classify. We
have included these as "discrete", in part based on the ISIC classifications. However, wesuspect
there is substantial heterogeneity within these groups of industries. Such heterogeneity is likely
to bias the results toward zero (providing a conservative test of group differences).

  Based on Wilcoxon rank-sum test.


                                                                                               19
can see in Table 8 that the preponderance of the sixteen industries in which fifty percent
or more of the respondents report patenting for use in negotiations are complex product
industries, including the electronics (computers, semiconductors, electronic components,
communications equipment, TV/radio) industries, instruments (including medical
equipment) and transportation (auto/truck, autoparts, aerospace).

        Among the industries with more than fifty percent reporting use of patents for
negotiations, there is only a small handful of "discrete" product (i.e., products comprised
of a relatively small number of patentable elements) industries, including drugs, steel and
metal products. The presence of drugs suggests that when patents are used for
negotiations, those negotiations may not only apply to cross-licensing (despite the
explicit mention of cross-licensing in the survey question), but to licensing revenue as
well. Accordingly, to compute the column labeled "Cross-licensing" in Table 10, we
remove from the respondents who report using their patent for "negotiations" those who
also report using it for licensing revenues. This provides a conservative estimate of
industries which patent with a particular view toward cross-licensing. We also weight
responses by the number of patent applications.47 Drugs, steel and metal products now
drop below forty percent, while semiconductors, medical equipment, instruments and
autos are above.48 Comparing the two industry groups (and weighting cases by number of
patent applications), we find that, on average, 54.8% of those in "complex" product
industries used patents for "Cross-licensing," while only 10.3% of those in "discrete"
product industries used patents in this way (2[1 d.f.]=4129.8, p<.0001).49


   The differences for process innovations are much smaller (39.0% for complex v. 35.6% for
discrete, Wilcoxon z=0.875, p>.38). As shown in Table 9, electronics and transportation
industries (though not instruments) again score relatively high for process patents. In general, we
are less certain about our predictions for process patents, because it is more difficult to know
(without extensive knowledge of each industry) about the nature of the manufacturing process,
and, in turn, whether commercializable process innovations are likely to be "discrete" or
"complex."

  A few industries change in unexpected ways when we weight. However, because this analysis
is sensitive to outliers, one large firm answering in other than the predicted way can substantially
change the average. Thus, while particular industries may be classed as "high cross licensing" or
not depending on weighting, exclusions of outliers, etc., the grouping of industries is fairly
robust, with complex-product industries tending to score high and "discrete-product" industries
scoring low.

48 For process patents, cross-licensing is also high (greater than 40%) in at least some of the
electronics and transportation industries (see Table 11). Again, per footnote 46 above, we are
less certain about our predictions for process patents.

  These averages (and those in the following paragraphs on reasons to patent) are estimated
using a weighted logistic regression. We use logistic regression (with COMPLEX as the
predictor) to account for the dichotomous character of the variables. We weight cases by number
of patent applications to better reflect the use of the "average" patent (since some respondents


                                                                                                  20
        In addition to noting important cross-industry differences with regard to cross-
licensing, we observe important differences with regard to the use of patenting for
licensing revenue. There are only ten industries in which 40% or more of the respondents
report licensing revenue as a motive for patenting. These are printing/publishing,
petroleum products, drugs, steel, metal products, motors/generators, semiconductors,
communication equipment, TV/radio, and aerospace. Once we weight these responses by
patent applications, these results are largely reinforced with two important exceptions.
Semiconductors now drops substantially below average, while computers are now
substantially above, suggesting that licensing revenue is a greater concern for less patent-
intensive firms in semiconductors, but a concern for the more patent-intensive firms in
computers. Overall, we find that discrete product industries make greater use of product
patents for licensing (37.5% for discrete versus 28.8% for complex, X2[1 d.f.]=194.8,
p<.000 1).° More generally, use of patents for licensing revenue in complex product
industries such as computers, semiconductors and telecommunications as well as discrete
product industries suggests that while there may be broad differences in the uses of
patents across industries, there are cross-firm differences within industries reflecting
heterogeneity in the features, goals and capabilities of firms.5'

        As noted above, our results show that the prevention of rivals from patenting
related inventions, which we call patent preemption or blocking, to be the most pervasive
motive for patenting after the prevention of copying. To understand this result and how
this motive may vary across industries, it is useful to consider that the notion of "related
inventions" has two different meanings. Inventions may be related whether they are


account for many more patents than others). For process patents, the results are similar (44.4%
versus 11.5%, x2111 d.f.]=2618.5, p<.000l). For the unweighted regressions the results are
weaker, but still significant (p<.0001) for product patents (though no longer significant for
process patents).
5°
     For process patents, the results are even weaker (32.9% for discrete versus 28.4% for complex,
X2[1 d.f.]=53.5, p<.000l). If we use the unweighted scores, the results are no longer significant
for either product or process.
'    Our interviews also suggest that licensing revenue is becoming more important recently, at
least for some firms, with firms becoming more aware of the potential payoff to staking
intellectual property claims and enforcing those claims through lawsuits. Reflecting this change
in attitudes, one respondent stated, "Patents are a business in itself. They generate licensing
opportunities." Consistent with Hall and Ham's interview findings for the semiconductor
industry, the respondents point to high profile lawsuits, such as the Texas Instruments'
semiconductor lawsuits or the "epochmaking" Polaroid v. Kodak case as important triggers for
this change in attitude toward the role of patents. Reflecting the notion that firms may be
embracing more aggressive intellectual property policies than a decade ago, two consultants,
Rivette and Kline [2000] just published a volume admonishing firms to better exploit their
intellectual property policy and "unlock the hidden value of patents."



                                                                                                  21
substitutes or complements, and the intent associated with "blocking" may turn on this
distinction. Consider industries or technologies where the patenting of substitute
inventions (i.e., inventions that resemble one another functionally) is possible. In this
setting, firms wishing to protect some patented core invention may patent substitutes to
foreclose that possibility to rivals, building what is sometimes called a "patent fence."
Those substitutes may represent improvements upon the original product or not, and the
firm may have no intent of commercializing those inventions. For example, in the 1940's
du Pont patented over 200 substitutes for Nylon to protect its core invention (Hounshell
and Smith [1988]). Turner [1998] documents the case of the "Fan" patent where Du Pont
patented an improvement on its already commercialized color proofing process for
photographic film in order to prevent its preemption in the marketplace.

        Inventions may also be related to one another if they are economic complements
when, to create a single commercializable product, numerous separately patentable
inventions need to be combined, which is commonly the case in complex product
industries. In such settings, holding a patent on one of these elements can block the
acquisition of exclusive property rights over the commercializable invention as a whole.

          Blocking patents may be used either to extract licensing revenue or to force
inclusion in cross-licensing negotiations. In the former instance, a patent holder with no
intent of commercializing the complex product may want to extract some share of the
rents via licensing, as illustrated by Texas Instrument's efforts to secure licensing
revenues from Japanese and subsequently American semiconductor manufacturers during
the 1980's and 1990's. Alternatively, because no one firm can move ahead on
developing and commercializing new technology without access to rival technology,
incumbents can use their patents as bargaining chips either to compel their inclusion in
cross-licensing or at least secure the freedom to move ahead on similar technological
efforts without being sued. We call this use of patents "block to play" because, by
compelling either access to rival technology or at least protecting against suits by
incumbents, it facilitates a firm's participation in a broad domain of technological
activity.

        Our discussion of the two forms of patent blocking suggests that there may be
different motives associated with blocking between discrete and complex product
industries. In discrete product industries, such as chemicals, we would expect firms that
report blocking as a motive do so with a view toward creating a patent fence. While, as
noted above, patent fences may be created where patents are strong, we would expect the
practice to be more common when the patented core invention is more susceptible to
substitution. Under such circumstances, it would seem unlikely that a firm could use
either a "core invention" patent or one of the patents surrounding the core invention to
generate licensing revenue or to strengthen its position in negotiations. Thus, we expect
the preponderance of respondents who report blocking as a motive for patenting in
discrete product industries to report no intention of using that patent for negotiations or
licensing. The column labeled "Fences" in Table 10 shows patent application-weighted
percentages of respondents by industry who report blocking as a motive, but not the



                                                                                        22
motives of use in negotiations or licensing.52 Use of patents to build such "fences" is, as
conjectured, much more conmon in discrete product industries (45.0%) than in complex
product industries (10.6%) (2[1 d.f.]=2973.7, p<.0001).53

        In contrast to the motives for patenting observed in discrete product industries,
our discussion of the uses of blocking in complex product industries suggests that firms
should commonly use the same patent for blocking and to strengthen their positions in
cross-licensing negotiations. The column labeled "Player" in Table 10 shows, by
industry, the percent of respondents who report using a patent for blocking and for
negotiations, but not to secure licensing revenue.54 Comparing this "Player" variable
across the types of industries, we find that "complex" product industries score
substantially higher than do "discrete" product industries (44.7% versus 10.1%, X2[1
d.f.]=2847.5, p<.0001). For process patents the results are similar (30.3% versus
9.8%,2[1 d.f.]=1 131.9, p<.0001). For the unweighted regressions, the results are
substantially weaker (26.2% versus 18.5% for product, p<.OS, 17.1% versus 14.9% for
process, p>.45), suggesting that this "player" strategy is much more prominent among the
firms with larger patent portfolios.

         Thus, we observe three uses of patents that appear to differ across industries.
First, in discrete product industries such as drugs where patents are effective, patents
afford sufficient protection on individual inventions to confer monopoly rents via either
the commercialization of an invention by the firm itself or via licensing. In the majority
of discrete product industries where patents are weaker, firms are more likely to use
patents for blocking by creating patent fences that impede the development of competing

52 The industries where the percent of such respondents exceed 50%, and often substantially,
indeed include all the chemical industries (except drugs), textiles, paper, rubber/plastic products,
mineral products and electrical equipment. For process patents, we find chemicals (except
drugs) again scoring substantially above average, along with food, textiles, and paper (see Table
 11). The absence of the drug industry from this list further suggests that in discrete product
industries where patents are effective in preventing substitution and provide a strong basis for
licensing, firms do not build patent fences as commonly as otherwise.

 For process innovations, the results are similar (43.8% versus 14.3%, X2[1 d.f.]=2 152.4,
pcz.000l). For the unweighted regressions, the results are weaker, but still significant (p<.Ol).

  We impose the latter restriction to focus conservatively on those industries where cross-
licensing is most important. The numbers in the "Player" column in these two tables are low
because excluding licensing revenue as a motive excludes some firms that patent to maintain
player status and license, and, per Tables 8 and 9, licensing revenue is also an important reason
to patent in many complex product industries (e.g. semiconductors, TV/radio, and aerospace).
As expected, the percentages are relatively high for complex product industries such as
electronics (except computers), instruments, machinery and machine tools industries and
autoparts. For process patents, we add printing/publishing and metals and drop special purpose
machines (see Table 11).



                                                                                                    23
alternatives and are less likely to use them for negotiations. Finally, in complex product
industries, while patents are also used for licensing revenue, the larger, more patent
intensive firms are more likely to use them to strengthen their positions as players in
cross-licensing negotiations; Tables 10 and 11 also show that not all industries divide
neatly into these uses; it is invariably a matter of degree, with heterogeneity manifest
within all industries. Industries where the uses are particularly diverse include
instruments, medical equipment and communications equipment.

        If firms use patents in different ways within industries, are there systematic
features to these intraindustry differences? To consider this possibility, we focus
specifically on whether there are any relationships within industries between motives for
patenting and the size of firms or their business units, or the firm's patent intensity. On
the basis of Kendall Tau correlation coefficients and controlling for industry effects (for
the seventeen industries with at least 8 observations), of all the reasons to patent product
innovations, only the motive of patenting "to enhance the reputation of the firm or its
employees" is significantly (at .01 confidence level) correlated with size, measured as
either the log of firm sales (r = -.11), or the log of business unit employees (r = -.16).
Suggesting that smaller firms are more likely to report this motive, this negative
correlation coefficient can be rationalized by the need of smaller firms' in some high
technology industries to hold patents in order to acquire financing or alliance partners
(Smith-Doerr, Owen-Smith, Koput and Powell [forthcoming]). We also observe
significant positive correlations between the number of respondents' patent applications
and two motives for patenting, namely to strengthen your bargaining position in
negotiations and to prevent infringement suits; the correlation coefficients for these two
relationships are .16 and .15, respectively for product innovations (and stronger for the
motives for patenting process innovations). Thus, as suggested above, it appears that,
within industries, firms that patent the most tend to be more concerned with negotiations
and the prevention of suits.


5. Discussion

         U.S. patent policy has changed markedly since the Yale survey was administered
in the early 1980's. First, in 1982, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit's was
established. Since that time, the judiciary's posture on patent law has become more pro-
patent as reflected in increased plaintiff success rates in infringement suits.
Administrative changes to diminish patent pendency periods have also been implemented
with a view toward strengthening patents. Has there, however, been any significant
increase in the reported effectiveness of patents? Overall, our findings suggest that
patents are still not the major mechanism for appropriating returns to innovations in most
industries. Instead, we find that the key appropnability mechanisms in most industries
are secrecy, lead time and complementary capabilities (see Figures 1 and 2). In fact, the
major change compared to the "pre-reform" Yale survey is the rise in the reported
importance of secrecy. Of all the appropriability mechanisms, however, secrecy lends
itself the least to R&D spillovers. Since R&D spillovers are a key source of productivity


                                                                                         24
 growth (Griliches [1992]), further research is warranted on the causes and possible
 impacts of this result.

         The most we can say about the impact of policy changes on the effectiveness of
 patents is that, when we look at the responses of the large firms comparable to those
 surveyed by Levin et al. [1987], some industries have witnessed perhaps a modest
increase in reported effectiveness, suggesting that patentsmay now be playing a more
central role in the appropriability strategies of larger firms. Our results also suggest that
the costs associated with patents, particularly their defense, disproportionately dissuades
small firms from availing themselves of patent protection.55 Thus, the standing of patents
against other means of appropriation has not changed substantially. Even among large
firms, these other mechanisms continue to dominate in firms' appropriability strategies in
the majority of industries. This modest change in the status ofpatents suggests either that
the institutional changes in the patent system are not as substantial as one might believe,
or that enduring features of technologies and industries may constrain any increase in
patent effectiveness that is achievable through changes in policy and judicial practice.

        Consistent with prior claims, our results suggest that there is also a good deal of
patenting that is not readily explained by the relative effectiveness of patents as a device
for protecting the profits due to specific inventions. Our interviews and survey results on
the reasons why firms patent suggest an explanation, namely that there are common uses
of patents that stand apart from the function of protecting the profits directly associated
with either the licensing or commercialization of the patented invention.

        One broader use of patents observed particularly in chemical (apart from drugs)
and other discrete product industries is their combination to build patent fences around
some patented core invention. Such fence building involves the patenting, though not
licensing (nor necessarily even commercializing), of variants and other inventions that
might substitute for the core innovation in order to preempt rivals from introducing
competing innovations.56 Firms do not, however, build such patent fences because
individual patents effectively prevent imitation or substitution, but because they do not.

        A second common use of patents which also goes beyond the licensing or
commercialization of the patented invention is observed in complex product industries
such as electronics. This is patenting to become or remain a major competitor (i.e.,
"player") in an industry, often via the amassing of large portfolios. The fact that the same
patents are often used for both blocking and negotiations in such industries suggests that


  Conceivably, the legal costs associated with patents may loom larger for smaller firms due to
lower levels of output over which to spread the associated fixed legal costs.

  Similarly, firms may use blocking patents to make it costly for other firms to conduct R&D in
a broad technological domain, recalling Liebenau's description of the German chemical firms in
the 1890 to 1930 period when they used patents "to build walls around whole research areas."
(cited in Arora [1997]).



                                                                                             25
firms patent not only to protect their own technology, but to hold their rivals hostage by
controlling technology that they need. The threatened sanction is often less the
expectation of exclusion pending the resolution of a lawsuit, but the more certain and
immediate economic harm due to the legal action alone. The ransom demanded by the
firm is either formal access to rival technology realized through liberal cross-licensing, or
at least the ability to do work similar to that of its rivals without being sued. In this
fashion, patents confer the reciprocal access to one another's technologies which enables
firms to steadily improve and expand their product lines and processes--something which
firms must do to be major competitors in complex product industries subject to rapid
technological change. By conferring nonexclusive access to a market in such settings,57
patents are less an instrument for appropriating rents directly from the firm's own
patented inventions (via their commercialization or licensing), and more an instrument for
appropriating a share of the oligopolistic rents accruing to the new technologies of all
incumbents. How big a share, however, will often be affected by the size and quality of a
firm's patent portfolio which affects the terms of trade between rival technologies and its
own.58

         The threat, often implicit, of infringement suits and countersuits underpins almost
all the uses of patents, whether to force participation in cross-licensing negotiations in
complex product industries, to build patent fences in discrete product industries, or to
protect the ability to license or commercialize a new technology in the drug and other
industries. Since patents themselves are the best countermeasure to the threat of
litigation,59 it is not surprising, therefore, that we observe the prevention of suits to be one


  Under conditions of uncertainty with regard to the success of a firm's own R&D and that of
rivals, the goals of establishing an exclusive right versus a nonexclusive right over an innovation
via blocking patents are not necessarily inconsistent. Indeed, firms may conceivably begin with
a strategy of aggressively blocking with the hope of establishing an exclusive right, and if that
strategy fails, they are then in a position to at least secure nonexciusive access.

58While a number of interviewees in the electronics industry reported that cross-licensing
negotiations often culminated in royalty-free cross-licensing, one did note that now it was more
typical for money to change hands: "You make comparisons of patent portfolios [interviewee
measures spaces with fingers, one twice the other]. You recognize the difference. Even THAT
gap might create multiple millions of dollars in payments from the weaker company to the
stronger. To cancel out the gap, you have to pay. You have 10 good patents, I have 15, you owe
for the 5 good patents. Ten or 15 years ago, the two companies would negotiate a royalty free
cross-license patent peace. But, given the huge size of the business, even a small, delta, gap
creates multimillions of dollars in value."

  An attorney for the now-acquired computer manufacturer, DEC, stated, "Our patents can be a
sword or a shield." (Coy [1993]). Affirming this observation on the basis of extensive
interviews of semiconductor firms, von Hippel [1988] observed that, threatened by an
infringement suit, a firm will typically send "a pound or two" of copies of patents germane to the
business of the potential plaintiff and suggest that it is they who are the real infringers,
culminating in cross-licensing (p. 53).



                                                                                               26
 of the most important uses of patents across all industries, notwithstanding the nature of
 the technology. What is interesting is that patents appear to be used as the basis for either
 threatening or defending against litigation independent of whether they are considered to
 be effective in their more conventional applications. This suggests that patents can be
 used either defensively or offensively even if they are weak or untested. They need only
 confer the right to sue and thus impose the costs of litigation and possible injunctive relief
 on rivals. But presumably the effectiveness of patents in such litigation-intensive
 strategies depends upon the firm's ability to support the requisite legal talent, as
 suggested by our findings that smaller firms are disproportionately dissuaded from
 applying for patents due to the costs of their defense and disproportionately report
 patents to be ineffective. The broad issue posed, however, by the pervasive defensive
 use of patents is whether the social value of patenting is substantially reduced "because it
 requires all to assume the overhead of defensive patenting" (von Hippel [1988, p. 53]).

        Do any of these insights into the reasons for patenting allow us to say anything
 about the surge in patent rates observed since the early 1980's? When combined with
 more qualitative insights drawn from our interviews and other research, we believe they
 do.6° First, we suspect that the use of patents in litigation-intensive strategies has
 increased over time. Although our data cannot show that either the prevention of or the
 prospective filing of suits have increased as motives for patenting during the recent past,
 such an inference is supported by both anecdotal evidence (e.g., Warshofsky [1994],
 Kash and Kingston [2000]) and the fact that patent infringement cases have more than
doubled since the early 1980's (Korman [1998]). Our own data also show that the most
patent intensive firms in complex product industries are patenting with a view toward
blocking rivals to strengthen their positions in cross-licensing negotiations. Suggested by
Hall and Ham's [1999] as well as our own interviews, patent portfolio races have
accelerated as firms have felt increasingly compelled to apply for patents because they
need to protect themselves from being blocked or believe that they need a strong portfolio
to force rivals to cede access to their technologies on more favorable terms. The notion
that a noncooperative strategic interaction of this sort could lead to an accelerating
patenting rate is consistent with the fact that it is now firms in complex product
industries, notably electronics, that are patenting the most in the U.S. Of the ten firms
receiving the most patents in 1998, nine are in the electronics industries.

        What could have set off the growing use of patents for both defensive and
offensive uses, as well as the accelerating patent portfolio races observed in the complex
product industries? The court reforms of the early 1980's may have set the stage. As
suggested by Cohen et al. [1998] and Hall and Ham [1999], the demonstration effects of
the Polaroid vs. Kodak settlement and a number of very visible, successful suits in
electronics suggested the utility of both defensive patenting, as well as that of more
aggressive strategies entailing the use of patent portfolios to garner licensing revenue.
Moreover, the more recent example of IBM's success with aggressive licensing strategies

60
     See Kortumand Lerner [1999] for a more comprehensive consideration of the possible causes
of the patent surge. Their conclusion, which is consistent with ours, is that the major change is
one of management practice, but one might wonder why management practice has changed.


                                                                                               27
 has reinforced this trend. These demonstrations of the offensive and defensive utility of
 patenting may have also interacted with the greater technological competition observed
 both nationally and internationally since 1980, which may in turn have induced firms to
 value intellectual property more highly. This competition could also account for the
 greater use of secrecy as well as patents since the use of either of these appropriability
 mechanisms can be increased at lower cost and more quickly than that of other
 mechanisms such as lead time or the exploitation of complementary capabilities.6'

        Do our findings regarding firms' reasons to patent suggest any public policy
concerns? In particular, to return to a question posed above, do these motives suggest
that patents may be used in ways that may undermine the ultimate purpose of patent law
to advance technology? Some of the more pervasive motives that we have identified
raise concerns. For example, the building of patent fences can be carried to the extreme
noted by Scherer [1980] and others to the point of creating "patent thickets" that foster
broader monopolies than anticipated by patent policy which in turn impede entry and the
innovation that may accompany it. Patent fences may have a similar effect when theyare
developed to the point of walling off entire technology domains (Arora [1997]).
Moreover, patent fences may not only preclude innovations that substitute for some core
innovation but also inventions that may improve upon the original invention (cf. Turner
[1998]), particularly in industries where technology advances cumulatively.

        In complex product industries where both noncooperative strategic patenting
appears to be accelerating and patenting for cross-licensing is common, other policy
concerns are raised. First, we suspect that the patent portfolio races observed in these
industries reflect excessive patenting from a social welfare perspective (as would typify a
Prisoners' Dilemma-like situation), and are thus raising the cost of innovation unduly.62
Moreover, some share of the patenting in these industries may provide little offsetting
social welfare benefit by inducing R&D to begin with. As our data suggest, most firms in
complex product industries do not consider patents, but first mover advantages, secrecy
and the exploitation of complementary capabilities as the key means of protecting their
inventions.




61 One communications equipment manufacturer confinned that it is not costly to implement
secrecy strategies, suggesting, "One advantage of secrecy is it is cheap." Another
communications equipment executive explicitly tied together the growth in his firm's patenting
with a greater emphasis on secrecy when he stated: "Our patent portfolio has increased. Patents
are more important than they were before. We are beginning to recognize that. But, at the same
time, secrecy awareness has increased even more. We are becoming more cognizant of the value
of keeping things like process secret."

62 See also Kash and Kingston [2000] for a similar conclusion based on more qualitative
evidence.



                                                                                            28
         Another policy concern in complex industries is, if access to competitor
technology is essential to being a viable competitor (i.e., "player"), and only incumbents
holding significant patent portfolios can achieve such access, then patenting can again
become a vehicle for impeding entry and the innovation that often accompanies it.63
Unlike the patent thicket case, here the barrier does not protect one firm but a group of
oligopolistic incumbents. An offsetting advantage of such entry restrictions is implied,
however, by the arguments of Merges and Nelson [1990], Scotchmer [1991] and Heller
and Eisenberg [1998] who suggest that as the number of firms holding separately
patented pieces of the same commercializable technology becomes too large,
commercialization may fail due either to a stacking of licensing fees or a breakdown in
negotiations arising from asymmetric subjective valuations of patent rights and associated
transactions costs. Thus, by limiting entry, patent portfolio races may actually help
prevent such breakdowns in negotiations over intellectual property. Patent portfolio races
may offer yet another offsetting social benefit. Such races induce firms to disclose more
of their inventions because failure to do so (through patents) creates the risk of being
excluded from the industry or even from use of one's own inventions. This greater
disclosure increases the extent to which rivals can build on each other's R&D,
presumably accelerating the pace of innovation.TM This effect is also enhanced by the
more liberal cross-licensing that typifies the player strategy.

       Our data do not show the degree to which patent portfolio races distort the nature
of R&D incentives or lead to socially wasteful outcomes, or whether such portfolio races
or patent thickets actually block entry. Nor do they indicate whether fee stacking or the
breakdown of negotiations in complex technology industries have ever undermined the
commercialization of innovation. The data do suggest, however, that the potential for
such outcomes may be more pervasive than previously thought. They also show that

63
   Indeed, our interviews suggest that the cross-licensing practices observed in complex product
industries would tend to discriminate against less patent-rich entrants. Respondents noted that
firms are reluctant to sell their technology, but are willing to trade it only to firms that have
valuable technology (intellectual property) to use as currency.

   Another issue is the effect of patenting on the kind of R&D firms will undertake in the
numerous instances where firms are patenting largely for defensive purposes, or simply to
increase the sizes of their patent portfolios. For example, would the latter strategy induce firms
to pursue more incremental innovation than otherwise?

   The prominence of fear of disclosure as a reason to avoid patenting an invention suggests that
respondents see this risk to patenting. And yet, we see they still feel compelled to patent the bulk
of their innovations in complex product industries to maintain their player status.

  The use of patents as bargaining chips to gain access to rival's technologies also suggests that
patents can be transformed from being primarily a mechanism for appropriation into a vehicle
for enhancing the firm's technological opportunities. Firms with large patent portfolios can gain
access to the accumulated knowledge of a large number of other finns, and by forcing liberal
cross-licensing agreements, enhance the available technological opportunities.



                                                                                                 29
patents are used in substantially different ways across different technologies, suggesting
that policy and court decisions affecting the breadth of claims, applicable nonobviousness
standards, likelihood of being upheld in court and other features of patents will likely
have different impacts on invention and competition in different industries.


REFERENCES

Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (1997), Judicial Business of the United States
     Courts, Washington, D.C.
Arora, A. (1997), "Patents, licensing, and market structure in chemicals," Research Policy,
     26: 391-403.
Cohen, W.M., Goto, A., Nagata, A., Nelson, R.R. and Walsh, J. (1998), "R&D spillovers,
     patents and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United States", Carnegie
     Mellon University, working paper.
Cohen, W.M. and Levin, R.C., (1989) "Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market
     Structure," in R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, ed., Handbook of Industrial
     Organization, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Cohen, W.M., Nelson, R.R. and Walsh, J. (1997) "Appropnability conditions and why
     firms patent and why they do not in the U.S. manufacturing sector," Carnegie Mellon
     University, working paper.
Wesley M. Cohen and John Walsh, "R&D Spillovers, Appropriability and R&D
Intensity:
   a Survey Based Approach," Carnegie Mellon University, June, 1998.
Coy, Peter (1993) "The global patent race picks up," Business Week, Aug. 9, 1993, p. 57.
Diliman, D.A. (1978) Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method, New
    York: Wiley-Interscience.
Griliches, Z. (1992) "The Search for R&D Spillovers," Scandinavian Journal of
    Economics, Vol 94, No. 3, Supplement, pp. 529-547.
Hall, B. and Ham, R.M. (1998) "The patent paradox revisited: Firm strategy and
    patenting in the U.S. semiconductor industry," NBER Conference on Patent System
    and Innovation, Jan. 8, 9, Santa Barbara, 1999, Working Paper.
Heller, M. and Eisenberg, R. (1998) "Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons
    in Biomedical Research", Science, Vol 28, May 1St, pp.698-701.
Hounshell, D.A. and Smith, J.K. (1988) Science and Corporate Strategy, Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Kash, D.E. and Kingston, W. (2000), "Patents in a World of Complex Technologies,"
     mimeo, George Mason University.
Korman, R. (1998) "Lo! Here come the technology patents. Lo! Here come the
    lawsuits." New York Times, December 27, 1998, BU:4.
Kortum, S. and Lerner, J. (1999) "What is behind the recent surge in patenting?,"
    Research Policy, 28:1-22.
Kusonaki, K., Nonaka, I., and A. Nagata. (1998) "Organizational capabilities in product
    development of Japanese firms." Organization Science 9:699-718.
Lanjouw, J.O. and Lerner, J. (1997) 'The enforcement of intellectual property rights: A
    survey of the empirical literature,' NBER, Working Paper 6296.


                                                                                       30
Lemer, J. (1994a) "Patenting in the shadow of competitors", Journal of Law and
   Economics, 38: 463-496.
Lerner, J. (1994b) 'The importance of trade secrecy,' Harvard Business School, Division
    of Research, working paper 95-043,
Levin, R., Kievorick, A., Nelson, R.R., and Winter, S.G. (1987) "Appropriating the
   returns from industrial R&D", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 783-820.
Mansfield, E. (1986) "Patents and innovation: An empirical study," Management Science,
    32:173-181.
 Mansfield, E., Schwartz, M. and Wagner, S. (1981) "Imitation costs and patents: An
    empirical study," Economic Journal, 91:907-918.
Merges, R.P. and Nelson, R.R. (1990) "On the Complex Economics of Patent Scope",
    Columbia Law Review, 90: 839-9 16.
Merz, J. and Pace, R. (1994) "Trends in patent litigation: the apparent influence of
    strengthened patents attributable to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit",
   Journal of the Patent and Trademark Office Society, v. 76.
National Science Board (1998) Science and Engineering Indicators 1998, Washington,
   D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Rivette, K.G. and Kline, D. (2000) Rembrandts in the Attic: Unlocking the Hidden Value
     of Patents, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Scherer, F.M. (1980) Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, Chicago:
   Rand McNally.
Scherer, F.M., et al. (1959) Patents and the Corporation. 2nd edn. Boston, privately
   published.
Scotchmer, S. (1991), "Standing on the shoulders of giants: cumulative research and
   patent law," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 5, pp. 29-41.
Smith-Doerr, Laurel, Jason Owen-Smith, Kenneth W. Koput and Walter W. Powell.
   Forthcoming, "Networks and knowledge production: collaboration and patenting in
   biotechnology." Pp 331-349 (Ch. 20) in R. Leenders and S. Gabbay, eds., Corporate
   and Social Capital, New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers
Taylor, C.T. and Silberston, Z.A. (1973) The Economic Impact Of The Patent System: A
   Study Of The British Experience. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Teece, D.J. (1986) "Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
   collaboration, licensing and public policy," Research Policy, Vol 15, pp. 286-305.
Turner, Julie S. [1998] "The nonmanufacturing patent owner: Toward a Theory of
   Efficient Infringement," California Law Review, Vol. 86, No. 1.
von Hippel, Eric [1988], The Sources of Innovation, New York: Oxford University Press.
Warshofsky, F. (1994) The Patent Wars, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Yoder, S.K. (1994) "How H-P used tactics of the Japanese to beat them at their game,"
   Wall Street Journal, Sept. 8, 1994, pp. 1, A9.




                                                                                       31
__________________________                                                      TABLE 1
                                             Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for Product Innovations:
                                       Mean Percentage of Product Innovations for which Mechanism Considered Effective'
                                                                                                        Other          Lead          Complementary    Complementary
Industry                                                       N          Secrecy         Patents       Legal          Time               Sales/Svc       Mfg.
                                                                                                              Mean percentage of innovations

 1500:Food                                                     89          58.54         18.26        21.18          53.37                39.83         51.18
 1700:Textiles                                                 23          63.70         20.00        25.87          58.26                55.22         58.26
 2100:Paper                                                    31          55.00         36.94        26.45          47.10                40.00         39.84
 2200:PrintingIPublishing                                      12          32.50         12.08        21.67          48.33                66.25         60.42
2320:Petroleum                                                  15         62.00         33.33         6.33          48.67                40.33         35.67
2400:Chemicals, nec                                            65          52.77         37.46        21.62          48.62                44.92         41.31
2411:BasicChemicals                                            35          48.00         38.86        11.57          38.29                45.86         44.71
2413:Plastic Resins                                            27          55.93         32.96        18.15          38.33                44.63         46.11
2423:Drugs                                                     49          53.57         50.20        20.82          50.10                33.37         49.39
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                                   29          70.69         39.66        25.52          55.52                55.17         48.97
2500:RubberfPlastic                                            35          56.86         32.71        10.14          40.86                34.29         37.71
2600:Mineral Products                                          18          46.11         21.11        12.22          39.72                37.78         40.00
2610:Glass                                                       6         46.67         30.83        11.67          50.00                62.50         70.00
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                                    10          45.00         30.00        17.50          38.00                45.50         40.00
2700:Metal, nec                                                  6         65.83         20.00         5.00          50.83                58.33         61.67
2710:Steel                                                     10          37.00         22.00        11.50          61.50                34.50         42.00
2800:Metal Products                                            44          43.07         39.43        18.18          48.18                37.05         40.11
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec                            74          49.19         38.78        20.88          52.23               41.15         43.65
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec                            64          45.08        48.83         23.05          59.69               46.33          51.09
2922:Machine Tools                                             10          61.50        36.00          9.00          61.00               43.00          34.50
3010:Computers                                                 25          44.20        41.00         27.20          61.40               40.20          38.00
3100:Electrical Equipment                                      22          39.09        34.55         15.00          33.41               32.27          31.82
3110:Motor/Generator                                           22          50.91        25.23         19.09         48.86                47.27         45.23
3210:Electronic Components                                     26          34.04        21.35        20.19          45.58                50.00         51.15
321 1:Semiconductors and Related Equipment                     18          60.00        26.67        22.50           53.33               42.22         47.50
3220:Communications Equipment                                  34          47.21        25.74        20.15          65.59                42.06         41.18
3230:TVIRadio                                                   8          50.00        38.75        35.63          53.75                24.38         38.75
3311:Medical Equipment                                         67          50.97        54.70        29.03          58.06                52.31         49.25
3312:Precision Instruments                                     35          47.29        25.86        20.86          54.14                49.57         45.57
33 14:Search/Navigational Equipment                            38          48.95        28.68        24.08          46.84                32.89         40.53
3410:Car/Truck                                                  9          42.22        38.89        19.44          65.56                41.67         42.22
3430:Autoparts                                                30           50.83        44.35         15.65         64.35                44.84         53.06
3530:Aerospace                                                48          55.10         32.92         16.15         58.02                34.58         46.88
3600:Other Manufacturing                                      84          49.29         33.81        26.61          63.51                42.56          45.30
ALL                                                         1118          51.00         34.83        20.71           52.76               42.74         45.61
                                                            (s.e.)        (0.96)        (0.94)       (0.73)         (0.92)               (0.91)        (0.88)
 Response categories were: less than 10%, 10-40%, 41-60%, 61-90%, and greater than 90%. Means were computed using category midpoints.
                                                                               TABLE 2
                                            Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for Process Innovations:
                                      Mean Percentage of Process Innovations for which Mechanism Considered Effective'
                                                                                                     Other          Lead        Complementary      Complementary
Industry                                                N         Secrecy           Patents           Legal         Time               Sales/Svc        Mfg.
                                                                                                       Mean percentage of innovation

1500:Food                                               89            55.84            16.40        15.00         41.91            29.78             46.52
1700:Textiles                                           23            60.65           25.22         24.35         48.70            44.35             53.91
2100:Paper                                              31            58.87           27.58         19.35         34.52            20.ó5             34.03
2200:Printing/Publishing                                11            20.45            8.64         10.91         33.64            50.91             63.64
2320:Petroleum                                          15            57.33           3ó.67          6.33         32.00            27.o7             31.33
2400:Chemicals, nec                                    63             53.65           20.40         12.86         27.14            28.41             42.30
241l:BasicChemicals                                    35             58.43           29.71         11.71         25.71            26.71             40.14
2413:PlasticResins                                      27            62.96           21.30          7.22         23.70            25.19             34.26
2423:Drugs                                             48             68.13           36.15         16.04         35.52            25.21             44.17
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                            28            76.25           27.32         15.71         33.93            40.36             54.46
2500:Rubber/Plastic                                     35            59.14           19.86         11.43         35.86            23.00             37.43
2600:Mineral Products                                   18           48.89            23.33         11.11         28.61            27.50             46.94
2610:Glass                                               6           58.33            30.83         18.33         31.67            42.50             50.00
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                             10           54.00            18.50         15.50         26.50            31.50             33.50
2700:Metal,nec                                           6           65.83            31.67         12.50         66.67            46.67             50.00
27l0:Steel                                              10           41.00            15.50         11.50         42.00            25.00             42.00
2800:Metal Products                                    42            46.19            22.50         15.36         39.05            35.36             47.38
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec                    69            37.54            23.62         16.30         34.86            28.33             40.00
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec                    63            41.83            28.57         16.03         44.92            35.48             41.27
2922:Machine Tools                                      10           48.00            18.00          9.50         43.00            34.00             39.00
3010:Computers                                         20            42.50            30.25         16.75         39.75            23.50             35.50
3 l00:Electrical Equipment                             22             31 .59          19.09          6.82         19.09            11.82             18.86
3110:Motor/Generator                                   21            42.62            22.14         17.86         44.52            31.67             39.29
3210:Electronic Components                             2ó            46.54            15.19         15.00         42.69            42.31             55.77
321 l:Semiconductors and Related Equipment              18           57.50            23.33          8.33         47.78            32.22             42.50
3220:Communications Equipment                          33            35.30            14.70        13.94          43.03            33.64             40.61
3230:TV/Radio                                           8            47.50            18,75        18.75          38.75            32.50             46.88
3311:Medical Equipment                                 66            49,24            34.02        22.27          45.15            32.12             49.55
3312:Precision Instruments                             31            43.55            16.77         15.81         35.48            32.74             40.81
3314:Search/Navigational Equipment                     37            43.65            13.24        16.35          39.05            31.89             42.97
3410:Car/Truck                                          9            34.44            21.67        17.22          34.44            26.o7             41.11
3430:Autoparts                                         31            56.45            24.35        15.16          50.16            36.94             55.97
3530:Aerospace                                         47            49.26            21.38        13.30          42.23            28.40             44.89
3600:Other Manufacturing                               79            51.65            23.42        20.76          44.56            31.39             38.29
ALL                                                  1087            50.59            23.30         15.39         38.43            30.73             43.00
                                                    (s.e.)           (1.03)           (0.83)       (0.63)         (0.96)           (0.88)            (0.95)
 Response categories were: less than 10%, 10-40%, 41-60%, 61-90%, and greater tha n 90%. Means wcrc computed using category midpoints.
                                    TABLE3
 Factor Analysis of Industry Mean Scores on Appropriability Mechanisms for Product
                              and Process Innovations

Mechanism                              Factor 1         Factor 2 Factor 3
                               Capabilities/First Mover Patents Secrecy
Complementary Sales/Svc. (Pro            0.813          -0.108     0.120
Complementary Mfg. (Product)            0.781           -0.014     0.194
Complementary Sales/Svc. (Pro           0.753            0.055     0.035
Complementary Mfg. (Process)            0.677            0.025     0.160
First Mover (Product)                   0.604            0.322     -0.086
First Mover (Process)                   0.602            0.232     0,084
Other Legal (Process)                   0.580            0.528     0.000
Patent (Process)                        -0.012           0.760     0.241
Patent (Product)                        -0.050           0.678      0.049
Other Legal (Product)                   0.402            0.620     -0.092
Secrecy (Process)                       0.058            0.149     0.797
Secrecy (Product)                       0.189            0.014     0.749
Variance Explained                      29.7%           15.8%      11.3%
________                    TABLE_4
  Effectiveness Rankings of Appropriability Mechanisms in the
           1983 Yale Survey for the 33 Comparison Industries
                                   Number of Industries
                                   Ranking Mechanism as:
Mechanism                    1st      2nd    3rd      4th
   Product Innovation
  Patents                     4         3     17       9
  Secrecy                     0         0     11      22
  Lead Time                  14        14      5       0
  Sales & Service            16        16      1       0

   Process Innovation
  Patents                     2         4      3      24
  Secrecy                     2        10     19       2
  Lead Time                  26         5      2       0
  Sales & Service             4        16     7        6


                            1' A B L E 5
     Effectiveness Rankings of Appropriability Mechanisms in the
    1994 Carnegie Mellon Survey for the 33 Comparison Industries
                                      Number of Industries
                                     Ranking Mechanism as:
Mechanism                   1st      2nd     3rd     4th        5th
   Product Innovation
  Secrecy                    13       11      2        5            2
  Patents                     7        5      7       4            10
  LeadTime                   10        8      6       7             2
  Sales & Service             4        4      7      10             8
  Manufacturing               3        3     14       7            6

   Process Innovation
  Secrecy                   21        10      1        1           0
  Patents                     1        5      3       8            16
  LeadTime                    3        7     16       4            3
  Sales & Service             0        0      3      19         11
  Manufacturing              10       12     10       1            0
Table 6- PRODUCT INNOVATIONS
Dependent Variable: Log-odds-ratio of the propensity to patent product innovations

                                       Specification I   Specification II
Variable                            Estimate St. Error stimate St. Error
Intercept                             -2.414      0.251 -1.004 *     0.571
Patent                                 0.043      0.006 0.044        0.007
Secrecy                                                 -0.005       0.007
First Mover                                               -0.0 15 *   0.009
Complementary Sales/Service                               -0.009      0.009
Complementary Manufacturing                                0.004      0.011
Product Complexity                                        -0.004      0.007
R2                                      0.45                0.54
N. of Industries                          61                  61




Table 7- PROCESS INNOVATIONS
Dependent Variable: Log-odds-ratio of the propensity to patent process innovations

                                       Specification I     Specification II
Variable                            Estimate   St. Error stimate St. Error
Intercept                             -2.792      0.364 -2.061         0.579
Patent                                 0.033      0.012   0.034 '"    0.013
Secrecy                                                   -0.00 1     0.009
First Mover                                               -0.006      0.012
Complementary Sales/Service                               -0.038      0.014
Complementary Manufacturing                                0.012      0.014
Product Complexity                                         0.006      0.0 13
R2                                      0.11                0.27
N. of Industries                          61                  61

NOTES:
1) *: Significant at 1O%;**: Significant at 5%; ***: Significant at 1%.
                                                                                TABLE8
                                                     Reasons to Patent Product Innovations: Percent of Respondents by Reason
                                                                Measure         Licensing      For Use in      Prevent       Prevent                   Enhance
Industry                                               N'         Perf.         Revenue         Negots.         Suits        Copying       Blocking   Reputation
                                                                                                  Percentage of Industry Respondents

1500:Food                                               45           4.44         15.56          33.33            46.67            93.33      73.33       28.89
1700:Textiles                                           10          20.00         20.00          40.00            80.00           100.00      90.00       60.00
2100:Paper                                              22           9.09         27.27          40.91            40.91           100.00      90.91       27.27
2200:PrintingfPublishing                                 5           0.00         40.00          40.00            40.00            80,00      60.00       60.00
2320:Petroleum                                          10          10.00         60.00          60.00            80.00           100.00      90.00       60(X)
2400:Chemicals, nec                                     44           4.55         36.36          34.09            56.82           100.00      86.36       43.18
2411:Basic Chemicals                                    25           0.00         12.50          29.17            33.33           100.00      87.50       45.83
2413:Plastic Resins                                     21           4.76         23.81          28.57            47.62           100.00      85.71       38.10
2423:Drugs                                              36          13.89         44.44          61.11            66.67           100.00      97.22       69.44
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                            21           9.52         19.05          47.62            38.10            95.24     100.00       47.62
2500:Rubber/Plastic                                     23           0.00         26.09          30.43            65.22           100.00      78.26       47.83
2600:Mineral Products                                    7          14.29         28.57          42.86            71.43            85.71      85.71       57.14
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                              5         40.00          20.00          40.00            80.00           100.00     100.00       80.00
2700:Metal, nec                                          4          OCX)          25.00          25.00            25.00            75(X)      25.00        0.00
2710:Steel                                               6         16.67          50.00          83.33            83.33            83.33     100.00       50.00
2800:Metal Products                                    35           5.71          42.86          37.14            57.14            97.14      82.86       51.43
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec                    54           7.41          12.96          33.33            50.00            98.15      79.63       55.56
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec                    59           1.69          20.34          40.68            54.24            94.92      72.88       45.76
2922:Machine Tools                                      8          12.50          12.50          50.00            62.50           100.00     100.00       50.00
3010:Computers                                         20           0.00          30.00          80.00            90.00            85.00      65.00       40.00
3100:Electrical Equipment                               14          0.00          14.29          42.86            57.14            92.86      78.57       21.43
3110:Motor/Generator                                     9         11.11          44.44                           55.56           100.00      77.78
                                                                                                 55.56                                                    22.22
3210:Electronic Components                              12          0.00          33.33          58.33            75.00            91.67      75.00       50.00
3211   Semiconductors and Related Equipment             12          0.00          41 .67         66.67            66.67            91.67      75.00       33.33
3220:Communications Equipment                           19         10.53          47.37          78.95            73.68            84.21      78.95       63.16
3230:TVfRadio                                           5          20.00         100.00         100.00           100.00           100(X)      80.00       80.00
3311:Medical Equipment                                 60           5.00          21.67         58.33             65.00            95.00      93.33       56.67
3312:Precision Instruments                             22           0.00           4.55         54.55             63.64            95.45      81.82       54.55
3314:Search/Navigational Equipment                     31           3.23          38.71         58.06             45.16            90.32      74.19       51.61
3410:Car/Truck                                          8          25.00          37.50         75.00             62.50           100.00      37.50       50.00
3430:Autoparts                                         23           4.35          17.39         65.22             78,26            95.65      82.61       56.52
3530:Aerospace                                         37           5.41          56.76         59.46             67.57            97.30      70.27       45.95
3600:Other Manufacturing                               53           3.77          22.64         35.85             56.60            98.11      86.79       43.40
ALL                                                   765           5.75          28.27         47.38             58.77            95.81      81.81      47.91
                                                     (s.e.)       (0.84)         (1.63)         (1.81)           (1.78)           (0.73)     (1.40)      (1.81)

 All industries with fewer than four observations deleted.
                                                                                  TABLE 9
                                                       Reasons to Patent Process Innovations: Percent of Respondents by Reason
                                                                Measure         Licensing       For Use in      Prevent        Prevent                   Enhance
 Industry                                               N'        Perf.          Revenue         Negots.          Suits        Copying       Blocking   Reputation
                                                                                                   Percentage of Industry Respondents

 1500:Food                                  44                      4.55           18.18           34.09           43.18             84.09      70.45        25.00
 1700 Textiles                               7                     14.29           28.57           42.86           85.71            100.00     100.00        42.86
 2100:Paper                                 23                      4.35           34.78           47.83            39.13            86.96      78.26        17.39
 2200:Printing/Publishing                    4                      0.00           25.00           50.00            25.00            75.00      50.00        50.00
 2320:Petroleum                             10                      0.00           60.00           70.00            70.00            80.00      80.00        50.00
 2400:Chemicals, nec                        39                      5.13           23.08           17.95           48.72             78.95      55.26        23.68
 2411:Basic Chemicals                       25                      0.00           16.00           24,00            3o.00            96.00      88.00       44.00
 2413:Plastic Resins                        18                      5.56           22.22           22.22           33.33             94.44      88.89       44.44
 2423:Drugs                                33                      18.18           33.33          48.48            54.55             87.88      81.82       54.55
 2429:MiscellaneousChemjcals                19                      5.26           21.05          31.58            36.84             68.42      73.68       36.84
 2500:Rubber/Plastjc                        17                      0.00           12.50          25.00            56.25             75.00      75.00       31.25
 2600:Mineral Products                       6                      0.00           16.67          33.33            83.33           100.00      100.00       50.00
 2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                 5                     40.00          40.00           20.00            60.00             80.00      80.00       60.00
2700:Metal, nec                              4                      0.00          25.00           75.00            50.00           100.00       75.00       50.00
2710:Steel                                   6                      16.67         50.00           50.00            50.00            50.00       66.67       16.67
2800:Metal Products                        32                       3.13          28.13           40.63            37.50            68.75       50.00       37.50
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec        42                       2.38          14.29           26.19            30.95            61.90       40.48       30.95
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec        52                       0.00          19.23           30.77            38.46            71.15       53.85       34.62
2922:Machine Tools                           8                     12.50          12.50           37.50            50.00            62.50       62.50       12.50
3010:Computers                             17                       0.00          35.29           70.59            88.24            70.59       58.82       23.53
3100 Electrical Equipment                  14                       0.00           7.14             7.14           14.29            50.00       35.71         7.14
3110:Motor/Generator                         6                     16.67          33.33           33.33            66.67            83.33       66.67       16.67
3210:Electronic Components                 12                       0.00          25.00           41.67            41.67            83.33       58.33       33.33
3211 :Semiconductors and Related Equipment 12                       0.00          41.67           50.00            58.33            91.67       58.33       25.00
3220:Communications Equipment              17                       5.88          23.53           52.94            52.94            76.47       52.94       35.29
3230:TV/Radio                               4                      25.00         100.00          100.00           100.00           100.00       75.00       50.00
3311:Medical Equipment                     54                       5.56           14.81          38.89            46.30            79.63       68.52       38.89
3312:Precision Instruments                 16                       6.25            6.25          31.25            50.00            68.75       62.50       31.25
3314:Search/Navigational Equipment         24                       4.17           20.83          37.50            37.50            62.50       58.33       29.17
3410:Car/Truck                              8                      25.00           25.00          62.50            50.00            87.50       37.50       37.50
3430:Autoparts                             21                       0.00            5.00          45.00            50.00            70.00       60.00       45.00
3530:Aerospace                             35                       8.57          50.00           44,12            52.94            82.35       58.82       35.29
3600:Other Manufacturing                  40                        2.50           12.50          30.00            50.00            82.50      60.00       35.00
 ALL                                     674                        5.04          23.25           36.96           46.50             77.61      63.58        34.03
                                        (s.e.)                    (0.84)          (1.63)         (1.86)           (1.93)           (1.61)      (1.86)      (1.83)
 All industries with fewer th an four observations deleted.
                                                 TABLE 10
                                      Patenting Strategies: Product Patents
Industry                                              N       Cross Licensing                   Fences                 Player
                                                                         Weighted percentage of industry respondents
l500:Food                                              45         38.45                          47.81                  36.84
1700:Textiles                                          10          4.67                          92.52                   4,67
2100:Paper                                             22         20.75                          67.07                  20.75
2200:PrintinglPublishing                                  5       30.43                         21 .74                  30.43
2320:Petroleum                                         10          0.86                          0.50                    0.86
2400:Chemicals, nec                                    44          4.09                         53.77                    4,09
241 1:Basic Chemicals                                  24         14.57                         64.57                   14.57
2413:Plastic Resins                                    21          2.83                         53.72                    2.83
2423:Drugs                                             36          8.29                         22.81                    8.29
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                           21         15.44                         78.80                   15.44
2500:Rubber/Plastic                                    23          5.43                         79.35                    4.89
2600:Mineral Products                                   7          2.63                         97.37                    0.00
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                               5       28.57                         39.68                   28.57
2700:Metal, nec                                           4        0.00                         47.62                    0.00
2710:Steel                                                6      17.86                          11.90                   17.86
2800:Metal Products                                    35         7.38                          30.63                    7.38
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec                    54        82.31                           7.78                   82.31
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec                    59        61 .90                         21.88                   57.55
2922:Machine Tools                                      8        80.00                          12.86                   80.00
3010:Computers                                         20        14.43                           0.00                    4.18
3100:Electrical Equipment                              14        20.96                          52.10                   19.76
31 lO:Motor/Generator                                     9       4,94                           2.47                    4.94
3210:Electronic Components                             12        46.92                           8.46                   44.62
321 1:Semiconductors and Related Equipment             12        56.49                            1.81                  56.49
3220:Communications Equipment                          19        34.50                           3.79                   34.50
3230:TV/Radio                                           5         0.00                           0.00                    0.00
331 l:Medical Equipment                                60        63.81                          25,46                   58.41
33l2:Precision Instruments                             22        54.59                          38.78                   49.49
3314:Search/Navigational Equipment                     31        70.13                           9.37                   69.49
3410:Car/l'ruck                                          8       98.09                           0.53                    0.00
3430:Autoparts                                          23       68.72                           10.34                  67.52
3530:Aerospace                                          37       11.62                           16.39                   9.02
3600:Other Manufacturing                                53       24.15                          47.21                   23.61
ALL                                                   764        33.51                           27.59                  28.24
                                                 (s.e.)          (1.71)                         (1.62)                 (1.63)
                                        TABLE 11
                           Patenting Strategies: Process Patents
Industry                                       N Cross Licensing           Fences            Player
                                                       Weighted percentage of industry respondents
I 500:Food                                     44      8.25                 75.99              6.63
1700:Textiles                                   7      2.43                 57.28              2.43
2100:Paper                                     23     25.50                 53.15             15.51
2200: Printing/Publishing                       4     45.45                  0.00             45.45
2320:Petroleum                                 10     20.04                  0.00             20.04
2400:Chemicals, nec                            39      3.51                 58.39              2.08
2411 Basic Chemicals                           25     10.83                 79.43              7.38
24l3:Plastic Resins                            18       1.21                61.79              1.21
2423: Drugs                                    33      8.73                 27.38              7.58
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                   19     15.00                 39.30             15.00
2500:Rubber/Plastic                            16      5.56                 83.33              5.56
2600: Mineral Products                          o      o.oo                100.00              0.00
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                     5      0.00                 66.67             0.00
2700:Metal, nec                                 4     65.00                  5.00            65.00
2710:Steel                                      o     14.29                 11.90            14.29
2800: Metal Products                           32     18.97                 16.48            18.20
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec           42      54.12                 29.76            54.12
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec           52      61.26                 14.62             3.42
2922:Machine Tools                              8     51.43                  7.14            51.43
301 0:Computers                                17      4,58                  2.08             3.33
3 I00:Electrical Equipment                     14      0.00                 25.75             0.00
31 lO:Motor/Generator                           o     19.61                  9.80             19.61
32 l0:Electronic Components                    12     46.92                  6.15            30.77
3211:Semiconductors and Related Equipment      12     51.60                  2.09            51.60
3220:Communications Equipment                  17     32.03                  3.00            31.33
3230:TV/Radio                                  4       0.00                 0.00              0.00
3311 Medical Equipment                        54      48.05                23.65             42.24
33 12:Precision Instruments                   16      36.00                26.86             36.00
33 14:Search/Navigational Equipment           24      52.62                11.19             52.62
341 0:Car/Truck                                 8     98.09                 0.53               0.00
3430:Autoparts                                20      57.23                17.81             56.20
3530:Aerospace                                34       0.09                16.99              3.42
3600:Other Manufacturing                      40      23.93                38.22             21.93
ALL                                          671      28.05                29.16             20.24
                                            (se.)    (1.74)                (1.76)            (1.55)
                                    Figure 1
                 Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for
                              Product Innovations
       Patents                                    34.8 (0.94)


   Other Legal                      20.7 (0.73)


      Secrecy

    Lead Time                                                     52.8 (0.92)

Complementary
 Sales/Service                                           42.7 (0.91)

Complementary
                                                           45.6 (0.91)
 Manufacturing

                 0      10     20        30         40       50        60       70   80   90   100
                     Mean % of Product Innovations for which Mechanism Considered Effective
                                   (N=1 118, standard errors in parentheses)
                                        Figure 2
                     Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for
                                  Process Innovations

       Patents                !          23.3 (0.83)


   Other Legal                    15.4 (0.63)


      Secrecy                                                        50.6 (1.03)

    Lead Time                                           38.4 (0.96)

Complementary                                       7
 Sales/Service

Complementary                                              43 0 0 95
 Manufacturing   •
                          I                     I                I

                 0       10        20     30      40      50       60      70    80      90   100
                              Mean % of Process for which Mechanism Considered Effective
                                       (N=1 087, standard errors in parentheses)
                                        Figure 3
                     Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for
                     Product Innovations for Large Firm Subsample
       Patents                                !4l.5 (1.69)
      Secrecy                                                   51.0 (1.74)


    Lead Time                                                   50.1 (1.70)


Complementary r                                       411 (1 66
Sales/Service

Complementary
                                                        43.9 (1.62)
 Manufacturing
                 •
                                  I       I                                   I    I
                                                  I         I          I



                 0        10     20      30      40        50         60      70   80   90      100
                       Mean % of Product Innovations for which Mechanism Considered Effective
                                      (N=321, standard errors in parentheses)
                                  Figure 4
         Eftectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms for Process
                  Innovations for Large Firm Subsample
       Patents i                     26.8 (1.60)



      Secrecy                                              53.2 (1.82)



    Lead Time                                36.7 (1.65)


Complementary
Sales/Service __________________ 27 1 (1 57

Complementary
                                                   43.8 (1.71)
Manufacturing
                —

                               I      I        I       I



                0   10        20     30      40      50       60     70    80      90   100
                         Mean % of Process for which Mechanism Considered Effective
                                   (N=316, standard errors in parentheses)
                                              Figure 5
                                     For Unpatented Innovations,
                                       Reasons Not to Patent
      Demon. Of Novelty                                                 154.8 (1.52)


              Disclosure              :           .   .        _r] 46.7 (1.52)


        Application Cost                         T136.7 (1.47)

           Defense Cost          '
                                           '25.3 (1.33)

Ease of Inventing Around                                                         ] 65.3 (1.45)
                                                          I         I                 I

                           0         10   20     30       40       50      60        70     80   90   100
                               % of Respondents by Reason (N=1 073, standard errors in parentheses)
                                   Figure 6
                  For Unpatented Innovations, Most Important
                           Reasons Not to Patent

      Demon, Of Novelty TT9 32.1 (1.46)

              Disclosure                           124.3 (1.34)


        Application Cost                           (1.14)


          Defense Cost           3.2 (0.55)


Ease of Inventing Around                            24.6 (1.35)
                           •
                                     I        I         I         I



                           0        10        20       30     40      50   60   70   80     90     100
                               % of Respondents by Reason (N=1 01 9, standard errors in parentheses)
                                      Figure 7
                        Reasons to Patent Product Innovations
Measure Performance            5.8 (0.84)


  Licensing Revenue                             28.3 (1.63)


   For Use in Negots.       ___________________________            (1.81)


        Prevent Suits _____________________________________ 58.8 (1.78)


    Prevent Copying                                                               95.8(0.7)
            Blocking ,                                                                81.8 (1.40)


 Enhance Reputation :rT:                                      47.9 (1.81)
                                 I          I           I                   I




                        0       10      20      30     40     50      60    70   80       90        100
                             % of Respondents by Reason (N=765, standard errors in parentheses)
                                         Figure 8
                           Reasons to Patent Process Innovations
Measure Performance          5.0 (0.84)


  Licensing Revenue                       ] 23.3 (1.63)

  For Use in Negots.                                      37.0 (1.86)


       Prevent Suits W39 46.5 (1.93)
    Prevent Copying                                                                    (1.61)


           Blocking .__________________________________________ 63.6 (1.86)


 Enhance Reputation                                  34.0 (1.83)
                                I
                       —

                                                 I         I       I         I             I



                       0       10         20    30        40      50    60   70   80      90     100
                            % of Respondents by Reason (N=674, standard errors in parentheses)
                                                         TABLE Al
                              Patenting Activity by Industry: In the Last Three Years, Percent of R&D

                                                                                          Mean' %                Mean' %
Industry                                           N       % Applying          N          Product         N      Process
1500:Food                                          87         52.87          78.00          14.64        74.00   15.21
1700:Textiles                                      23         43.48          21.00           9.49        18.00    6.79
2100:Paper                                         31         77.42          23.00          59.19        20.00   47.99
2200:PrintingIPublishing                           12         41.67          12.00          44.37        12.00   19.96
2320:Petroleum                                     15         73.33          12.00          37.74        10.00   62.28
2400:Chemicals, nec                                64         68.75          50.00          68.90        44.00   61.49
241 l:Basic Chemicals                              35         77.14          26.00          51.28        23.00   26.38
2413:Plastic Resins                                25         76.00          20.00          24.39        20.00   35.17
2423:Drugs                                         49         73.47          35.00          95.50        29.00   41.85
2429:Miscellaneous Chemicals                       29         72.41          21.00          57.74        16.00   15.75
2500:RubberfPlastic                                34         64.71          29.00          39.80        26.00   20.09
2600:Mineral Products                              18         38.89          16.00          79.25        17.00   53.76
2610:Glass                                          6         50.00           6.00           5.83         4.00    2.16
2695:Concrete, Cement, Lime                        10         50.00            8.00         42.11         8.00   23.80
2700:Metal, nec                                     7         71.43           5.00           2.97         4.00   37.38
2710:Steel                                         11         54.55           7.00           4.46         7.00    2.68
2800:Metal Products                                44         77.27          35.00          48.78        28.00   26.55
2910:General Purpose Machinery, nec                74         74.32          60.00          45.50        49.00   27.65
2920:Special Purpose Machinery, nec                63         92.06          47.00          38.51        38.00    9.84
2922:Machine Tools                                 II         72.73           9.00          29.07         8.00    3.38
3010:Computers                                     25         80.00          19.00          38.82        16.00   26.10
3100:Electrical Equipment                          21         61.90          18.00          59.16        17.00   18.65
31 10:Motor/Generator                              22         40.91          21.00          29.20        17.00    3.14
3210:Electronic Components                         26         46.15          23.00          34.15        20.00    8.46
321 1:Semiconductors and Related Equipment         17         64.71          14.00          48.51        12.00   20.60
3220:Communications Equipment                      32         59.38          29.00          59.58        25.00   48.20
3230:1'V/Radio                                      8         62.50           7.00          60.93         6.00    0.00
331 l:Medical Equipment                            66         89.39          51.00          66.80        42.00   31.16
3312:Precision Instruments                         33         69.70          27.00          40.01        24.00   23.04
33 14:SearchlNavigational Equipment                37         86.49          32.00          50.24        24.00   24.43
3410:Car/Truck                                      9         88.89           8.00          48.63         5.00   19.62
3430:Autoparts                                     31         77.42          26.00          53.13        19.00   16.12
3530:Aerospace                                    49          77.55          42.00          50.81        37.00   35.66
3600:Other Manufacturing                           85         64.71          72.00          37.05        62.00   17.22
ALL                                             1109          69.79         909.00         49.12        781.00   31.43
 Dropped respondents where sum of % Product and % Process = 100, suggesting respondent misunderstood question.
