                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TAX SUBSIDIES FOR HEALTH INSURANCE:
                           EVALUATING THE COSTS AND BENEFITS


                                             Jonathan Gruber


                                          Working Paper 7553
                                  http://www.nber.org/papersIw7553

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Aventie
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




I am grateful to Barrett Kirwan, Robin McKn i ght, and Melissa Schettini for outstanding research assistance,
and to Linda Bilheimer, Gary Claxton, Judy Feder, Sherry 0 lied, Julie James, Jim Mays, Mark Merlis, Mark
Pauly, Diane Rowland and particularly Larry Levitt for helpful comments, and to the Kaiser Family
Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
Tax Subsidies for Health Insurance: Evaluating the Costs and Benefits
Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 7553
February 2000
JELNo. 118, H23

                                           ABSTRACT

       The continued rise in the number of non-elderly Americans without health insurance has led
to considerable interest in tax-based policies to raise the level of insurance coverage. This paper
describes a detailed microsimulation model that has been developed to evaluate such tax-based
polices, and its findings for the impact of polices on government costs and insurance coverage. I find
that while tax subsidies could significantly increase insurance coverage, even very generous tax
policies could not cover more than a sizable minority of the uninsured population. But there are
several design features which can clearly make tax policy more effective: using tax credits rather than
deductions; making credits refundable; and addressing the timing mismatch between when insurance
purchases are made and tax refunds are received. I also document a clear tradeoff between the scope
of tax subsidies and their efficiency.


Jonathan Gruber
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberjmit.edu
        The dramatic rise and high level of uninsurance rates in the U.S., despite an economic

boom that has had only one interruption in 15 years, is striking. In 1987, 14.8% of non-elderly

Americans were without health insurance. Over the next decade, the percentage of the non-

elderly population without insurance coverage grew by nearly 25% to 18.3%, so that in 1997

there were over 43 million uninsured Americans (Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1999).

Particularly troubling is the significant increase in the uninsurance of children in the U.S.; despite

dramatic increases in the expansion of public health insurance through the Medicaid program

since the mid-1980s, the share of children without health insurance has grown by over 10% since

1987.

        These trends have motivated considerable policy discussion at both the Federal and state

levels. At the Federal level, they were one motivation for the ultimately unsuccessful attempt of

the Clinton Administration to promote comprehensive reform of our health care system. The

failure of this attempt has returned the policy focus to incremental reforms. Following the

passage of the Child Health Insurance Program in 1997, most Congressional discussions have

centered on the idea of using the tax system to subsidize the purchase of insurance by

individuals. Tax-based approaches to expanding insurance coverage have a certain intuitive

appeal. They would provide tax equity by providing financial benefits to those purchasing

coverage individually that are now enjoyed only by the self-employed or those with employer-

sponsored coverage. They would also rely on the private insurance system rather than a

government-sponsored program that might carry stigma for some people. And finally, they can

be seen as providing a tax cut rather than creating a more politically controversial new spending

program.
       Yet while the tax equity argument is compelling — especially given the estimated $100

billion that is now spent each year providing federal tax subsidies for the purchase of employer-

sponsored health insurance1 -- the ability of tax subsidies to meaningfully reduce the number of

people uninsured remains uncertain and unproven. Moreover, the spectrum of tax-based

approaches that have been proposed either formally or informally is quite large, ranging from

deductibility of insurance costs for individuals to refundable tax credits that might cover most or

all of the cost of typical health insurance policy.

       In this paper, I assess the potential implications of a range of tax-based approaches using

a new micro-simulation model developed specifically for this purpose. I examine how different

characteristics of these proposals are likely to affect such outcomes as: the overall cost to the

federal government, the number of the uninsured who would gain coverage, which income

groups would benefit from the subsidies, and how those who now have employer-sponsored

coverage would be affected.




        'Sheils and Hogan (1999).

                                                      2
           Part I: Tax Policy Towards Health Insurance - Current and Proposed

Current Tcvc Policy

       The primary focus of current U.S. tax policy towards health insurance is the exclusion of

employer paid health insurance premiums from the taxable income of employees. For example,

if an employee is paid $30,000 per year in wages, and their tax rate on these earnings is 20%,

then they take home only $24,000. But, if that same employee is paid $27,000 in wages and

receives health insurance from their employer that costs the employer $3,000, then their take

home pay is $21,600, and the total value of their compensation is $24,600. That is, due to the

fact that employees are taxed on their earnings but not on the value of their health insurance,

being "paid" in the form of health insurance rather than wages is more valuable. This is a major

reason why private health insurance coverage is almost exclusively provided through the

workplace in the U.S.; only about 9% of the privately insured don't have employer-provided

insurance.2 As noted above, the foregone revenues to the federal government through this tax

preference amounted in 1998 to an estimated $65.9 billion through income taxation, and another

$36 billion in payroll taxation (Sheils and Hogan, 1999). Further implications of our current tax

treatment of health spending are discussed in Pauly (1986) and Gruber and Poterba (1996).

       An additional small tax preference towards health spending is the availability of an

itemized deduction for any medical spending, including on health insurance, above 7.5% of

Adjusted Gross Income. Finally, for some workers, employee spending on employer-provided

health insurance is tax subsidized as well. Firms that have a plan that qualifies under Section



       2Author's tabulations from the March 1997 CPS.

                                                 3
125 of the IRS code can allow their employees to make their premium contributions on a pre-tax

basis.

         Advocates for the self-employed have long argued that there is an inequity in this system,

because unincorporated self-employed businesses could not benefit from this tax preference

towards health insurance. As a result, as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the self-employed

were allowed to deduct from their taxable income 25% of the cost of their health insurance, up to

the amount of their self-employment income. This amount was subsequently increased, and will

reach 100% by 2003 (Meyer, Silow-Caroll and Wicks, 1999).

         This system of tax subsidies leaves three groups without tax subsidies for the purchase of

health insurance:

• Those who work for firms that do not offer health insurance.

• Those who are not employees nor self-employed, such as the unemployed or early retirees

    (before the age of Medicare eligibility).

• The employee share of health insurance premiums for those employees whose firms do not

   offer a Section 125 plan (i.e. a "cafeteria plan") that allows them to make those contributions

   on a pre-tax basis.

         Each of these holes represents a significant population. Roughly 16% of the non-elderly

population is, at a point in time, not eligible for a tax subsidy to health insurance, and roughly

19% of insurance spending among those who are insured is not tax subsidized.3




         3Author's tabulations from the March 1997 Current Population Survey

                                                 4
Proposed Reforms

       The past few years has seen a variety of proposed reforms to the tax treatment of health

insurance expenditures. There are a large number of potential approaches to expanding tax

subsidies to health insurance. Any detailed proposals must, at least, address the following list of

questions:

Deduction or Credit? Currently, the employer exclusion is a deduction, through which

individuals' taxable income is effectively reduced by the amount of their health insurance

expenditure. The actual reduction in taxes (i.e. the subsidy) depends on the individual's tax rate.

The alternative is a credit, through which an individual's taxes are directly reduced by a fixed

dollar amount, regardless of the individual's tax rate. One key difference between these

approaches is that a credit provides the same amount of subsidy to all income-eligible taxpayers,

while a deduction provides a subsidy that rises with the tax rate (so that it is higher for higher

income taxpayers). Another difference is that the credit can provide a 100% subsidy to the cost

of insurance for some individuals, while a deduction only provides a subsidy rate equal to the

individual's tax rate (e.g. someone in the 15% tax bracket would receive a subsidy equal to 15%

of the insurance premium). This is an important difference for health insurance subsidies

because, of those uninsured who have positive tax liabilities, 90% are in the 15% tax bracket.4



Refundability? A key limitation of tax policy in increasing insurance coverage is that 45% of the




       4Author's tabulations from the March 1997 CPS.

                                                  5
uninsured do not pay any taxes against which any subsidy can be applied.5 If a tax credit was

made refundable, as with our current Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), it would reach even

those potential participants with no tax liability. This would mean that the individual would

receive a refund from the IRS equal to the amount of the credit.



Cap on the Subsidy? The current employer exclusion is unlimited, applying to all expenditures

by an employer on health insurance. An alternative, for either a deduction or a credit, would be

to cap the amount of insurance expenditure that is eligible for tax subsidization. This can be

done by only qualifying a certain percentage of spending for the subsidy (as is currently done for

the self-employed), or by capping the amount of spending that is eligible at some dollar level, or

some combination of the two. This would lower the costs of the tax policy, but would also lower

its value to potential participants and as a result limit use of the subsidy.




        5Author's tabulations from the March 1997 CPS.




                                                   6
Income Limitations? Insurance status is fairly well correlated with income; 85% of the uninsured

have incomes below the median household income level for their family structure.6 As a result,

the ability of tax policy to target a given amount of public dollars to the uninsured is enhanced if

the availability of tax subsidies is income limited to some extent.



Which Populations? As noted earlier, there are three potential groups that can benefit from new

tax subsidies: those who are not employed in an incorporated firm; those who work for a firm

that does not offer health insurance; and those who work in a firm that does offer health

insurance, but for whom the employee portion of health insurance contributions are made on an

after-tax basis (e.g. no Section 125 plan is available). Tax subsidies can in theory be offered to

only the first population, by restricting the new subsidy only to those not offered insurance; to the

first and second, by qualifying only non-group (or non-employer provided) health insurance

expenditures for subsidies; and to all three, by qualifying any out of pocket (non-employer)

spending on health insurance for a subsidy.



Other Policies? Another important question is whether tax policies targeted towards non-group

coverage should be accompanied by insurance market reforms that would make coverage more

accessible for individuals buying coverage on their own. These could include requiring insurers


       6Author's tabulations from the March 1997 CPS.




                                                 7
to offer insurance to anyone regardless of health status or to restrict variations in premiums based

on an individual's health.



       Each of these are difficult issues which pose challenging tradeoffs for health policy

makers. This paper does not seek to definitively resolve these tradeoffs. Rather, we present a

range of results for policies which vary along these dimensions to provide policy-makers with a

basis for understanding the implications of the different routes to tax subsidization.

       Finally, it is worth noting that there are a host of more detailed administrative issues

involved in the establishment of tax subsidies. For example, how are tax-qualified health plans

to be defined? What mechanisms will be available to minimize the problems -especially for low

income individuals with minimal savings - of mismatch between insurance spending (which is

year-round) and tax subsidies (which arrive only in April)? If the tax policy restricts coverage to

those not offered employer-based coverage, how can employer-offering be measured and

enforced? These important implementation questions are taken up in a companion paper

prepared for the Kaiser Family Foundation by Meyer, Silow-Carroll and Wicks (1999).




                                                  8
               II: Overview of the Simulation Model Created for The Analysis

       In this section, we provide a very brief overview of the simulation model employed for

this analysis. A more detailed description is provided in the Technical Appendix.

       This model uses as its base micro-data on a nationally representative sample of

individuals from the Current Population Surveys (CPS) for February and March, 1997. The

former has information on employer insurance offering, while the latter has information on

insurance coverage from all sources, income, firm characteristics, self-assessed health status and

demographics. As well, in recent years, the March CPS has also provided a detailed calculation

of taxable income and tax rates for each family in the sample. We supplement the CPS with data

from KPMG-Peat Marwick, which provide information by region and firm size on employer

premiums, employee premium shares, and whether employee premiums are made on a pre-tax

basis, and data from the Community Tracking Survey and quotes from non-group insurers on the

costs of non-group insurance policies.

       We then use the data to simulate the impact of alternative tax policies on insurance

coverage. This involves assessing how the policies affect individuals and employers in different

circumstances -- based on such factors as their insurance status, income, and tax rate -- and how

those individuals and employers respond. For each policy, the simulation model can estimate

effects such as: the overall cost to the federal government, how many and what types of people

become insured, and how many employers currently offering coverage drop it. In doing this type

of analysis, a number of assumptions must be made about how individuals and employers will

respond to tax subsidies, including:

• The extent to which the currently uninsured will purchase the newly subsidized insurance
                                                 9
   coverage

• The extent to which those with non-group coverage will take up subsidies to their insurance
    spending

• The extent to which those with group coverage will switch to non-group coverage if it is
    subsidized

• The extent to which firms will react to the availability of subsidized non-group coverage by
    dropping their offering of insurance to their employees, or by cutting back on employer
   premium contributions to insurance

• The extent to which firms will react to the availability of subsidized employee premium
    contributions by reducing their premium contributions.

• The extent to which those employees dropped from group coverage will then take up
    subsidized non-group coverage

• The extent to which insured employees facing higher premium contributions will drop group
    coverage, and to which uninsured employees facing lower premium contributions through tax
    subsidization will takeup group coverage.

• The extent to which those on Medicaid will switch back to non-group coverage if it is made
    available on a subsidized basis

       These assumptions -- which are detailed in the technical appendix -- are based on other

published studies, where available, as well as consultations with economic, actuarial, and policy

experts. The simulation model is capable of estimating how variations in the assumptions alter

the results. A sample of these type of "sensitivity" analyses are discussed briefly below.

       We consider below a variety of tax policy options. But it is very useful to start with a

common "base case," from which the implications of changing policy parameters can be

considered. Our base case for the analysis below is a tax credit for health insurance spending that

is capped at $1,000 per year for single filers and $2,000 per year for jointlhead of household

filers. As we detail in the Appendix, this amounts to roughly 43% of the costs of a typical non-

                                                10
group policy for an uninsured individual, and about 31% of the costs of a family policy for the

typical uninsured family. The credit is refundable, and the full amount of the credit is available

only to joint filers with taxable incomes of $75,000 or less, phasing out to zero credit at taxable

incomes of $100,000; the limits are $45,000 and $60,000, respectively, for single filers. It is

available only for non-employer provided insurance, so that it cannot be used towards the

purchase of employer health insurance premiums; but it is available to all persons, even those

offered employer-provided health insurance.




                                                 11
                  III: Tax Policy: Insurance Coverage and Cost Implications

Base Policy

       The impacts of this base case policy on insurance coverage and costs is presented in

Tables 1A and lB. The first table shows the total cost of the policy; the takeup of the subsidy by

various groups, categorized by their pre-subsidy insurance status; and the net change in the size

of these groups from before to after the subsidy. We present all population estimates both in

absolute millions of persons and as a percentage of the size of the group before the policy impact;

all group sizes include only the non-elderly. We explore in particular, for the employer-insured,

the avenues that lead to the net change in this group. The second table shows a distributional

analysis of the impacts of the policy. We consider the division of the population into those

below the federal poverty line ($17,274 for a family of four), those between 100% of the federal

poverty line and 200% of that amount, those between 200 and 300%, those between 300 and

400%, and those over 400% of the federal poverty line; this last cutoff is about 33% more than

the median family income of $50,000 for families of this size. For each group, we show: the net

cost and the percent of costs attributable to the group; subsidy takeup in absolute and percentage

(relative to group size before the policy impact) terms; the change in the uninsured in absolute

and percentage terms; and the cost per newly insured person (total dollars spent on that group

relative to the reduction in the uninsured).

       Our key findings are:

• The total cost of this policy is $13.3 billion dollars per year (in 1999 dollars).

• Almost 18.4 million persons takeup the subsidy, which is 8.2% of the total non-elderly
   population.

                                                 12
• Of those taking up, 4.7 million were previously uninsured (11% of the uninsured), 8.6 million
   were previously covered by non-group insurance (57% of those covered by non-group
   insurance), 4.7 million were previously covered by employer-provided insurance (3.2% of
   those covered by employer-provided insurance), and 0.4 million were previously covered by
   Medicaid (1.8% of those covered by Medicaid).

• On net, the number of uninsured falls by slightly more than 4 million, which is 9.5% of the
   uninsured population.

• On net, the number of persons with non-group insurance rises by 9.8 million, which amounts
   to a rise of two-thirds in the size of this group.

• On net, the number of persons with employer-provided insurance falls by 5.4 million, which
   is 3.6% of the size of this group. This change is comprised of:

              - 1.1 million persons whose firms stop offering group insurance, so that they move
              to the non-group market;
              - 0.1 million persons whose firms stop offering and they become uninsured;
              - 3.6 million persons who switch from group to non-group insurance;
              - and 0.6 million persons who become uninsured because their firms are raising
              the employee share of insurance premiums and they decide to drop coverage.


       While this policy lowers the number of uninsured, it also induces a substantial shift from

group to non-group coverage. Moreover, almost one-half of those taking up the subsidy are

persons who are currently already purchasing non-group insurance. As a result, the net cost of

the policy per newly insured person is almost $3300, which is substantial. By comparison, on

average in our sample, employer-provided insurance costs $1860 per person covered, and non-

group insurance costs $2100. That is, due to imperfect targeting, the government is paying 50%

more than the cost of the typical non-group policy per person newly insured.

       It is interesting to note that most of the government cost of imperfect targeting of this

subsidy arises primarily through takeup by the existing non-group insured, 57% of whom take

advantage of this new subsidy, not through dropping and switching among the existing employer-

                                                13
insured. This is because, while those on employer insurance who drop or switch, cost the

government money through their takeup of the subsidy, they also save the government revenues

by dropping their currently tax subsidized employer coverage. For example, for those workers

whose firms drop their health insurance coverage, we assume that their wages will rise to reflect

the fact that their employer is no long paying for health insurance, and can therefore afford higher

wages. These higher wages will then be taxed, raising new revenues, and offsetting the cost of

their takeup of the new insurance subsidy. For those who switch from group to non-group

insurance, we assume that the cost savings to the employer is passed back to workers on average

in the form of higher wages (although not specifically to the switching employees), once again

raising revenues. And revenues also rise since employers react to this policy, to some extent, by

lowering their pre-tax contributions for health insurance, and once again raise wages to

compensate for this.7



        7As we discuss in the Appendix, how this is modeled depends critically on one's
assumptions about the incidence of reductions in employer spending on health insurance. The
key issue is that money saved by employers through reduced group insurance spending must go
somewhere, and as a result will eventually be taxed. We assume that the savings accrue to
wages, either in a worker-specific way (for firm dropping) or on average across all workers (for
switching from group to non-group insurance). If we assumed instead that some of these savings
accrued to profits, the revenue offset would be similar, as the corporate tax rate is similar to the




                                                 14
Distributional Analysis

       Given the strong correlation between insurance status and income, it is important to

consider not just the aggregate impacts of this subsidy, but its distributional implications as well.

This is done in Table lB. using the income groupings relative to the poverty line described

above. There are several findings of note from this distributional analysis:

• The lowest income group, which contains 45% of the uninsured, receives about 26% of the
    net spending on this policy. Only about 1.3 million of the uninsured in this group gain
    coverage (6.6% of the uninsured below the poverty line); this is about one-third of the total
    number of uninsured who gain coverage across all income groups. Overall, this policy is
    more efficient for this subgroup than for the full population, with a cost of $2,740 per newly
    insured. This is primarily because there are few non-group insured taking up the policy in
    this income range, relative to the number of uninsured taking it up.

• Those between 100 and 200% of poverty, a group that contains another 30% of the
   uninsured, receive about 30% of the net spending from this policy, and there is a decline in
   the uninsured of about 1.6 million. Spending is even more efficient in this group than for the
   lowest income group, with a cost of $2,500 per person newly insured, since there is an even
   higher ratio of uninsured to non-group insured in this income range.

       Those between 200 and 300% of poverty receive almost 20% of the net spending from
       the policy, but there is a decline in the uninsured of only 0.7 million. As a result,
       spending is less efficient for this group, with a cost per newly insured of over $3,500.


average individual's income tax plus payroll tax rates. The incidence of the savings will affect
the ultimate distributional consequences of tax policy, but that issue is not addressed in the
model.




                                                 15
       Those above 300% of poverty receive 24% of the net spending of this policy, but there is
       only a very small change in the number of uninsured, in large part because there are so
       few uninsured in this income group. As a result, spending is much less efficient at these
       higher income levels. For those between 300 and 400% of poverty, there is a cost of over
       $6,000 per newly insured. For those above 400%, there is a cost of almost $11,000 per
       newly insured.

           Thus, a majority of spending under this policy (56%) is targeted to those below 200% of

the poverty line, and three-quarters is targeted to those below 300% of the poverty line. But the

spending that is done on those above 300% of the poverty line is very inefficient, with a total of

$3.3 billion spent on this group for a reduction in the number of uninsured of only 400,000.

Overall, while this policy has a high cost per person newly covered, it is providing a large tax

break that is mostly targeted to those below 300% of the poverty line; these distributional gains

should be weighed against any inefficiencies of this policy relative to alternatives.



Alternative Policies

           While the base policy considered mimics the structure of a number of proposed tax

subsidies, there are at the same time a host of alternative structures that have been proposed in

current congressional debates. While we cannot do justice in this limited space to the full variety

of alternatives available to policymakers, we consider several natural alternative policies here to

provide a flavor of how the effects of tax policy change as the basic structure of the program is

altered.



Making the Credit Non-Refundable: One option that will lower costs substantially, and aid with

ease of administration of the subsidy as well, is to make it non-refundable. On the other hand,


                                                  16
this will severely limit the benefits of this subsidy for the uninsured, more than 60% of whom

have tax liabilities less than $1,000 (so that they can only partially benefit from a non-refundable

credit).

           The impacts of a non-refundable $1,000/$2,000 credit are presented in Tables 2A and 2B.

This does indeed lower the costs of the subsidy, which fall to almost half of the costs of the non-

refundable credit ($7 billion). But the impact on the size of the uninsured population falls even

more, with fewer than two million uninsured gaining coverage (or only 4.3% of the uninsured).

As a result, the cost per newly insured person is even higher than with the refundable credit, at

over $3,800 per person. This high cost is a function of the fact that such a high share of the

dollars are going to the previously non-group or employer-insured.

           Moreover, the distributional consequences of this approach are much less attractive. As

Table 2B shows, only about 2% of the spending through this policy goes to those below the

poverty line, and almost 50% goes to those above 300% of the poverty line. Once again, for

those higher income groups at the bottom of this Table, the spending is quite inefficient; for

those above 400% of the poverty line, the cost per newly insured is almost $11,000.

           These results are important ones to highlight in the context of cunent debates over tax

policy, which are often focused around issues of refundability. There are a number of political

and administrative arguments against refundability, most significantly the question of whether

net tax refunds to low income families are hidden forms of "welfare" payments. But the

economics in most cases speaks clearly: refundability is critical for appropriate targeting of tax

incentives to low income populations. As we show below, this is particularly true for large



                                                   17
credits, because taxpayers with low tax liabilities will be less likely to have sufficient tax

payments against which the credit can be offset.8



Using a Deduction: Another alternative that can limit costs further is to use a deduction rather

than a credit structure. This has similar problems as non-refundability in terms of reaching the

uninsured. Moreover, of the half of the uninsured that do pay taxes, 90% are in the 15% tax

bracket, so a subsidy in the form of a deduction is worth relatively little to them. On the other

hand, by so substantially limiting the value of the subsidy, it also potentially raises efficiency by

limiting takeup by the currently employer-insured.

        The results of an unlimited deduction of non-group health insurance costs are presented

in Tables 3A and 3B; we assume that this is an "above the line" deduction that is available to all

taxpayers and not just those who itemize. The costs of this policy are dramatically lower than for

the alternatives presented earlier, at only $870 million per year. But the impact on insurance

coverage is also much more modest, with only 250,000 uninsured gaining coverage. This is

         8For example, consider a person with a $501 tax liability, and contrast a $500 and $1000
credit. In the former case, refundability is irrelevant for the value of the credit to this individual,
since they can take the full credit against their taxes, but in the latter case they can't take the full
credit unless it is refundable.




                                                   18
because there is only modest overall takeup of this subsidy by the uninsured to begin with

(600,000 persons), and much of this is then offset by firm dropping and reduced coverage due to

firm contribution reductions. Obviously, estimating with precision the change in the number of

uninsured in the range around zero is difficult. But it is clear that deductibility will have both

"low bang and low bucks:" the costs will be low but the impacts on insurance coverage will be

essentially nonexistent.

        Note that the cost that does arise from this policy is not due to takeup by the previously

employer-insured; the government actually makes money on this population, with the

government revenue from higher wages due to firm dropping and contribution reductions

outweighing the government cost of subsidy takeup. Rather, the inefficiency arises primarily

from the fact that three-quarters of those taking up this subsidy were already non-group insured.

 Since a deduction is not particularly attractive for the low income uninsured population, this

leads to a very low efficiency of this type of policy.

        This point is also reflected in the distributional analysis of Table 3B. Only 6% of the

benefits of this policy flow to those below the poverty line, and over 42% flow to those over

300% of the poverty line. Moreover, there are actually increases in uninsurance in the group

over 400% of the poverty line, as firm dropping and individual dropping due to decreased

contributions lead to more uninsured than takeup the subsidy in these income ranges.



Limit the Credit to Those Not Offered Employer Coverage: One alternative to try to better target

the spending on this subsidy is to limit the credit only to those currently not eligible for employer



                                                  19
insurance coverage. There are of course difficult administrative issues associated with

implementing and enforcing such a policy, as discussed in Meyer, Silow-Carroll and Wicks

(1999). But the advantage is that being offered insurance coverage by one's employer is tightly

related to being covered by insurance, so that this policy provides a device through which to

better target subsidy dollars to the currently uninsured.

       We consider the impact of a refundable $1,000/$2,000 credit that is limited to those not

offered employer insurance in Tables 4A and 4B. The total cost of this option is much lower

than the base policy, at only $6.2 billion per year, although the number of persons newly insured

falls as well, to 2.1 million. The efficiency of this alternative is somewhat better than the base

case, at $2,927 per newly insured person. This reflects two effects, relative to the base case. On

the one hand, there is savings from much lower takeup of this policy by the existing non-group

insured, since many of them are offered employer-provided insurance. On the other hand, there

is a much larger increase in the uninsured pool from firm dropping (there is no switching here,

since offered individuals can't take the subsidy); we estimate that 3.2 million persons are

dropped by their firms, and 700,000 of them remain uninsured.

       As Table 4B illustrates, this alternative is also somewhat more distributionally attractive

than the base policy. Over one-third of the dollars are targeted to those below the poverty line,

and only about 13% of the dollars are spent on the very poorly targeted groups above 300% of

the poverty line, where the number of uninsured is actually rising.

       Thus, if this type of restriction can be enforced, a policy which targets its subsidy to those

who are not offered employer-provided insurance can deliver both somewhat higher efficiency



                                                 20
and somewhat better distributional consequences. These modest gains, however, must be traded

off against the costs of enforcing this administratively awkward restriction. Moreover, it seems

unlikely that this provision can be perfectly enforced; some persons who are offered insurance,

either through misunderstanding or intent, will apply for this subsidy.



Expand the Subsidy to Apply to All Insurance Spending: An alternative direction in which to

take policy is to expand from the base case subsidization of just non-group premiums to

subsidization of all spending on insurance, even the employee portion of employer premiums.

On the one hand, this would greatly increase costs, as over 70% of the employer-insured pay

some or all of their premiums, and all of these costs would now be paid by the government. On

the other hand, the Current Population Survey reports that almost 40% of the uninsured are

offered group health insurance, and a large subsidy would essentially make insurance free for this

population, with dramatic impacts. Moreover, there would be neither firm dropping nor

employee switching to non-group insurance under a policy such as this. Of course, this policy

raises a new set of difficult administrative issues as well, around the measurement of the

employee share of employer premiums.

        The net results of this policy are presented in Tables 5A and 5B. The cost of the policy is

indeed substantial, at $62.2 billion per year. On the other hand, the impact on the uninsured is

dramatic, with 12.4 million uninsured gaining insurance coverage. Overall, however, this is the

least efficient of the policies considered, with a cost of over $5,000 per newly insured person.

        This policy has a very broad reach, with over 127 million persons taking it up. This



                                                 21
group is of course predominantly comprised of the employer-insured, who takeup the insurance

subsidy to cover their premium costs. Even the almost 30% of the employer-insured whose

employers now pay all of their premiums will take up this policy, as we assume that most

employers will to some extent charge their employees premiums if such a generous tax credit is

in place. In addition, a major difference between this and earlier policy options is that the

number of employer-insured is rising, not falling. Thus, to the extent that policy-makers value

maintaining the employer-insurance market, one benefit of this policy that is not monetized in

our "efficiency" measure is the fact that this policy, unlike the others considered, does not induce

a large move out of the employer-based pool. This issue is discussed further in the conclusion.

       This policy alternative is less distributionally attractive than a refundable credit, but

spends a higher share of its dollars at the bottom of the income distribution than does the non-

refundable credit or deduction. Only 36% of the spending is on those below 200% of the poverty

line, and over 40% of the spending is on those above 300% of the poverty line. To put this result

in perspective, this policy would involve spending twenty percent more on those above 400% of

the poverty line, to cover fewer than one million uninsured, than the base policy would spend

overall to cover four million uninsured.

       It is worth noting, however, that the inefficiency of this policy comes more from its scale

than from its structure. As we will show in the next section, the cost per newly insured from this

approach is not appreciably higher than that from the base policy that is extended in generosity to

provide comparable levels of coverage to the uninsured.




                                                 22
Change the Scale of the Subsidy: While we have chosen a credit of $1,000 for singles and $2,000

for marrieds as our base case policy, one could consider much less or more generous alternatives

as well. In Tables 6A/B and 7AIB, we consider first halving, then doubling, the generosity of

this policy. We find that while the larger credits substantially increase the number of uninsured

covered, they do so much less efficiently. At a credit of $500 for singles and $1,000 for

marrieds, we estimate costs that are only 30% those of the base case, but a reduction in the

uninsured that is almost one-half as large. As a result, the spending per newly insured person is

only $2,240, which is substantially below even average group costs per person. On the other

hand, at a credit of $2,000 for singles and $4,000 for families, which would approximate the full

cost of insurance for these populations, we estimate that costs rise three-fold, but the number of

newly insured less than doubles, so that the spending per newly insured rises to $4,915 per

person. At the same time, the small credit covers fewer than 2 million new persons, whilethe

larger credit covers over 7.7 million.

       The smaller subsidy also targets its spending more directly at the bottom of the income

distribution, with over 60% of the dollars flowing to those below 200% of poverty. On the other

hand, the $2,000/$4,000 credit spends less than half its dollars on those below 200% of poverty,

and over 30% on those above 300% of poverty. This worsening of distributional impacts as

generosity rises reflects the dramatic increase in takeup by both the (relatively high income) non-

group insured and employer-insured; for example, the number of employer-insured who takeup

the subsidy rises from 5 million in the base case to 13 million for the $2,000/$4,000 credit. On

the other hand, there is a much more dramatic impact of the larger subsidy on the lower income



                                                23
uninsured groups; only 3% of the uninsured below poverty and 5% between 100 and 200% of

poverty gain coverage with the smaller credit, while 11% of those below poverty and 26% of

those between 100 and 200% of poverty gain coverage with the larger credit.

       Thus, there is a clear tradeoff as the generosity of the tax credit is changed. Modest

credits on the order of $500 for singles and $1,000 for marrieds cannot deliver a very large

change in the uninsured population, but the newly insured that are covered tend to be the lowest

income and are low cost. Very large credits on the order of $2,000 for singles and $4,000 for

marrieds can induce substantial changes in the uninsured population, but only at a very steep cost

per newly insured.



Other Changes to Generosity: Alternative means of changing the generosity of the tax subsidy are

to make only a portion of insurance costs eligible for the tax subsidy, or to change the range of

eligible incomes. We consider the impact of such changes in Table 8, which summarizes the

key elements from earlier tables: the total takeup of the subsidy; the total cost; the change in the

uninsured, non-group insured, and employer-insured; the cost per newly insured; and the

percentage of benefits that flow to those with incomes below 200% of the poverty line.

       We first consider the case where families are allowed to receive a subsidy for only 50%

of their costs, although they can continue to count these costs until the total credit equals the base

case amount of $1,000/$2,000 (that is, they can take this credit against insurance costs of up to

$2,000 if single and $4,000 if married). This reduces the cost of the subsidy by roughly half, to

$7 billion, but it reduces the impact on the uninsured as well, with only 2.8 million gaining



                                                 24
coverage. The efficiency of this policy is significantly higher than the base case, with a cost per

newly insured of only $2,500. This finding continues to support the conclusion from earlier

Tables 6 and 7 that as the subsidy becomes more generous, it becomes less efficient.

       We next consider the impact of further limiting the income ranges for eligibility for the

subsidy.9 We reduce the phase out range for families from a range of $75,000-$ 100,000 to a

range of $30,000-$50,000, and likewise scale back the limits for singles. Interestingly, this

change saves over $2 billion per year in costs, with only a very small change in the number of

persons newly covered. As a result, the efficiency of the policy improves substantially, with a

cost of $2,938 per person newly insured. Moreover, this policy is much more distributionally

attractive than the base case, with 69% of the benefits flowing to those with incomes below

200% of the poverty line. This suggests that there are strong net gains from income limiting the

availability of this subsidy to middle income families.



Easing Liquidity Constraints: A key issue in implementing tax credits is the mismatch between

the flow of tax subsidies and the flow of insurance premium payments. Low income households

who would like to take advantage of tax credits during a given year, but who only receive their

credit the next Spring, may face liquidity problems that leave them unable to take advantage of

       9We also considered a case where the income limits were removed, but this case delivered
very similar results to the base case.




                                                25
this tax subsidy. If the government can find a solution to this timing mismatch, it can increase

the propensity of the uninsured, as well as those dropped by firms and those on Medicaid, to

takeup tax subsidies. A variety of analysts have proposed solutions to this problem, such as

paying tax credits directly to insurers (Etheredge, 1999). But our track record with the Earned

Income Tax Credit (E1TC) suggests caution in assuming that this problem is easily overcome:

while individuals can claim their EITC throughout the year, and presumably for many individuals

it would be of some value to do so, over 99% of claimants receive the credit as a lump sum the

next Spring (Leibman, 1998). It is worth noting that even such a timing match would not remove

the uncertainty over eligibility for the subsidy, which is not resolved until the end of the year and

may limit takeup. With the high income limits that we consider (up to $100,000 for married

couples) this is unlikely to be a major concern, but as income limits are tightened this uncertainty

becomes more important.

       While we have assumed that liquidity constraints reduce takeup in our base case

calculations, it is important to assess the impact of easing them by assuming that the government

solves the liquidity problem, and the results of doing so are shown in the next rows of Table 8.

Easing liquidity constraints increases by $1.3 billion the cost of the policy (absent any additional

interest or other costs to the government of easing these constraints), and results in an additional

1.4 million newly insured persons, for a total of 5.5 million newly insured. This implies a

substantial increase in the efficiency of the policy, with a cost of only $2,700 per newly insured.

The distributional impacts of this assumption change are modest.

       Moreover, for larger tax credits, the impacts of easing liquidity constraints are much



                                                 26
larger. Our estimates for a $2,000/$4,000 credit without liquidity effects are shown in the next

row. Here, easing liquidity constraints raises costs by $6 billion, but raises the number of

uninsured covered by more than two-thirds to over 12 million. In a world without liquidity

constraints, therefore, very large tax credits look much more efficient, at a cost of $3,665 per

newly insured. This much larger effect reflects the fact that liquidity constraints are a larger

problem for larger subsidies. Moreover, while liquidity constraints are a barrier to takeup by the

uninsured, they are not a barrier to takeup by the non-group insured, since this population is

already making monthly insurance payments so that even a standard April tax credit payment is

very valuable to them. Thus, for large credits in particular, easing liquidity constraints is a

particularly useful means of increasing policy efficiency, because it is directly targeted towards

those uninsured who are hampered from taking up the tax subsidy.



Sensitivity

       We have also considered the sensitivity of our findings to the assumptions employed in

the analysis. We consider in particular three changes. The first is to assume that the price of non-

group policies falls by 10% as this tax subsidy is implemented. In practice, a reduction in the

price of non-group policies could arise in one of two ways. First, since this policy induces a rise

in the non-group market of over two-thirds, there may be reductions in the premium that is

charged in this market due to increased administrative efficiency and reduced adverse selection.

Second, this policy change may be accompanied by other regulatory actions that limit pricing

markups in the non-group market.



                                                 27
       A reduction in the price of non-group insurance raises both the costs and benefits of tax

subsidies; the costs go up because the lower prices are offset by increased takeup, and the

benefits rise as more uninsured takeup the policy. The number of newly insured rises to almost 5

billion, and the efficiency of the policy rises somewhat as well, with a cost per newly insured of

under $3,000. There are no significant distributional impacts of this change.

       The second change is to lower the rate at which the employer-insured are willing to

switch from their group policies to non-group               This induces no change in the insurance

coverage impacts of the policy, but it does lower costs slightly. More generally, we have found

that the results discussed here are fairly robust to any changes in assumptions about the behavior

of firms or workers, since this has little impact on the uninsured population and since there are

low net costs of the employer-insured taking up this subsidy (due to offsetting tax revenue

increases as discussed earlier).

       The third change is to lower our assumed price elasticity, which impacts primarily on the

takeup of the non-group subsidy by the uninsured.'1 The effects of doing this are very dramatic:

costs fall by only $1.7 billion per year, but the number of newly insured falls by 1.5 million, so

that the efficiency of the policy deteriorates significantly. While we have based our estimate of

price elasticity on a careful reading of the literature, this sensitivity does suggest the value of

further research investigating this key behavioral parameter.



        '°We change the constant in our switching formula from 0.625 to 0.4; see appendix for
details on how this formula works.

        '1We change the constant in our price elasticity formula from 0.625 to 0.4; see appendix
for details on how this formula works.

                                                  28
                                         IV: Conclusions

       Federal policymakers continue to look to tax policy as a politically attractive vehicle for

addressing the problems of the uninsured in the U.S. As a result, it is critical to carefully assess

the cost, insurance coverage, and equity implications of alternative approaches to tax

subsidization. While point estimates of the effects of any major change in health financing

cannot be estimated with perfect precision, simulation analyses using common assumptions are

particularly useful for comparing and contrasting the effects of alternative proposals. Our

approach in analyzing alternative tax-based mechanisms for covering the uninsured in this way is

similar to a recent series of analyses carried out by a Kaiser Family Foundation project on

Incremental Health Reform (1999).

       We have compared alternative tax policy designs using a consistent set of measures,

including: the overall cost to the federal government, the number of uninsured who gain

coverage, the federal cost per person newly insured (which is a measure of how efficiently

federal dollars are being used), and the proportion of benefits that flow to those below 200% of

the poverty level (which is a measure of the degree to which the policy targets those with low

incomes).

        There are several clear conclusions from this analysis. First, it is difficult to design a tax

policy which delivers a modest cost per newly uninsured person, while insuring a large number

of new persons. The base policy considered here -- a refundable credit of $1,000 for singles and

$2,000 for families -- is more generous than many of the proposals being considered by federal

policymakers, and yet still subsidizes less than half of the estimated cost of a non-group



                                                 29
insurance for a typical person. While it would decrease the ranks of the uninsured by an

estimated 4 million persons (less than 10% of the uninsured population), the average cost per

person newly insured is $3,300. Raising the value of the credit or allowing tax subsidies to be

used towards the purchase of employer-sponsored coverage would insure more people, but also

raise the cost per person newly insured significantly. Lowering the value of the credit would be

more efficient — meaning that the cost per person insured would be lower — but the result would

be an even smaller dent in the number of Americans uninsured.

       Second, there are clearly more and less efficient ways to cover a given number of

uninsured. We find in particular that non-refundable credits are much more expensive per

uninsured person covered, while covering fewer of the uninsured. We find as well that income

limits on eligibility that more tightly target the policy towards the lower part of the income

distribution in which the uninsured are concentrated can significantly lower costs with essentially

no impact on the number of persons newly insured. Finally, we find that policies that can more

tightly match the timing of tax subsidies with the timing of insurance payments can improve both

the scope and efficiency of tax policy, especially for low-income people.

       Third, different approaches to tax subsidies vary not only in the efficiency with which

they reach the uninsured, but also in how effective they are at targeting resources to those with

low incomes. For example, a policy that targeted refundable credits of $1,000 for singles and

$2,000 for families towards people with incomes of less than $50,000 would provide 69% of its

benefits to those below 200% of the poverty level. In contrast, a policy that allowed people to

deduct non-group insurance premiums would provide just 30% of its benefits to people below



                                                30
twice the poverty line, and a credit that was not refundable would target an even smaller portion

of aid to the poor or near poor.

       Finally, tax-based subsidies — particularly those whose subsidies are most expansive —

would likely lead to reductions in the number of people with employer-based coverage. For

example, we estimate that the base case — a refundable credit of $1,000 for singles and $2,000 for

families — would reduce the number of people with employer coverage by 5.4 million. Most of

these people (3.7 million) would switch from employer coverage to non-group insurance because

they would find the new tax subsidies more attractive than their current situations. However, the

remainder would either be dropped by their firms — and then either purchase non-group insurance

or go without coverage — or become uninsured because their employers increased the amount

they must pay for insurance. Policies that mitigate firm dropping of coverage or switching to

non-group insurance by employees (e.g., by allowing the credit to be used towards the purchase

of employer coverage) tend to cost more in total and also per person newly covered.

        This paper does not discuss in detail a number of important additional issues to be

considered with tax subsidies. Four in particular stand out. The first, mentioned briefly earlier

and discussed in more detail in Meyer, Silow-Carroll and Wicks (1999), is administrative

complexity. This is particularly relevant given the importance of surmounting liquidity

constraints in improving the efficiency of tax policy. Another difficult administrative issue is

geographic adjustment of credit levels. There is substantial regional variation in the cost of

insurance, and even very large variation within states; for example, in the data we use on

employer premium averages across even large regions of the U.S., there is a 50% difference



                                                31
between the lowest and highest premium regions. We have assumed that this is not reflected in

credits that are provided, but policy-makers may choose to target the credit to local cost levels.

This is an advantage of an uncapped deduction, which more naturally respects local cost

variation (although only in a limited way due to the small resulting subsidy rates).

       The second is the erosion of the base of employer-provided health insurance. The past

decade has seen a steep decline in employer-provided insurance coverage, and tax subsidies to

non-group coverage would only exacerbate this decline. If there are pooling advantages to

having individuals obtain their insurance through the workplace, then this is a potential concern

with policies targeted only to non-group coverage. Moreover, those leaving the employer pool

will be the healthiest employees, leading to a rise in costs per covered person among those

remaining in the pool. On the other hand, however, doubling the size of the non-group market (as

we estimate would occur in the base policy) could substantially improve the functioning of this

market, both in terms of administrative efficiency and reduced adverse selection. And de-linking

insurance from the workplace could improve the functioning of the labor market by reducing

insurance-induced immobility across jobs, or "job lock" (Gruber, 1999).

       Third, this paper has focused almost exclusively on gains in insurance coverage, but it has

not differentiated the kinds of insurance that individuals are holding. If tax policy leads, either

through switching or employer dropping, to fewer individuals covered by very generous

employer policies and more covered by substantially less generous non-group policies, then there

are implications for quality of health care that become potentially relevant. Whether the

differences in quality of plan are actually relevant for health is in fact disputable. But the impact



                                                 32
on quality of coverage remains an important concern for tax policy.

       Fourth, we have not considered in any detail either pricing reactions in the non-group

market nor state and/or federal regulatory reactions to this type of policy. It is possible, as noted

earlier, that the substantial increase in enrollment in the non-group market could lead to

reductions in prices. Moreover, non-group insurance plans might design policies targeted

specifically to the available level of the credit, further increasing takeup from what is modeled

here (although this takeup might be in plans with significantly less generous benefits than are

typical today).

       At the same time, this analysis assumes that policies in the individual market are

universally available (at health risk adjusted prices). While such "guaranteed issue" in the

individual market is required in some states, most states allow insurers to exclude people who are

in poor health, which could reduce takeup. It is possible that state and/or federal regulators could

accompany tax subsidies with individual market regulations to limit such practices, but these

regulations are controversial. And, the net impact of insurance market reforms in the context of

tax subsidies is uncertain, as it would raise costs for the most healthy and lower them for the least

healthy. It is also possible that regulators could accompany subsidies with requirements on

product quality in the non-group market, making it harder for individuals to buy the (relative to

employer-provided insurance) lower quality product that is available in the non-group market,

mitigating the impact of tax policy on insurance takeup.

       In summary, tax policy does hold some promise as a means of providing health insurance

to some of the uninsured. But providing coverage to substantial numbers will require very large



                                                 33
expenditures, both overall and per person newly covered. Even the most effective policy

considered here, a $2,000/$4,000 credit that is accompanied by a solution to liquidity problems,

costs almost $40 billion per year and covers only 30% of the uninsured. Thus, tax policy can

likely be most useful as one part of an overall strategy to address uninsurance in the U.S., as

opposed to a solution in and of itself.

                                          Technical Appendix

       This appendix describes in substantial detail the structure of the simulation model that

underlies the simulation estimates presented in the main body of this report. Further details are

available upon request.



Data and Baseline Assumptions

        The base data set for the analysis is a match of the February and March 1997 Current

Population Surveys (CPS). The March CPS provides a rich variety of information on insurance

coverage from all sources, income, firm characteristics, self-assessed health status and

demographics. As well, in recent years, the March CPS has also provided a detailed calculation

of taxable income and tax rates for each family in the sample. The tax information in the March

1997 CPS is obviously not updated to reflect important changes to our tax system put in place in

the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, most notably an income-limited tax credit of $500 per child

and a reduction in the tax rate on long term capital gains. We have updated the CPS tax

information to reflect these tax law changes. The February CPS is a supplement that has

information on insurance offering by the firms in which the CPS respondents are employed.



                                                  34
       Onto this base data set we have matched information from the 1998 employer survey

done by KPMG-Peat Marwick. This survey provides for a national sample of employers

information on health insurance premiums, employee shares of premiums, and the tax

deductibility of employee premiums.12 From these data we computed premiums, employee

shares, and pre-tax status for different firm sizes in various areas of the country. We noted the

interesting feature in the data that total premium costs actually rose with firm size, despite the

well-documented phenomenon that insurance loading factors are higher for smaller firms

(Congressional Research Service, 1988). This is likely because the plans offered by larger firms

are more generous than the plans offered by their smaller counterparts, and it would be

inappropriate to call this higher quality a purely higher cost of insurance. As a result, to calculate

total premium costs, we used the overall average costs for each of 27 areas in the country, and

then applied firm-specific loading factors calculated by Actuarial Research Corporation (ARC) to

update the 1988 CRS estimates. For the split between employer and employee premium costs,

and the percentage of employees who make pre-tax contributions, we use data for six firm sizes

in 4 regions of the country.

       We then matched this information to our CPS data base. We did so using three variables

in the CPS: firm size, location, and an indicator for whether your employer paid all of your health

insurance costs. The latter allowed us to more precisely match employee shares of costs to the

CPS. For some individuals in the CPS, we are also missing information on whether they are


        l2 particular, we use information on the availability of a "flexible spending account",
through which employees can set aside money on a pre-tax basis to cover all health spending,
including insurance premiums. This provides a reasonable proxy for the availability of pre-tax
contributions.

                                                 35
offered insurance, either because the data are missing in the February survey or because we are

unable to match the observations across the February and March surveys. In this case, we impute

insurance offering using data on firm size, location, and insurance coverage status from the

February survey. We should note that eligibility will be taken to mean any eligibility for

insurance, as opposed to eligibility for insurance where the employer pays some minimal share

(e.g. 50%). It would be very difficult to implement this rule in our analysis, not to mention to

enforce it legislatively.

        To measure non-group market costs, we use a national average non-group premium for a

single 40 year old male in excellent health of $120 per month, and adjust it for locational cost

variation, age, and health status. Our figure for the average non-group premium is the average

that is computed from data on actual premiums paid in the Community Tracking Survey data

set;'3 it is also fairly representative of the non-group premiums reported in Chollet (1999) and of

non-group premium data that was provided to us by both Mutual of Omaha and Trustmark. Due

to both selection in who is covered by non-group insurance in the CTS, and the underwriting

practices underlying the non-group quotes we obtained, we assume that this is the cost for an

individual in excellent health, so that it will be higher as health status is worse. We use the

KPMG data described above to provide locational variation in costs across 27 areas of the

country. We obtained information from Mutual of Omaha on the age distribution of insurance

premiums for their non-group policies, and from Actuarial Research Corporation (ARC) on the




       '3We are grateful to Bradley Herring for doing the CTS tabulations for us.

                                                 36
(netted out from age) distribution of medical costs by self-assessed health status.'4

       We also must model the insurance market environment in which the individual is

operating. Using data from the Georgetown Public Policy Institute, we measured in each state in

1997 the presence of limitations on insurance pricing by age and health status. Of course, the

difficulty in modeling these regulations is that it is unclear how they impact pricing in the

insurance market. We assume that they simply compress the insurance cost distribution; so, for

example, an age-rating band operates to set a ceiling and a floor on age-induced variation in

premiums (and full community rating simply sets premiums to the average over all age and

health classes).

       Our resulting group premium estimate averages $2,214 for individuals with group

coverage, and $5,566 for families. Our non-group premium averages, over all persons, $2,542

for individuals and $6,740 for families. For the (typically somewhat younger/healthier)

uninsured, the average cost for individuals of non-group policies is $2,351, and the average cost

for families is $5,826. For those holding non-group policies, the average cost for individuals is

$2,993, and the average cost for families is $6,351.


        14Our health factors are 1 for excellent health, 1.21 for very good health, 1.84 for good
health, 3.47 for fair health, and 5.8 for poor health. Our age factors range from a low of 0.456 for
children to a high of 2.8 for men aged 62-64.




                                                 37
       We assume that there are no changes in insurance regulation in response to this tax

policy. We do consider cases where the loading factor on individual insurance is reduced, which

could capture either a response of the non-group market to increased demand, or regulatory

pressures. We also assume that there is no change in state or federal public insurance policy in

response to tax subsidies. And we assume that there is guaranteed access; any one who is

technically assigned by our model to demand insurance is assumed to be able to purchase it at the

non-group price they face (which, as noted above, is a function of area group costs, age, and

health status).

        Finally, we do not have data on the composition of any given worker's firm in the CPS

data. As a result, we proceed by assuming that each worker is fully representative of others in

their firm. This approach does miss the richness that arises from within-firm heterogeneity in

worker characteristics (although the direction of the effect of this heterogeneity on the results is

unclear). Unfortunately, a lack of data on both workers themselves, their firms, and other

workers in their firms precludes accounting for this heterogeneity in the analysis.



Incidence

        A critical question for the analysis is whether the cost of health insurance is reflected in

employee's wages. This is a long-standing question that has been the subject of considerable

academic research; see Gruber (1999) for a review. The general conclusion from both theory and

empirical evidence is that there is "full incidence" of employer insurance costs; that, over the

medium to long run at least, health insurance costs are reflected in employees' wages. But an



                                                  38
unresolved issue in this literature is how finely this shifting to wages occurs. For example, are

less healthy workers paid lower wages than more healthy workers because their insurance costs

are higher?

       In our base case, we make a mixed set of assumptions on incidence. For most purposes,

we assume "average incidence": the employee's wages reflect the average cost of insurance to

the firm. Therefore, for example, if the firm drops health insurance, then when the employee

considers whether to purchase a non-group policy he contrasts the full cost of his previous group

coverage (both employee and employer portions) to the subsidized non-group costs. In addition,

his wages are rising by the employer cost of health insurance, so he will pay additional taxes on

that income, generating government revenue. Likewise in this base case, if the firm reduces its

premium contributions, raising the employee's contributions, then it also provides an offsetting

wage increase.

       However, we felt that this assumption was inappropriate for thinking about individuals

switching from group to non-group policies. It is unlikely, at least in the short run, that firms will

selectively raise the wages of those employees who choose to drop their existing firm policies.

This has two implications. First, when an employee considers switching, he contrasts only his

current own premium costs (and not the employer share of costs) to the subsidized costs of the

non-group policy. Second, if an employee moves from employer-provided to non-group

coverage, the money saved by the firm is not passed back to that worker in the form of higher

wages; we assume that the money is instead spread across all workers, and calculate revenues by

assuming an average marginal rate of 15% (plus a payroll tax rate of 15.3%).



                                                 39
         We recognize that there is some controversy over the extent to which wage shifting

operates in reality. But the key point to note is that the money saved by employers through

reduced group insurance spending must go somewhere, and as a result will eventually be taxed.

We assume that the savings accrue to wages, either in a worker-specific way (for firm dropping)

or on average across all workers (for switching from group to non-group insurance). If we

assumed instead that some of these savings accrued to profits, the revenue offset would be

similar, as the corporate tax rate is similar to the average individual's income tax plus payroll tax

rates.



Calculating Subsidy Rates

         Armed with information on family tax rates and insurance costs, we can calculate subsidy

rates, which are the central determinant of the behavioral responses that we will discuss below.

For deductions, the subsidy rate is simply the individual's tax rate, so long as they are fully

income eligible; if their income is in the phase out range, then their subsidy rate is reduced

accordingly. For credits, the subsidy rate is 100% if the individual is income eligible and their

imputed non-group premium is below the credit cap. If the premium is above the credit cap, then

the subsidy rate is determined by the share of the credit that is under the cap. If a credit is not

refundable, or if individuals hit the upper income limit, then this further limits the share of the

credit that individuals can take advantage of and thereby the subsidy rate.

         One important issue that arises in computing subsidy rates is the presence of families with

mixed insurance coverage, e.g. some persons on non-group or group coverage and some



                                                  40
uninsured. In these cases, we assume that the priorities for credit dollars are first to cover the

uninsured members of the family, second to subsidize existing non-group premiums, third to

finance switching from group insurance, and fourth to finance switching from Medicaid. That is,

for a family where the parents are group insured and the children are uninsured, they will first

consider using the credit to insure the children, and only after that decision has been made will

they consider whether any remaining credit dollars should be used to finance a switch to non-

group coverage. We therefore recompute subsidy rates for different family members depending

on their priorities; since the uninsured children in this family would use up much of a credit if

they take up insurance, that leaves a lower remaining family credit (and therefore a lower subsidy

rate) for the group insured switching decision.

        It is worth noting in this context that, for families with a common insurance coverage

status, we do not model person-by-person coverage changes, but rather assume that the family

moves together. That is, if a family is all uninsured, we consider only whether they will take the

credit to move the entire family onto non-group policies, not whether they might move a

particular member into coverage. This may lead us to understate the coverage increase among

the uninsured, but at the same time it may also lead us to understate movements out of group

coverage and takeup by those on non-group coverage.

       Another complication that arises in the CPS is that a large number of persons

(predominantly dependents) with non-group insurance coverage derive that coverage from

outside of the household. As a result, it is impossible to know with precision the characteristics

of the tax unit which is receiving a subsidy, and therefore difficult to compute the subsidy rate.



                                                  41
This group is sufficiently large (5 million persons, as estimated by the CPS) that we did not want

to simply ignore them. We therefore assumed that the characteristics of the tax filing unit from

which they derived their coverage were identical to the characteristics of the tax filing unit in

which they reside. This should be fairly accurate on average and allows us to incorporate this

sizeable group into the analysis.

       A final complication is that we have a number of persons in the data set with more than

one source of insurance coverage, particularly those with non-group coverage as well as either

group or public coverage. This could arise because individuals simultaneously have two sources

of coverage (e.g. supplementary non-group coverage that fills gaps in either group or public

coverage), or because individuals had both types of coverage over the previous year, and the CPS

question asks about coverage at any point in the previous year. For the purposes of computing

subsidy rates and behavioral responses, we treat individuals reporting both group and non-group

coverage as having group coverage, and individuals reporting both non-group and public

coverage as having non-group coverage.



Behavioral Elasticities

       As noted in the text, we employ a host of behavioral elasticities in our simulations. Our

particular assumptions are:

Takeup of tax subsidy among those already purchasing non-group insurance: Following on the
substantial evidence from a variety of tax subsidies that takeup is less than full, we assume that
there is only partial takeup by the existing non-group insured. In particular, we assume that
takeup varies from 50% at the smallest subsidy level to 90% at a 100% subsidy; the latter figure
recognizes that many large tax subsidies, such as the EITC, are not fully claimed by those



                                                 42
            15
eligible.

Takeup of subsidized non-group insurance among the uninsured: We calculate takeup by
applying both a price elasticity and a correction for the burden of premiums relative to income.
For our base price elasticity, we use -0.625. We then augment this with a correction factor of the
form: (1- (non-group premiumlincome))2. This term accounts for two factors which are likely to
lead to takeup that falls with income. The first being the fact that as income falls, individuals are
less likely to take up subsidies which are less than 100%, as disposable income is needed for
other expenditures that may be perceived as more urgent (such as food and housing). The second
is liquidity constraints: we assume that the government will not find a way to solve the problem
that insurance expenditures are made throughout the year, but any credits or deductions are only
received the next April. This is a much larger problem for lower income individuals who have
both little savings and potentially poor access to credit markets. The quadratic form of the
expression captures the fact that both of these effects are likely to operate very strongly towards
the bottom of the income distribution. This factor generates patterns by income level that are
consistent with the pattern of takeup rates assumed by the Urban Institute in their recent
simulation work (Feder, Uccello, and O'Brien, 1999).16 We also consider a sensitivity analysis
in which the government does solve this liquidity problem in some way; in that case, the
numerator in the expression above is after-subsidy premiums, not total premiums.

        15Leibman (1998) cites takeup rates of the EITC in the 80-90% range.

         '6At the average income correction factor in our sample of uninsured, this produces an
elasticity of -0.53. This estimate is lower than that of Gruber and Poterba (1995), who suggest
elasticities of -1 or greater (in absolute value). The upper bound elasticity is similar to recent
estimates by Royalty (1999). The average elasticity is somewhat higher than the range of -0.33
to -0.4 presented in Marquis and Long (1994).




                                                43
Firm dropping of insurance offering: We assume that the likelihood of firm dropping vanes by
firm size, and use linear functions running from 0 at a 0% subsidy to some upper bound at a
100% subsidy. For policies which restrict eligibility to those not offered insurance coverage, we
assume that the upper bound on dropping is 45% for firms with fewer than 10 employees; 35%
for firms with 10-24 employees; 20% for firms with 25-99 employees; 5% for firms with 100-
499 employees; 3% for firms with 500-999 employees; and 0 for firms with 1,000 employees or
more. This produces a sample average dropping rate of roughly 10% for a 100% subsidy; this is
comparable to the upper bound estimate of the impact of Medicaid on firm dropping in Shore-
Sheppard, Buchmueller, and Jensen (forthcoming), since reactions to private subsidies should be
larger than those to Medicaid. For policies which don't restrict eligibility, we assume that these
upper bounds on dropping are one-quarter as large (e.g. 10.25% for firms with 1-9 employees).
For policies which tax subsidize even employee contributions for employer-provided insurance,
we assume no firm dropping.

Takeup among those dropped: Among those dropped by their firms, some will takeup subsidized
non-group policies. We assume that if the non-group policy cost is lower than what the
employee was paying for group insurance (which depends on the incidence assumption described
above), then the employee will take it up. If it is more expensive, then we apply the price
elasticity of demand of -0.625 to determine the takeup decision, once again accompanied by the
correction factor relating premiums to income.

Switching to spouse's policy if dropped: Some of those dropped by their firms will have spouses
who have insurance coverage as well. We assume that if an individual is dropped from their
policy, they will consider switching to their spouse's policy (which the spouse is either taking or
for which he/she is eligible). We take the difference between the cost of insurance to the
dropped spouse and the incremental cost of adding them to their spouse's insurance policy; for
example, if the spouse already had single coverage, then this is just the cost of moving to family
coverage. We then add 10% to this differential, to capture the fact that the spouse's policy has
been revealed to be less attractive to the dropped employee; if it was not, then the family would
all be on the spouse's policy. We then apply the price elasticity (-0.625, augmented by the
correction factor relating premiums to income) to either the incremental cost of the spousal
policy, or the subsidized cost of the non-group policy, whichever is cheaper.

Firm premium contribution reductions: If subsidized coverage is available to those who are
offered group insurance, the firm may react to this policy by reducing its contributions towards
insurance. We assume that for a 100% subsidy available for non-group coverage only, the firm
will reduce its contributions by 10%.

If the subsidy is available for employee premium payments of employer-provided insurance,
however, there will be a much larger reaction. If there is a credit for insurance spending, and
there is perfect certainty, then firms should reduce contributions by the full amount of the credit,
since credits provide 100% subsidies while employer-deductibility provides a subsidy at the
                                                 44
individual's tax rate. In reality, contributions may fall by less, due to uncertainty about the value
of the credit to a given employee and issues of timing mismatch between when employee
contributions are paid and when the tax credit is received. We therefore assume, somewhat
conservatively, that employer contributions are reduced by one-half of the credit amount for
which the employee is eligible. If there is a deduction, then employees for whom contributions
are now pre-tax are unaffected; for other employees, we once again assume that the employer
raises contributions by one-half of the value of the subsidy (which, if the deduction is uncapped,
is one-half times the employees tax rate times the employer premium).

Switching from group to non-group policies: As noted above, we assume that individuals only
compare their out of pocket costs of group insurance with the subsidized costs of non-group
insurance in making their switching decisions (e.g. we assume that an employees' wages rise
when he drops his group coverage; rather, we assume that the gains to the employer are spread
across all workers). If subsidized non-group insurance is less expensive than the out of pocket
costs of existing group coverage after contributions have been reduced, then individuals will
switch to some extent from their group policies. We assume that switching is determined
according to the following formula:

        0.625*(out of pocket costs of group policy - post-subsidy costs of non-group policy)
                                   total cost of group policy

That is, individuals will be more likely to switch as their financial gain from doing so is larger,
relative to the underlying quality of the product that they are leaving behind when they move to
the non-group market. That is, at a given level of financial gain from moving to the non-group
market, there will be less switching among those who have better group policies (as proxied by
total cost).17

Employee dropping of insurance because contributions are rising: If firms increase their
contributions, then employees may choose to drop their coverage. We assume an elasticity of
insurance coverage at the firm with respect to its cost of -0.625. For applying this elasticity, we
take the relevant base of insurance costs to be the full costs, including the employer share, as per


        17This averages to only 0.025 in our sample of group-insured persons for the base policy,
since for roughly 90% of our sample the out of pocket expenses of group insurance remain lower
than the subsidized non-group policy cost. Our choice of this base figure (0.625) reflects a
balancing of two literatures. On the one hand, Cutler and Gruber (1996) estimates imply that, of
those privately insured who became eligible for Medicaid, 20% switched to the public insurance
program; this provides a lower bound on the amount of switching if there is stigma around public
insurance receipt. At the same time, Dowd and Feldman (1994) and Cutler and Reber (1998)
estimate enormous elasticities of switching across group insurance plans, on the order of 2 or
more. This is clearly an upper bound, since group insurance plans are much more comparable to
each other than any group plan is to non-group insurance.

                                                 45
our average incidence assumption. We once again augment this elasticity with a correction for
premiums relative to income; in this case, the numerator is the employee share of group
premiums.

Individuals increase takeup of employer-provided insurance because employee contributions are
tax subsidized: For some policy options, employee contributions to employer-provided health
insurance will be tax subsidized. This may lead some employees who were not taking up
coverage to do so. We assume in this case that when employee contributions (after-subsidy) go
to zero, takeup of employer insurance goes to 91%, which represents full takeup by those who
are eligible for employer insurance (9% of employees on average were ineligible for employer
insurance in 1997, according to Farber and Levy, 1999). We linearize the change in insurance
coverage between no change at current premium sharing levels and a 91% increase for no
employee contributions.

Switching from Medicaid to non-group insurance: If there is some stigma associated with public
coverage, then some who are on the public program may switch back to non-group insurance
when it is subsidized. We assume that the switching to non-group insurance is a function of the
available subsidy; it is 0 at a 0 subsidy, and 20% at a 100% subsidy, and linear in between, once
again augmented by the income correction factor.




                                               46
                                         References

Cutler, David, and Jonathan Gruber (1996). "Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
        Insurance?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 391-430.

Cutler, David, and Sarah Reber (1998). "Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-Off Between
        Competition and Adverse Selection," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 433-466.

Dowd, Bryan, and Roger Feldman (1994). "Premium Elasticities of Health Plan Choice,"
      Inquiry, 31, 438-444.

Employee Benefits Research Institute (1999). "Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics
      of the Uninsured: Analysis of the March 1998 Current Population Survey". Washington,
      D.C.: EBRI.

Etheredge, Lynn (1999). "Tax Credits for Uninsured Workers," mimeo, Health Insurance
       Reform Project of the George Washington University.

Farber, Henry, and Helen Levy (1999). "Recent trends in Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance
       Coverage: Are Bad Jobs Getting Worse?," forthcoming, Journal of Health Economics.

Gruber, Jonathan (1999). "Health Insurance and the Labor Market," forthcoming in Joseph
       Newhouse and Anthony Culyer, eds., Handbook of Health Economics.

Gruber, Jonathan, and James Poterba (1996). "Fundamental Tax Reform and Employer-Provided
       Health Insurance," in Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, Henry J. Aaron and
       William G. Gale, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 125-170.

The Kaiser Project on Incremental Health Reform (1999). "The Difference Different Approaches
      Make: Comparing Proposals to Expand Health Insurance," available at www.kff.org,
      prepared by Judith Feder, Con Uccello, Ellen O'Brien.

Leibman, Jeffrey B. (1998). "The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and
      Income Distribution," in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy 12, 83-120.

Manning, Willard, etal. (1987). "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
      from a Randomized Experiment," American Economic Review 77, 25 1-277.

Marquis, Susan, and Stephen H. Long (1994). "Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the
      Non-Group Market," mimeo, RAND.

Meyer, Jack, Sharon Silow-Caroll and Elliot Wicks (1999). "Tax Reform to Expand Health
      Coverage: Administrative Issues and Challenges." Report prepared for the Kaiser Family

                                             47
       Foundation.

Pauly, Mark (1986). "Taxation, Health Insurance, and Market Failure in the Medical Economy,"
       Journal of Economic Literature, 24, 629-675.

Royalty, Anne (1999). "Tax Preferences for Fringe Benefits and Workers' Eligibility for
       Employer Health Insurance," Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Sheils, John, and Paul Hogan (1999). "Cost of Tax-Exempt Health Benefits in 1998," Health
        Affairs, 18, 176-181.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara, Thomas Buchmueller, and Gail Jensen (1999). "Medicaid and Crowding
       Out of Private Insurance: A Re-Examination Using Firm Level Data," forthcoming,
       Journal of Health Economics.




                                              48
                                      Table 1A:
         Refundable $1,000I$2,000 Credit for Non-Group Insurance, All Eligible

                                           Number of       Percent of     Net Cost
                                           Persons         Insurance      ($1999
                                           (Millions)      Category       Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                 ----            ---             13,285

Total Takeup of Subsidy                     18.37          8.2

   Previously non-group                     8.60           57.2           7,006

   Previously uninsured                     4.72           11.1           4,655

   Previously employer-insured              4.68           3.2             1,824

   Previously Medicaid                      0.36           1.8             -200

Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                                9.77           65.0

   Uninsured                                -4.03          -9.5

   Employer-Insured                         -5.37          -3.7

       Firm dropped to non-group                  -1.05          -0.7

       Firm dropped to uninsured                  -0.12          -0.1

       Switch to non-group                        -3.64          -2.5

       Uninsured due to decreased                 -0.57          -0.4
       contributions
    Medicaid                                -0.36          -1.8

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                             $3,296




                                          49
                            Table 1B: Distributional Analysis


                                                                              Cost per
         Net Cost                 Subsidy               Change in   Percent   Newly
         ($1999      Percent of Takeup     Percent      Uninsured   of        Insured
Group    Millions)   Costs      (Millions) of Group (Millions)      Unins.    ($1999)
<100% $3.489         26.2         4.39           8.6    -1.27       -6.6      $2,739
of FPL
100-     $4,012      30.2         5.31           11.6   -1.64       -13.1     $2,447
200%
of FPL
200-     $2,478      18.7         3.50           9.2    -0.71       -13.1     $3,506
300%
of FPL
300-     $1,466      11.0         2.20           7.7    -0.24       -11.3     $6,040
400%
of FPL
>400% $1,840         13.9         2.97           4.8    -0.17       -5.3      $10,956
of FPL




                                            50
                                    Table 2A:
      Non-Refundable $1,000/$2,000 Credit for Non-Group Insurance, All Eligible

                                           Number of      Percent of    Net Cost
                                           Persons        Insurance     ($1999
                                           (Millions)     Category      Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                 ----           ----          6,978

Total Takeup of Subsidy                    11.10          4.9

   Previously non-group                    5.14           34.2          3,638

   Previously uninsured                    2.36           5.5           2,194

   Previously employer-insured             3.53           2.4           1,181

   Previously Medicaid                     0.06           0.3           -35

Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                               5.95           39.6

   Uninsured                               -1.82          -4.3

   Employer-Insured                        -4.07          -2.8

       Firm dropped to non-group                  -0.80         -0.5
       Firm dropped to uninsured                  -0.09         -0.06

       Switch to non-group                        -2.73         -1.9

       Uninsured due to decreased                 -0.45         -0.3
       contributions
    Medicaid                               -0.06          -0.3

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                          $3,827




                                         51
                             Table 2B: Distributional Analysis


                                                                                 Cost per
         Net Cost    Percent of Subsidy                    Change in   Percent   Newly
         (1999       Total         Takeup        Percent   Uninsured   of        Insured
Group    Millions)   Costs         (Millions) of Group (Millions)      Unins.    ($1999)
<100% $125           1.8           0.39          0.8       -0.09       -0.5      $1,337
of FPL
100-     $1,418      20.3          2.29          5.0       -0.69       -5.5      $2,058
200%
of FPL
200-     $2,131      30.5          3.24          8.5       -0.63       -11.6     $3,383
300%
of FPL
300-     $1,464      21.0          2.20          7.7       -0.24       -11.3     $6,031
400%
of FPL

>400% $1,840         26.4          2.97          4.8       -0.17       -5.3      $10,955
of FPL




                                            52
                                     Table 3A:
               Uncapped Deduction for Non-Group Insurance, All Eligible

                                           Number of     Percent of       Net Cost
                                           Persons       Insurance        ($1999
                                           (Millions)    Category         Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                 ----          ----             871

Total Takeup of Subsidy                    6.32          2.8

   Previously non-group                    4.73          31.4             1,394
   Previously uninsured                    0.58           1.4             186

   Previously employer-insured             0.99          0.7              -689

   Previously Medicaid                     0.01          0.1              -20
Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                               1.59           10.6

   Uninsured                               -0.25         -0.6

   Employer-Insured                        -1.33         -0.9

       Firm dropped to non-group              -0.30             -0.2
       Firm dropped to uninsured              -0.10             -0.1

       Switch to non-group                    -0.70             -0.5
       Uninsured due to decreased             -0.24             -0.2
       contributions
   Medicaid                                -0.01         -0.1

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                            $3,544




                                         53
                             Table 3B: Distributional Analysis

                                                                                 Cost per
         Net Cost    Percent of Subsidy                    Change in   Percent   Newly
         (1999       Total         Takeup        Percent   Uninsured   of        Insured
Group    Millions)   Cost          (Millions) of Group (Millions)      Unins.    ($1999)
<100% $52            6.0           0.41          0.8       -0.05       -0.3      $1,002
of FPL
100-     $199        22.8          1.61          3.6       -0.16       -1.3      $1,231
200%
of FPL
200-     $252        28.9          1.64          4.3       -0.09       -1.6      $2,919
300%
of FPL
300-     $178        20.4          1.09          3.8       -0.0003     -0.02     517,011
400%
of FPL
>400% $190           21.8          1.57          2.5       0.05        1.7       $----
of FPL




                                            54
                                      Table 4A:
 Refundable $1,000/$2,000 Credit for Non-Group Insurance, Only Non-Offered Eligible

                                          Number of      Percent of    Net Cost
                                          Persons        Insurance     ($1999
                                          (Millions)     Category      Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                ----           ----          6,153

Total Takeup of Subsidy                   10.03          4.5

   Previously non-group                   3.67           24.4          2,991

   Previously uninsured                   2.79           6.5           2,740

   Previously employer-insured            3.39           2.3           525

   Previously Medicaid                    0.19           0.9           -104

Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                              6.36           42.3

   Uninsured                              -2.10          -4.9

   Employer-Insured                       -4.07          -2.8

       Firm dropped to non-group                 -3.17         -2.2
       Firm dropped to uninsured                 -0.63         -0.5
       COBRA to non-group                        -0.27         -0.2
   Medicaid                               -0.19          -0.9

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                         $2,927




                                         55
                          Table 4B: Distributional Analysis

                                                                               Cost per
         Net Cost Percent of Subsidy             Percent   Change in Percent   Newly
         ($1999   Total        Takeup            of        Uninsured of        Insured
Group    Millions) Cost        (Millions)        Group     (Millions) Unins.   ($1999)
<100% $2,041       33.2        2.56              5.0       -0.8      -4.1      $2,552
of FPL
100-     $2,191    35.6        3.13              6.8       -0.93     -7.4      $2,353
200%
of FPL
200-     $1,129    18.3        1.91              5.0       -0.35     -6.5      $3,197
300%
of FPL
300-     $496      8.1         1.12              3.9       -0.05     -2.3      $9,894
400%
of FPL
>400% $298         4.8         1.31              2.1       0.03      1.0       $----
of FPL




                                            56
                                     Table 5A:
       Refundable $1,000/$2,000 Credit for Any Insurance Purchases, All Eligible

                                                          Percent of
                                           Number of      Insurance       Net Cost
                                           Persons        Category        ($1999)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                  ----           ----           62,177

Total Takeup of Subsidy                     127.28         56.5

   Previously non-group                     8.54           56.8           6,511
   Previously uninsured                     12.43          29.1           9,307

   Previously employer-insured              105.73        72.7            46,906
   Previously Medicaid                     0.58            2.9            -548
Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                                3.41           22.7
   Uninsured                                -12.43         -29.1

   Employer-Insured                         9.60           6.6
   Medicaid                                 -0.58          -2.9

Cost per Newly Insured                                                    $5,003




                                          57
                            Table 5B: Distributional Analysis

                                                                              Cost per
         Net Cost    Percent of   Subsidy       Percent   Change in Percent   Newly
         ($1999      Total        Takeup        of        Uninsured of        Insured
Group    Millions)   Costs        (Millions)    Group     (Millions) Unins.   ($1999)
<100%    $7,442      12.0         12.22         24.0      -3.49     -18.0     $2,132
of FPL

100-     $15,243     24.5         28.65         62.7      -4.79     -38.2     $3,179
200%
of FPL

200-     $13,562     21.8         27.45         71.9      -2.23     -41.1     $6,091
300%
of FPL
300-     $10,008     16.1         21.68         75.9      -0.94     -43.7     $10,667
400%
of FPL
>400%    $15,921     25.6         37.29         60.2      -0.98     -30.9     $16,258
of FPL




                                           58
                                     Table 6A:
          Refundable $500/$1,000 Credit for Non-Group Insurance, All Eligible

                                           Number of      Percent of      Net Cost
                                           Persons        Insurance       ($1999
                                           (Millions)     Category        Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                 ----           ----            3,838

Total Takeup of Subsidy                    11.43          5.1

   Previously non-group                    7.36           49.0            3,184
   Previously uninsured                    2.11           4.9             1,157

   Previously employer-insured              1.74           1.2            -335

   Previously Medicaid                     0.21            1.1            -168
Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                               4.07           27.0
   Uninsured                               -1.71          -4.0

   Employer-Insured                        -2.14          -1.5

       Firm dropped to non-group                  -0.47          -0.3
       Firm dropped to uninsured                  -0.09          -0.06
       Switch to non-group                        -1.27          -0.9
       Uninsured due to decreased                 -0.30          -0.2
       contributions
   Medicaid                                -0.21          -1.1

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                            $2,239




                                          59
                             Table 6B: Distributional Analysis

                                                                               Cost per
         Net Cost    Percent of Subsidy          Percent   Change in Percent   Newly
         ($1999      Costs         Takeup        of        Uninsured of        Insured
Group    Millions)                 (Millions)    Group     (Millions) Unins.   ($1999)
<100% $1,195         31.1          3.01          5.9       -0.57     -3.0      $2,093
of FPL
100-     $1,193      31.1          3.26          7.1       -0.68     -5.4      $1,750
200%
of FPL
200-     $690        18.0          2.15          5.6       -0.29     -5.3      $2,385
300%
of FPL
300-     $389        10.1          1.33          4.7       -0.10     -4.8      $3,788
400%
of FPL
>400% $371           9.7           1.67          2.7       -0.07     -2.2      $5,325
of FPL




                                            60
                                     Table 7A:
         Refundable $2,000/$4,000 Credit for Non-Group Insurance, All Eligible

                                            Number of       Percent of    Net Cost
                                            Persons         Insurance     ($1999
                                            (Millions)      Category      Millions)
Total Cost in 1999 dollars                  ----            ---           37,945

Total Takeup of Subsidy                     32.27           14.3

   Previously non-group                     10.02           66.7           13,368
   Previously uninsured                     8.78            20.6           12,388

   Previously employer-insured              12.90           8.9            12,376

   Previously Medicaid                      0.57            2.8            -187

Total Change in Population Size

   Non-group                                22.24           147.9
   Uninsured                                -7.72           -18.1

   Employer-Insured                         -13.95          -9.6

       Firm dropped to non-group                   -2.04          -1.4
       Firm dropped to uninsured                   -0.11          -0.1

       Switch to non-group                         -10.86         -7.5
       Uninsured due to decreased                  -0.94          -0.6
       contributions
   Medicaid                                 -0.57           -2.8

Cost per Newly Insured ($1999)                                             $4,915




                                          61
                             Table 7B: Distributional Analysis

                                                                             Cost per
         Net Cost    Percent      Subsidy     Percent   Change in            Newly
         ($1999      of           Takeup     of         Uninsured Percent    Insured
Group    Millions)   Costs        (Millions) Group      (Millions) of Unins. ($1999)
<100% $7,692         20.3         6.32        12.4      -2.17       -11.2    $3,538
of FPL
100-     $10,983     28.9         9.21        20.2      -3.23       -25.7    $3,401
200%
of FPL
200-     $7,616      20.1         6.55        17.2      -1.46       -26.9    $5,222
300%
of FPL
300-     $4,794      12.6         4.24           14.9    -0.49      -22.8    $9,821
400%
of FPL
>400% $6,860         18.1         5.94        9.6        -0.37      —11.7    $18,518
of FPL




                                            62
                                      Table 8

                                                                             % of
                                                Change    Change   Cost      benefits
                                                in non-   in       per       for
                 Total    Total    Change in    group     employer newly     <200%
                 takeup   cost     uninsured    insured   insured  insured   FPL

50% of Costs     14.44    7,028    -2.81        6.44      -3.44    2,503     60.7
Subsidized
Phase-out from   15.17    10,898   -3.71        7.73      -3.67    2,938     68.8
$30,000 to
$50,000
No liquidity     19.91    14,652   -5.46        11.36     -5.37    2,683     59.5
constraints

$2,000/$4,000    37.11    44,345   -12.10       27.13     -13.93   3,665     54.9
cap and no
liquidity
constraints
10% lower non-   20.86    14,569   -4.94        12.06     -6.71    2,951     55.8
group costs
Lower            17.07    12,222   -4.02        8.47      -4.08    3,037     59.0
switching
elasticity
Lowerprice       16.78    11,691   -2.56        8.14      -5.20    4,575     55.0
elasticity




                                           63
