                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DOES PUBLIC INSURANCE IMPROVE THE
                         EFFICIENCY OF MEDICAL CARE? MEDICAID
                        EXPANSIONS AND CHILD HOSPITALIZATIONS


                                              Leemore Dafny
                                             Jonathan Gruber


                                           Working Paper 7555
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7555

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2000




We are grateful to Arpa Shah for research assistance, to Aaron Yelowitz for his assistance with our Medicaid
eligibility programs, to Robert Kaestner, Brigitte Madrian, and seminar participants atNorthwestern University
and the American Economic Association meetings for helpful comments, and especially to John Horm and the
staff at the Research Data Center at NCHS for their help in making the NHDS data available to us. Each
author acknowledges financial support from both the National Institute on Aging and the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Leemore Dafny and Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
Does Public Insurance Improve the Efficiency of Medical Care?
Medicaid Expansions and Child Hospitalizations
Leemore Dafny and Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 7555
February 2000
JELNo. 118, H51

                                             ABSTRACT

        One of the benefits commonly claimed for expanded public health insurance is improved
efficiency of medical care delivery, but this claim has little rigorous empirical support. We provide
such support by assessing the impact of the Medicaid expansions over the 1983-1996 period on the
incidence of avoidable hospitalizations. We find that expanded public insurance eligibility leads to
a significant decline in avoidable hospitalization: over this period Medicaid eligibility expansions were
associated with a 22% decline in avoidable hospitalization. But we also find that there is a
countervailing and larger impact in terms of increased access to hospital care for newly eligible
children, so that there is an overall 10% rise in child hospitalizations due to the expansions. The
expansions have mixed implications for treatment intensity, but appear to be associated with a
significant shift in the types of hospitals at which children are treated, with fewer children treated in
public hospitals and more in for-profit facilities.


Leemore Dafny                                                   Jonathan Gruber
National Bureau of Economic Research                            MIT
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                                       Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                             E52-355
and MIT                                                         50 Memorial Drive
                                                                Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                                and NBER
                                                                gruberj @mit.edu
        The dramatic rise and high level of uninsurance rates in the U.S., despite an economic

boom that has had only one interruption in 15 years, is striking. In 1987, 14.8% of non-elderly

Americans were without health insurance. Over the next decade, the non-elderly population

without insurance coverage grew by nearly 25% to 18.3%, so that in 1997 there were over 43

million uninsured Americans. Particularly troubling is the significant increase in the uninsurance

rates of children in the U.S.; despite dramatic expansions of public health insurance through the

Medicaid program since the mid-i 980s, the share of children without health insurance has grown

by over 10% since 1987, to 15% of children (Fronstin, 1998).

        This rise in the uninsured concerns policy-makers for two reasons. The first is that

insurance coverage is generally assumed to lead to better health. The second is that insurance

coverage is generally assumed to lead to more efficient use of medical care. The presumption is

that uninsured individuals will not only use more care when they become insured, but that care

will be used more appropriately, for example by using physicians rather than emergency rooms

 for primary care.

        There is a substantial literature assessing the first of these contentions, with both simple

 comparisons of individuals across insurance states and more sophisticated analyses of exogenous

 shifts in insurance coverage; see Gruber (1997) for an extensive review. But there is much less

 evidence on the second contention.

       The purpose of our paper is to address this deficiency. We do so by exploring the impacts

of the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s, the largest change in public

insurance policy over the past 30 years, on the nature of hospitalizations of children in the U.S.

We consider the impact of Medicaid on both the total number of child hospitalizations, and the
                                                   2

types of hospitalizations. We explore in particular whether the types of hospitalizations that have

been denoted by medical experts as "avoidable" rise or fall as Medicaid is expanded. If Medicaid

is increasing access to "more efficient" primary care, then we should observe a decline in these

avoidable hospitalizations as Medicaid expands. In theory, since Medicaid is both increasing

access for unavoidable hospitalizations, but promoting efficiency that reduces avoidable

hospitalizations, the net impact of expansions of the program on hospital use are ambiguous.

       We focus our analysis on the hospitalization of children, the demographic group which has

been the primary target group of public insurance policy over the past 15 years.1 While much

public policy attention has focused on children, the economics literature on hospitalization has

largely ignored them; most work by economists on hospitalization has focused instead on adults

and, in particular, the elderly. But children's hospitalizations represent 7% of the total, and 11%

of hospital spending is devoted to children. Moreover, there has been a sharp decrease in the

incidence of child hospitalization over the past 15 years, with rates falling by almost 50% since

1980, much more than for adults. This trend may be related to the high fraction of children's

hospitalizations that is believed to be avoidable - 25 percent as compared to 10 percent for adults.

As a result, children are a particularly interesting group to study in this context.

       There are two key features of our empirical strategy. The first is the Medicaid expansions,

which occurred over the period since 1984 at a very different pace across the states, and across

different groups of children within states. This policy heterogeneity provides the exogenous


         'There have also been substantial expansions in the coverage of the expenses of
 pregnancy; see Gruber (1997) for a review. But here the issues of efficiency are different, since
 virtually every pregnancy results in a hospitalization; rather, the question is whether mothers who
 gain insurance coverage see physicians earlier in their pregnancies, and if pregnancy outcomes
 improve as a result. For evidence that this is the case, see Currie and Gruber (1996a).
                                                 3

variation in insurance status necessary to carry out our analysis. The second is our use of the

National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS), the only nationally representative survey of hospital

discharges. These data have large samples of child discharges for each year, as well as detailed

information on admission diagnoses that allows us to assess the "avoidability" of hospitalizations.

By matching our information on Medicaid eligibility to these data, we are able to assess the

impact of insurance status on the number and type of hospitalizations.

       We find that extending Medicaid coverage to low-income children has substantially

reduced the incidence of avoidable hospitalization, while increasing the rate of hospitalization

overall. Between 1983 and 1996, Medicaid expansions led to 22 percent fewer avoidable

pediatric hospitalizations, but 10 percent more hospitalizations overall. In addition, the

expansions are associated with shorter hospital stays, but a higher number of procedures

performed during those stays. They also appear to have significantly increased children's access

to for-profit hospitals.

        Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides background on child hospitalizations,

avoidable hospitalizations, and the Medicaid expansions. Part II discusses our data and empirical

strategy. Part III presents our results on total and avoidable hospitalizations. Part IV then extends

our analysis to consider what Medicaid has done to the nature of child hospitalization more

generally, focusing on sources of insurance coverage, intensity of treatment, and the types of

hospitals to which children are admitted. Part V concludes.
                                                    4

                                          Part I: Background

Pediatric Hospitalizations

          Accounting for 7.2% of all hospital admissions in 1996, pediatric hospitalizations are

frequently overlooked in the health economics literature. Yet these hospitalizations were

responsible for $20 billion in charges in 1987, the latest year for which data are available,

representing 10.7% of hospital charges and nearly half of total expenditures on child health care

services.2 Moreover, recent public health insurance reforms have focused on extending coverage

to impoverished children, highlighting the need to understand children's health and health care

utilization patterns.

          Figure 1 presents time trends in hospitalization rates in the U.S. for the under 15, 15 to 64,

and 65 plus populations, estimated using the annual National Hospital Discharge Survey (N}JDS).

The disparity in hospitalization rates across age groups is large, with the over 65 population

hospitalized 9 times as frequently as children (346 per 1,000 elderly vs. 38 per 1,000 children). A

marked decline in hospitalization rates during the 1980-1996 period is evident for both the 15-64

and the under 15 groups; the trend in the over 65 category fluctuates during this period, but due to

the changing age composition of this group, this trend cannot be meaningfully compared to the

trends in the younger groups. Overall, the hospitalization rate declined by 31%, with the relative

decline for children (47%) the largest among the three groups.

          Table 1 compares the leading causes of pediatric and adult hospitalizations, tabulated

using the first-listed diagnosis code in the 1996 NIHDS. The table highlights the obvious age-



 2
     Tabulations from the National Medical Expenditure Survey, 1987, as reported in Hahn (1992).
 Estimates refer to children aged 0 to 17.
                                                   5

related patterns in hospital needs, with diseases of the respiratory system (asthma, pneumonia, and

acute infections) topping the list for children, childbirth ranking first for adults 15-64, and

diseases of the circulatory system (largely heart disease) accounting for the plurality of

hospitalizations among the elderly. Infectious and parasitic diseases, along with the category of

endocrine, nutritional, metabolic, and immunity disorders, account for the major afflictions

specific to children.

       Despite this wealth of statistical information on children's hospitalizations, there is little

work by health policy analysts on the causal determinants of child hospitalization; the work that

exists is largely descriptive in nature. McConnochie et. al (1997a) review the medical literature

on pediatric hospitalizations, and draw two conclusions that are important for our purposes. First,

there is a substantial amount of "inappropriateness" or "avoidability" in child hospitalization; we

discuss this further below. Second, there is high geographic variation in hospitalization rates of

children that is not easily explained by morbidity differences. In their own studies of

hospitalization rates for infants of different socioeconomic backgrounds, the authors find that

nearly 80 percent of the higher rates for disadvantaged infants is due to "discretionary" as opposed

to "mandatory" conditions, suggesting that disease prevalence is not the only determinant of

hospitalization. A study of infant hospitalizations for asthma by Homer et al. (1996) controls for

morbidity burdens using measures of oxygen saturation in admitted patients, and finds that

morbidity does not explain all of the differences in hospitalization rates between Boston and

Rochester, New York. Goodman et al. (1994) investigate the effects of demand inducement and

health system characteristics on pediatric discharges, concluding that discharges are positively

associated with bed supply, and negatively associated with distance from the hospital and
                                                 6

residence near an academic medical center.

       Finally, several studies have noted that hospitalization rates are higher for the uninsured

and Medicaid populations, though these studies do not present separate estimates for children (e.g.

Weissman et al., 1992; Billings and Teicholz, 1990). Only two studies of which we are aware,

however, utilize a framework that addresses causality between insurance status and the probability

of hospitalization for children. The RAND Health Insurance experiment (Manning et al., 1987)

uses randomly assigned variation in copayment rates to show that there are insignificant increases

in the probability of admission for children covered fully for inpatient expenses versus those

covered by cost-sharing plans. On the other hand, Currie and Gruber (1996), using the Medicaid

expansions studied here, find that becoming eligible for Medicaid nearly doubles the probability

of hospitalization. The discrepancy between these findings may arise from the fact that the

RAND experiment capped out-of-pocket exposure at a reasonably low level, so that in many cases

those children covered by cost sharing plans were effectively fully insured for hospitalization.



Avoidable Hospitalizations

       Defined as hospitalizations that "might not have occurred had [patients] received effective,

timely, and continuous outpatient (ambulatory) medical care for certain chronic disease

conditions," avoidable hospitalizations (AVH5) are commonly used as a measure of access to

health care. As such, the list of AVH diagnoses is carefully selected so as to represent conditions

more likely to result from inadequate access to ambulatory care, rather than from differences in

disease prevalence or provider practices. The list is therefore distinct from so-called

"discretionary" admissions, those for which subjective physician judgment is an integral part of
                                                   7

the decision to admit.3 For example, admissions for immunizable conditions are non-

discretionary and avoidable, whereas admissions for acute fever are discretionary but unavoidable.

Of course, as noted by Weissman, Gatsonis, and Epstein in their oft-cited 1992 JAMA article on

AVH rates by insurance status, "being avoidable is a matter of degree." Nevertheless, the AVH

rate is designed to capture the effectiveness of the health care system in providing timely care.

       A list of pediatric AVH diagnoses is presented in Table 2. Of the 39.4 million pediatric

hospitalizations that occurred between 1983 and 1996, 26 percent were classified as avoidable

using this definition. The top 6 avoidable conditions are for asthma (24% of AVH5), pneumonia

(23%), gastroenteritis (14%), ear, nose, and throat (ENT) infections (13%), dehydration (8%), and

kidney/urinary tract infections (5%). Previous estimates of the share of hospitalizations that are

avoidable range from 7 to 12 percent for the nonelderly population as a whole and 18 to 28

percent for children.4 We use the criteria defined in Gadomski et al. (1997), who base their

definition on a 1993 Institute of Medicine report on access to health care. The authors revise the

general definition provided in the report, excluding adult conditions and dental diagnoses and

adjusting the criteria to reflect pediatric illnesses. There are two other definitions used in the

literature, but one is not specific to children (Weissman et al, 1992), and the second (Casanova

and Starfield, 1995) is a slightly more expansive version of the Gadomski et al. list, classifying 29

percent of the NHDS hospitalizations as avoidable. Given the minimal differences between the

two pediatric definitions available, we choose the more conservative measure.



  McCormochie et al. (1997b).
  Weissman et al. (1992); Pappas et al. (1990); Casanova and Starfield (1995); McConnochie et
 al. (1 997a). Note the estimates that include adults exclude psychiatric and obstetrical
 admissions.
                                                   8

          Time series trends in avoidable hospitalizations are presented in Figure 2, which shows

both AVH rates per 1,000 population under age 16, and the share of hospitalizations for this age

group which are categorized as avoidable. Between 1983 and 1996, there was a steep decline in

the AVH rate of nearly 35 percent. However, this decline is slower than the overall decline in

hospitalization of children documented above, so the share of hospitalizations that are avoidable is

rising.

          Previous research on AVHs has concentrated on two areas: (1) calculating age and gender-

standardized AVH rates for different populations and types of insurance coverage; (2) establishing

a causal link between inadequate ambulatory care and subsequent AVHs. A good example of the

research in the first area is Weissman, Gatsonis, and Epstein, who studied the relative risk of

admission, by insurance status, for 12 AVH conditions in the under 65 population residing in

Maryland and Massachusetts in 1987. After adjusting for age, sex, and baseline hospital

utilization for unavoidable conditions, the relative AVH admission rates for the uninsured as

compared to the privately insured were 1.71 in Massachusetts and 1.49 in Maryland. For

Medicaid recipients, the relative AVH admission rates were 1.84 and 1.65 in Massachusetts and

Maryland, respectively.5

          This work, though useful for descriptive purposes, fails to control adequately for omitted

variables influencing both insurance status and AVH incidence, and therefore cannot provide

evidence on a potential causal link between the two. For example, those who are uninsured may

be in worse underlying health, leading to more avoidable hospitalizations independent of their



         5Two other studies that examine the relationship between insurance status and AVH rates
 are Billings and Teicholz (1990) and Pappas et al. (1997).
                                                   9

insurance status. By exploiting exogenous changes in insurance coverage across different age

groups and states over time, our approach enables us to surmount these types of biases.

       The only previous work of which we are aware that attempts to assess the impact of

exogenous insurance shifts on the efficiency of hospitalization is Kaestner, Joyce, and Racine

(1999). They use data from 11 states to examine whether children who live in low income areas

are less likely to be admitted for avoidable categories of illnesses when Medicaid expands in those

areas. Their results are mixed, with decreases in non-asthma avoidable hospitalizations but

increases in asthma hospitalizations for younger children, and no impact on older children. One

limitation of their approach is that the denominator for their analysis is either total hospitalizations

or total births at those hospitals, both of which are likely to be rising as Medicaid expands (since

the expansions for pregnancy are correlated with the expansions for children); this could lead to a

relative fall in avoidable hospitalizations even as absolute avoidable hospitalizations are rising.

The question of relevance for thinking about efficiency is not whether avoidable hospitalizations

rose more quickly or slowly than total hospitalizations; it is whether avoidable hospitalizations

rise or fall at all as Medicaid expands. This is the question that we address.

        The remainder of the work in this first area consists of a number of medical papers

documenting significantly higher AVH rates among low-income populations and blacks (e.g.

Begley et al., 1994; Billings et al., 1993). The authors acknowledge that they cannot fully control

for disease prevalence among the different populations, and therefore the evidence they find,

while supportive of the hypothesis that AVHs are an outcome associated with poor access to

ambulatory care, is not conclusive.

        The second strand of literature provides evidence for the presumption that avoidable
                                                  10

hospitalizations are indeed avoidable; that is, that increased consumption of outpatient services

does, in fact, deliver fewer AVHs. One approach has been to link aggregate measures of access to

medical care with corresponding data on AVH rates. Using hospital discharge data from 26

health service areas (HSAs) in Pennsylvania in 1989, Parchman and Culler (1994) find that higher

per-capita rates of family and general practice physicians are negatively associated with AVH

rates, after controlling for the effects of mean per-capita income. Another approach has been to

show that avoidable hospitalizations are associated with inadequate pre-hospital care. Solberg et

al. (1990) find that 45% of avoidable hospitalizations studied failed explicit quality criteria and

10% were judged by physicians to have received poor-quality care. A third approach is taken by

Homer et al. (1996) and Holfan and Newacheck (1993), who show that places and income groups

with lower rates of preventative care for childhood asthma have higher rates of hospitalization,

though this association could also be explained by a host of other intermediating factors between

location and poverty status and hospitalization. Finally, Gadomski et al. (1998) evaluated the

Maryland Access to Care (MAC) Medicaid managed care program, which emphasized improved

access to primary care. They find that the program increased the odds of ambulatory care, and

that among those children who did use ambulatory care, the program was associated with

decreased probabilities of both hospitalization in general and avoidable hospitalization in

particular.

        Each of these approaches has limitations, but the weight of the evidence supports the

contention of a link between inadequate primary care and avoidable hospitalization. We therefore

follow the medical literature in employing the AVH rate as a measure of the efficiency of patient

care.
                                                 11

Medicaid Expansions

       Historically, Medicaid eligibility for children has been tied to participation in the Aid for

Families with Dependent Children program (AFDC). This linkage with AFDC restricted access

to the program in three ways. First, despite the existence of the AFDC-Unemployed Parents

program (AFDC-UP) which provides benefits to households in which the primary earner is

unemployed, AFDC benefits were generally available only to single-parent households. Second,

income cutoffs for cash welfare vary across states, and can be very low. For example, in 1984, the

cutoff for a family of 4 in South Carolina was only 29 percent of the poverty line. Third, the

stigma of applying for cash welfare programs may have prevented eligible families from receiving

Medicaid benefits.

       In some states, children could also qualify for Medicaid under state Medically Needy or

Ribicoff programs. The Medically Needy program relaxed the income criteria for eligibility by

covering people who would have been eligible for AFDC if their incomes were lower, but who

had large medical expenditures that brought their "net income" below program thresholds. The

Ribicoff option allowed states to cover children in two-parent families who met the AFDC

income criteria.

       Beginning with the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (DEFRA '84), the linkage between

AFDC coverage and eligibility for Medicaid has gradually been weakened. DEFRA '84

eliminated the family structure requirements for Medicaid eligibility of young children by

requiring states to cover children born after September 1, 1983 who lived in families that were

income-eligible for AFDC. DEFRA was followed by a series of measures that raised the income

cutoffs for Medicaid eligibility, first at state option, and then by federal mandate. These options
                                                   12

are described in Appendix 1. The important point to note is that states took up these options at

different rates, so that there was a great deal of variation across states in both the income

thresholds and the age limits governing Medicaid eligibility.

       Over the 1983 to 1996 sample period we use, we estimate that the fraction of children

under 16 who were eligible for Medicaid rose by 16 percentage points. But this national trend

masks considerable heterogeneity across the states: there was actually a decline in eligibility of

2% in Alaska during this period, and a rise of 37% in West Virginia. In addition, there is also

heterogeneity within states in the rate at which children of different ages were covered. For

example, coverage of infants under 1 rose by over 45% in Texas, while coverage of children ages

11 to 15 rose by less than 5%.   It is this variation across states, within states over time, and even
across different age groups in the same state at a given point in time, that we use to identify our

models.



                               Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

       Our study period begins in 1983, nearly a year before the first federally-mandated

expansions took effect, and continues through 1996, the latest year for which all the data are

available. The source of our hospitalization data is the National Hospital Discharge Survey

(NIHDS), the only continuous nationwide survey of inpatient utilization of non-federal, short-stay

hospitals. The NHDS samples approximately 250,000 discharges annually, collecting data on

diagnosis and procedure codes, discharge status, length of stay, and selected hospital and

demographic characteristics. Weights provided with the survey data enable estimation of statistics
                                                   13

for the universe of annual hospitalizations in the United States.

        Because our primary independent variable of interest, Medicaid eligibility, varies only by

state, birth date, and calendar quarter, we group the individual hospital data into cells. The sample

size does not permit grouping at such a fine level of detail, so we define cells for 4 age categories

for each state and year. The age categories are children under 1 year old, 1-5 year-olds, 6-10 year-

olds, and 11-15 year-olds. Note that the under 1 category does not include the initial

hospitalization of newborns admitted upon birth. This age group nevertheless warrants its own

category, both because it accounts for 27.6% of total hospitalizations to children under 15 during

the study period, and because many federal and state initiatives have expanded Medicaid

eligibility specifically for infants under 1 year old.

        Of the resulting 2,856 cells (4 age categories * 14 years *   51   "states" (50 states plus

Washington, DC), we drop 348 because the corresponding state-years are not surveyed at all, 180

because they are poorly surveyed for several consecutive years, and 20 because they are

undersampled in advance of being excluded entirely from the sample. These rules affect 16 states

in total: 3 are dropped entirely from the sample, 11 are dropped in the late 1980s when the survey

data suddenly becomes patchy or disappears, and 2 are missing data for 2 consecutive years in the

middle of the study period but are otherwise included in the sample. Regressions of a dummy for

inclusion in the data set on our independent variables revealed no systematic relationship between

the probability of inclusion and our variables of interest. Each of the remaining 2,308 cells is then

matched to the appropriate age/state/year population estimate from the Census Bureau. We

calculate hospitalization rates by dividing the weighted number of hospitalizations in each cell by

population.
                                                 14

       The major advantage of the NHDS is that it provides a large, nationally representative

sample of hospital discharges, with information on diagnosis at hospitalization that can be used to

identify avoidable hospitalizations. The major disadvantage is that the NHDS is not designed to

yield state-specific estimates of either total or child hospitalizations. Discharges from hospitals

with 1,000 or more beds are sampled with certainty, while discharges from smaller institutions are

selected using a stratified, three-stage design, with selection of primary sampling units (PSUs),

hospitals within the selected PSUs, and discharges within the hospitals constituting the first,

second, and third stages, respectively.

       This sampling design leads to two problems for the empirical analysis, which relies on

state level estimates of hospitalization rates. First, this sampling approach can and does leave a

number of states entirely (or almost entirely) out of the survey. Discharges in the states that are

included in the survey are overweighted in order to produce national estimates; thus, a number of

state cells have large numbers of weighted hospitalizations relative to the underlying state

population. Since we only include states that have survey data, this results in a high rate of

hospitalizations in our dataset, relative to the true national average. Second, since the PSUs can

cross state boundaries, a sample which is representative of a PSU need not represent the

individual states that comprise it.

       Neither of these factors would present a significant problem for the analysis if the

sampling rules remained fixed from year to year. By including state fixed effects, we can capture

the extent to which states' estimated hospitalization rates deviate from representative levels. We
                                                  15

can also reduce the influence of outliers by censoring the hospitalization rates.6 But there is

reason to believe that the sampling rules within states change over time, particularly in 1987 when

there is a redesign of the NIHDS. This could be particularly problematic for our analysis if there is

a shift in the composition of hospitals across states within a PSU.

       As a result, we also include in our model a set of state*year interactions. These

interactions allow for changes within states over time in the sampling frame of hospitals, and also

control for other state time trends which may be correlated with Medicaid eligibility policy. Our

model is still identified when these are included, since the expansions occurred at a differential

pace for different age groups.

       The final issue related to the sampling design concerns the question of what weights to use

for our regression analysis. The accuracy of the NHDS estimate for a given cell depends not on

the sample size of that cell per se, but on the sampling probability of a discharge within that cell.

Thus, even if a larger number of discharges for 1-5 year-olds are sampled in California than in

Rhode Island, the accuracy of the hospital statistics for 1-5 year-olds in Rhode Island will be much

greater if the sample represents a larger fraction of the universe of discharges. Restrictions on the

use of our NHDS dataset, discussed briefly below, prevented our calculating these sampling

probabilities for each cell. We were, however, able to develop approximate sampling

probabilities for each state and year using the ratio of total N}IDS survey discharges in that state

and year to total discharges in that state and year as reported by the American Hospital

Association.




         6We censor the individual cell hospitalization rate at 0.5. Our results are not very
 sensitive to the censoring point used.
                                                  16

       Descriptive statistics for our cell data, calculated using these weights, are presented in

Table 3. The first panel shows several key variables as a fraction of the population. The

hospitalization rate in our sample is 10.3%, which is significantly higher than the aggregate rate

shown in Figure 1; as noted above, this arises through the fact that we are only using sampled

cells in the NHDS, which are overweighted to represent the nation. Nevertheless, the time trend

in our data is very similar to the national trend, suggesting little systematic bias to our estimates as

a result. The AVH rate is 2.5 percentage points, or 24% of the total hospitalization rate. The

incidence of the leading causes of avoidable hospitalization are shown as well. The second panel

describes the distribution of characteristics of hospitalizations. About 56% of hospitalizations are

financed by private insurance, and about one-quarter by Medicaid. Over four-fifths of

hospitalizations in the sample occur in non-profit hospitals.

       Due to the sensitive nature of the information gathered in the NHDS, geographic

identifiers are not released in the public use files. We were able to create the NHDS data cells and

match Medicaid policy variables to those cells through an agreement with the Research Data

Center at the National Center for Health Statistics. Once the dataset was complete, we were

allowed restricted remote access to the data.



Empirical Strategy

       Our key variable of interest is the percentage of children in each age group, state, and year

eligible for Medicaid. We estimate this variable using a detailed simulation model originally

developed for Currie and Gruber (1996a,b), and updated through 1996 for this project. This

model uses information on family structure, age, income, state and year to impute eligibility for
                                                    17

Medicaid using state-specific rules for AFDC and expansion eligibility. These earlier papers

describe this model in more detail.

       We begin by extracting data for 0 to 16 year-olds from the March Current Population

Survey (CPS) data for each year, which has sufficient information on income, family structure,

and location to determine eligibility for Medicaid. We then compute eligibility for each child in

the CPS data, aggregate into the age groups used for our NHDS sample (0, 1-5, 6-10, 11-15), and

match the eligibility measures onto the NHDS sample by age group, state, and year.

       After matching these eligibility measures to our NHDS data, we can estimate models of

the following form:

(1)    HOSPajt = L + I3iELT1Gajt + 13211a + I33j + I4; + I35j t + Cajt

where a indexes age groups, j indexes states, and t indexes years; HOSP is the hospitalization rate

(or one of our other dependent variables), ELIG is the fraction of children eligible for Medicaid in

each age group/state/year cell, and 1la' ,   and; are full sets of dummy variables for age group,
state, and year, respectively.

        This model relates the rate of hospitalization in a cell to the probability that a child in that

cell is eligible for Medicaid. We control for age group, state, and year fixed effects to capture any

underlying correlation between Medicaid eligibility and hospitalization across these groups. In

addition, as discussed above, we include a full set of state*year interactions to control both for any

changes in the NHDS sampling frame that change how a state is represented in our data, and for

other state-specific trends that might be correlated with Medicaid eligibility policy.

        Even in this rich framework, however, two concerns remain with our ELIG measure. The

first is measurement error: given the small sample sizes by age group and state in the CPS, there is
                                                   18

likely to be substantial noise in our measure relative to true population Medicaid eligibility. The

second is omitted variables bias: the actual eligibility of these children will be correlated with

omitted factors that also determine their hospitalization rates. For example, a recession that hits a

given state/age group particularly hard may lead to both rising Medicaid eligibility and rising

hospitalization.

        We therefore instrument for actual eligibility using what Currie and Gruber call "simulated

eligibility". To construct this instrument, we begin by drawing a nationally representative random

sample of 250 children of each age from each year's CPS. Then, we take this same sample

through our simulation programs to calculate the fraction of children of each age who would be

eligible for Medicaid if they lived in each state. That is, we ask how many zero year olds would

have been eligible had they lived in California, how many would have been eligible had they lived

in Texas, etc. We then once again aggregate these data into the NIHDS age groupings, and match

them onto the NHDS data by age group, state and year. These simulated eligibility estimates

become instruments for actual eligibility, and we estimate our models below by two-stage least

squares.

        This nationally representative population measure provides a convenient index of the

generosity of state Medicaid rules that utilizes only variation in the eligibility rules across states,

years, and age groups of children. It is independent of factors specific to state/age groups that

might affect both Medicaid eligibility and hospitalization rates. This instrumental variables

strategy also surmounts measurement error problems in our actual eligibility measure, so long as

the error does not derive from miscoding of state rules. As shown in Table 3, about one-quarter

of the children for whom hospital data is available are estimated to be eligible for Medicaid over
                                                 19

this sample period.



                                      Part III : Basic Results

Total Hospitalizations

       The first column of Table 4 presents our results for total hospitalizations. As noted above,

our dependent variable is the rate of hospitalizations per child, and our independent variable of

interest is the percentage of children in that age group/state/year cell eligible for Medicaid. We

show only the coefficient of interest from models that also include a full set of age group, state,

and year dummies, as well as state*year interactions.

       Our first important finding is that increases in Medicaid eligibility are associated with

increases in hospitalizations. We estimate that for each percentage point of children made eligible

for Medicaid, hospitalizations rise by 0.066 percentage points. That is, we estimate that if all

children were made eligible, hospitalizations would rise by 6.6 percentage points, or by 64% of

their baseline value. Since the expansions over our time period increased eligibility by 16

percentage points, we estimate that they increased child hospitalization by 1.06 percentage point,

or 10.3 percent.

       This finding confirms Cunie and Gruber's (1996b) finding that children are more likely to

be hospitalized if they are Medicaid-eligible. Our estimate is somewhat smaller than theirs; they

found that making a child eligible for Medicaid doubled the odds of hospitalization. But their

analysis examines the odds of a child experiencing at least one hospitalization, whereas our

examines total hospitalizations per capita. If Medicaid serves to increase first hospitalizations of

children, but to reduce additional hospitalizations, the two results are readily reconciled.
                                                 20

       This finding also reveals that, if the Medicaid expansions did increase the efficiency of

care, this effect was not large enough to produce a decline in total hospitalizations. That is, either

efficiency did not rise, or any efficiency gains were offset by increased access of children for

unavoidable inpatient care. We return to this point below.



Avoidable Hospitalizations

       The next column of Table 4 shows our findings for avoidable hospitalizations per capita.

In fact, we find a very significant negative effect of Medicaid eligibility on avoidable

hospitalizations. Our estimates suggest that for each percentage point increase in eligibility,

avoidable hospitalizations fall by 0.034 percentage points. That is, an out-of-sample extrapolation

suggests that if all children were Medicaid-eligible, there would be no avoidable hospitalization.

More relevantly, we find that the expansions over the 1983-1996 period reduced avoidable

hospitalizations by 0.54 percentage points, or 22%.

       This striking finding suggests substantial efficiency gains to providing public insurance

coverage to children. We cairnot prove through this evidence that the route to more efficient

hospital care was improved use of ambulatory care. But, given the nature of these types of

admissions, and given that Currie and Gruber (1996b) find significant improvements in access to

primary care associated with the Medicaid expansions, this result certainly implies that improved

ambulatory care is the cause of increased efficiency of hospitalizations.

       To gain a clearer picture of how Medicaid impacts avoidable hospitalizations, in Table 5

we consider separately the impact of Medicaid eligibility on each of the six most frequent

categories of avoidable hospitalizations: asthma; pneumonia; gastroenteritis; ear, nose, and throat
                                                   21

(ENT) infections; kidney/urinary tract infections; and dehydration.

        Our results here are quite interesting. For four of the six top conditions, the impact of

Medicaid is negative, and it is significant for pneumonia, gastroenteritis, and ENT infections. For

kidney/urinary tract infections, the coefficient is positive, but not significant. But for dehydration,

the coefficient is positive and significant. This is striking since the type of ambulatory care that is

likely to be most effective in preventing dehydration is not preventive care, but rather emergent

ambulatory care. This suggests that for the conditions for which preventive care is most key, there

is very strong support for a causal role of Medicaid in reducing avoidable hospitalization.



Reconciling the Hospitalization Results

        Our finding that the Medicaid expansions simultaneously decreased the avoidable

hospitalization rate by approximately 0.54 percentage points and increased the total

hospitalization rate by 1.06 percentage points implies that "unavoidable" hospitalizations rose by

1.6 percentage points, or 16% of our baseline hospitalization rate. That is, the access gains of

expanded Medicaid eligibility were quite large. This finding begs the question: what kind of

hospitalizations were so responsive to the increase in insurance coverage?

        In fact, as noted earlier, there is a substantial literature on child hospitalization which

suggests that a large share of hospitalizations are for "discretionary" diagnoses that may respond

to insurance coverage. "Discretionary" admissions involve a substantial amount of physician

discretion, and can often be handled on an outpatient basis. They are also characterized by a lack

of clinical consensus regarding the appropriate course of treatment, and large locational variation

in admit rates. A study of hospital records in four states in the early 1980s finds that 14 to 22
                                                  22

percent of all admissions for all age groups occurred in the "most discretionary" DRG codes,

defined using measures of local variation in admit rates (Roos et al. 1988). A more recent study

(McConnochie et al. 1 997b) of geographic variation in rates of infant hospitalization in Rochester,

New York reveals that 59 percent of hospitalizations were discretionary, as compared to 18

percent that were mandatory (defined as a diagnosis "for an acute condition that is life-threatening

or has the potential to produce long-term disability without (or even with) immediate

hospitalization").

       It is difficult to assess directly the impact of the Medicaid expansions on discretionary

hospitalizations, since the sole compilation of diagnoses that we can find is designed for infants

only. However, as a specification check that our results are sensible, we can assess whether our

finding of an increase in total hospitalizations is reflected in a category of mandatory

hospitalization that seems unlikely to respond to Medicaid eligibility: the hospitalization rate for

severe fractures, burns, and trauma. That is, if our finding of rising total hospitalizations reflects

not rising discretionary admissions, but rather some spurious omitted variable, then we should see

rises in mandatory admissions as well. But if the mechanism is the one that we suggest, then such

mandatory admissions should not be rising with eligibility increases.

        In fact, we find no significant relationship between the hospitalization rate in this category

and Medicaid eligibility. The coefficient of Medicaid eligibility in a regression using the

hospitalization rate for severe fractures, burns, and trauma as the dependent variable is -0.0002

(.00 1 1). This falsification exercise provides support for our hypothesis that the Medicaid

expansions led to a greater number of unavoidable, discretionary admissions.
                                                  23

Implications

       Assessing the implications of these findings is difficult. In principle, the efficiency gains

from reduced avoidable hospitalizations may be quite large. Among children enrolled in

Medicaid in 1996, average hospital expenditures per year per user of hospital services was $3,627

(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1998). The typical user of hospital services has

1.5 inpatient stays per year (Hahn, 1992), so that the cost per stay was approximately $2,418.

While data is not specifically available on the cost of an avoidable hospitalization, lengths of stay

for avoidable hospitalizations are on average about 2/3 those for unavoidable hospitalizations, so

that we can roughly impute their cost as $1600. This is roughly forty times the mean cost of an

ambulatory visit per user of ambulatory services, once again corrected for the frequency of service

use. Thus, so long as the ambulatory care that reduced the incidence of avoidable hospitalizations

consisted of fewer than 40 episodes, there were cost savings from these increases in how care was

delivered.

       Of course, not only those children who are at risk for avoidable hospitalization will

increase their usage of primary care, so that even if for a given child there were fewer than 40

additional primary care visits associated with an avoided hospital stay, over all children the

Medicaid expansions may have been associated with more than 40 additional visits per avoided

hospitalization. However, the available evidence suggests that there were fewer than 40 increased

visits per hospitalization avoided. Currie and Gruber (1996b) find that making a child eligible for

Medicaid lowers the odds of going a year without a physician visit by 10 percent. We find here

that if all children were eligible for Medicaid the rate of avoidable hospitalization per capita

would fall by 3.4%. This suggests that there are only on the order of three increased visits per
                                                  24

hospitalization avoided. Of course, the 10% figure is a lower bound, since Medicaid would

increase not just the odds of seeing a physician, but the frequency with which a physician is seen.

Moreover, it may be that the physician contacts that allow children to avoid hospitalization are

more expensive than average. But even if the rate of physician contacts rose substantially, and

even if they were somewhat more costly than average, it seems unlikely that this calculation

would approach the point where the increased ambulatory care was not cost-effective.

       At the same time, however, Medicaid is associated with an even larger rise in unavoidable,

discretionary hospitalizations. As a result, the expansions are raising total costs. Evaluating the

costs and benefits of these increased hospitalizations is very difficult, and relies critically on the

value of any health improvements to children from increased access to the hospital. Currie and

Gruber (1996b) document that the Medicaid expansions overall were associated with a significant

decline in child mortality, but there is no way to decompose from their estimates the share of these

health improvements that are due to hospital access.

       In summary, it seems likely that the reduction in avoidable hospitalization that we

document was due to efficiency gains from increased primary care. Whether the increase in total

hospitalizations due to the Medicaid expansions was cost-effective, in terms of cost per unit of

health improvement, is unclear.



             Part IV: Impact of Medicaid on the Nature of Child Hospitalization

       Our analysis thus far has focused on the use of hospital data to provide a marker for trends

in the efficiency with which medical care is delivered. But there are a separate set of interesting

issues associated with how expansions in public insurance impact the general nature of child
                                                25

hospitalization. How does public insurance eligibility expansion affect the insurance coverage of

those who are hospitalized? How does it impact the intensity with which children are treated in

the hospital? How does it impact where children are treated?



Insurance Coverage of Hospitalized Children

       Expansions of Medicaid eligibility can have both direct and indirect effects on the

insurance coverage of hospitalized children. The direct effect is to increase the number of

hospitalizations that are paid for by Medicaid. The magnitude of this direct effect will be the

product of two factors: the marginal takeup rate of Medicaid by the newly eligible; and the rate at

which those newly eligible are hospitalized. There is considerable evidence on the first of these

factors which suggests fairly low marginal takeup rates, on the order of 25% (Currie and Gruber,

1996b; Cutler and Gruber, 1996). There is little evidence on the second. Moreover, these two

factors interact, as much of the takeup decision for hospital treatment is made not by the

individual but by the hospital; in the wake of Medicaid expansions, hospitals have set up

extensive facilities for enrolling eligible uninsured patients in Medicaid (US GAO, 1994).

       The indirect effect of the Medicaid expansions may be to lower the coverage of

hospitalizations of children by private insurance. This could occur through the "crowdout"

mechanism introduced by Cutler and Gruber (1996). Since privately insured individuals must

pay, on average, roughly two-thirds of the cost of their medical care, some of them may switch to

the free public insurance provided by Medicaid when they become eligible. Cutler and Gruber

estimate quite large crowdout, with one of every two persons enrolling in Medicaid formerly

having private insurance; this reduction in private insurance amounts to about 20% of the
                                                   26

privately insured who were made eligible by the expansions. Subsequent work has produced a

wide range of estimates, with a number of studies confirming large crowdout effects (e.g. Shore-

Sheppard, forthcoming; Currie, 1996) and a number disputing that the effects are sizeable (e.g.

Dubay and Keimey, 1997; Blumberg, forthcoming). Once again, the magnitude of this effect

would be the product of the extent of crowdout, and the extent to which crowded out children are

hospitalized. The latter might be expected to be well below the average rate of hospitalization of

privately insured children, as parents may be willing to substitute lower quality Medicaid

coverage for higher quality private coverage only when their children are unlikely to need medical

care.

        The impacts of the expansions on the insurance coverage of those hospitalized are shown

in Table 6. The dependent variable here is total hospitalizations covered by different payers,

relative to population. We find that the expansions were associated with more hospitalizations

paid for by Medicaid; each percentage point of eligibility is associated with a 0.057 percentage

point increase in Medicaid-financed hospitalizations. This figure is much lower than the marginal

takeup rates discussed earlier, but this is not surprising since it is also multiplied by

hospitalization rates. Indeed, since the average hospitalization rate in our sample is 10.3 percent,

if those taking up were hospitalized at the average rate we would have expected a coefficient of

only 0.026. The fact that the coefficient is more than twice this figure suggests that those taking

up are hospitalized at much higher than average rates.

        In the second column, we show that hospitalizations financed by private insurance actually

appear to increase as Medicaid expands, contradicting the crowdout hypothesis, but that the

coefficient is insignificant and small. It is unclear why higher Medicaid eligibility would be
                                                   27

associated with a rise in privately financed hospitalizations. But, given the small size and

insignificance of this coefficient, the general conclusion appears to be that there is little evidence

of crowdout operating here. This could be consistent with small crowdout on average;

alternatively, there could be substantial crowdout on average, but low crowdout among those

privately insured families whose children are likely to be hospitalized (since those families are the

ones least likely to move to the public system).

       The third column shows the impact on uninsured hospitalizations, which fall significantly.

Thus, the expansions of Medicaid appear to be associated with a substantial shift in

hospitalizations that are not insured to hospitalizations that are financed by the Medicaid program.

The smaller magnitude of the coefficient in the uninsured regression relative to the Medicaid

regression reflects the fact that inpatient utilization increases with Medicaid coverage. Not only

are those hospitalizations that were formerly uninsured now being financed by Medicaid, but the

newly eligible are going to the hospital more often.



Intensity of Treatment

       An issue that has received considerable study in the health literature is whether insurance

status differentials are associated with differences in the intensity of treatment of patients in the

hospital. A large literature, reviewed in Weissman and Epstein (1990) and in Currie and Gruber

(1999), has compared the treatment of groups with different types of insurance coverage and

reached somewhat mixed conclusions: those with private insurance coverage are treated much

more intensively than are the uninsured, but those with public insurance coverage do not appear to

be consistently treated more intensively. Currie and Gruber (1999) extend this literature by
                                                 28

examining the impact of the Medicaid expansions on the intensity of treatment of childbirth.

They find no aggregate impact on intensity of treatment, but they do find an important

compositional impact. For those mothers who were likely to be uninsured prior to becoming

Medicaid-eligible, there was a significant increase in treatment intensity. On the other hand, for

those mothers who were likely to be privately insured, and therefore subject potentially to

crowdout, treatment intensity decreased. This is a logical result of the fact that Medicaid

reimburses providers at much lower levels than does private insurance, so that a move from

private to Medicaid coverage would lower incentives for intensive treatment.

       We examine the impact of Medicaid on the intensity with which children are treated in the

hospital. We follow the literature on the hospitalization of the elderly to consider two dependent

variables: length of stay in the hospital, in days; and the number of procedures performed on the

child (Cutler, 1991). Since over 50% of our sample has no procedures performed on them during

their stay in the hospital, we also consider a dummy variable for having an inpatient procedure.

       For this analysis, we are considering average treatment of those in the hospital; thus, we

are not comparing hospitalization figures to underlying population rates, but rather considering the

impact of the expansions on the nature of how those who are hospitalized are treated. Doing so

runs into a critical difficulty of interpretation because the Medicaid expansions are affecting the

mix of who is hospitalized. Thus, the expansions will have compositional impacts, in addition to

supply-side impacts, on the nature of hospitalizations. The compositional changes have an

uncertain effect on our coefficients. On the one hand, avoidable hospitalizations are falling; since

these hospitalizations are treated less intensively on average, the Medicaid expansions will be

associated with a higher level of intensity of the remaining hospitalizations through compositional
                                                  29

effects. On the other hand, however, unavoidable hospitalizations are rising even more than

avoidable hospitalizations are falling, and the marginal unavoidable hospitalization for a new

Medicaid enrollee may have a lower intensity of treatment. This would lead the expansions to be

associated with a lower level of intensity through compositional effects.

       The direct supply-side incentives have uncertain effects as well, as there will be more

intensive treatment of those moving from an uninsured state to Medicaid, but less intensive

treatment of those moving from private insurance to Medicaid. Thus, the prediction for treatment

intensity is quite ambiguous. Of course, this discussion does not necessarily mitigate the interest

of these types of results. It is still important in a reduced form sense to understand what public

insurance coverage does to the nature of hospitalization. But we cannot attach any structural

interpretation to our findings in ten-i-is of conditional impacts on treatment or other features of the

data; public insurance may be affecting intensity for either supply incentive or composition

reasons.

       Our results are shown in Table 7. Perhaps for the reasons just described, we find very

mixed evidence on treatment intensity. We find a significant increase in both the number of

procedures and the odds of having any procedure; we estimate that a one percentage point increase

in eligibility raises the odds of having a procedure by 0.3 percentage points, or 0.63 percent of

baseline. At the same time, however, there is a significant and sizeable decline in length of stay,

suggesting that each percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility lowers the length of stay by

0.011 days, or 0.25 percent of baseline. Thus, the Medicaid expansions appear to be leading to

shorter stays for children in the hospital on average, but more intensive treatment per day when

hospitalized.
                                                 30

Types of Hospitals

       Another interesting aspect of hospitalization that might be affected by the expansions is

the type of hospital to which children are admitted. If non-government hospitals have structures

in place to reduce their accessibility to the uninsured, then expanding Medicaid may increase

access of low-income populations to these types of hospitals. In particular, given the relatively

generous levels of Medicaid reimbursement to hospitals in the world of managed care in the

private sector, hospitals may be eager to solicit the business of formerly uninsured patients who

become insured by Medicaid.

       In the next panel of Table 7, we consider the impact of Medicaid expansions on the type of

hospitals to which children are admitted; the dependent variables are the share of hospitalizations

in different hospital ownership categories. In fact, we find a very strong impact of the expansions

on where children are hospitalized: there is an equal and opposite reduction in government

hospitalizations and rise in for-profit hospitalizations, of about 0.05 5 percentage points for each

percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility. At these estimates, a 100% level of Medicaid

eligibility would double the share of children admitted to for-profit hospitals, and almost halve the

share admitted to government hospitals. There was no impact on admits to non-profit hospitals.

        These findings suggest that different types of hospitals do care about insurance coverage in

deciding who to admit, particularly for the types of discretionary admissions that are making up a

large share of the hospitalizations of children in our sample (as opposed to emergency admissions,

where hospitals are legally bound to treat all who arrive at the emergency room). When children

are entitled to Medicaid coverage, they are made more attractive to for-profit hospitals, who pull

them from the public hospitals in which they were treated as uninsured patients.
                                                  31

                                        Part V: Conclusions

       The relentless rise in the number of uninsured in the U.S. ensures that public insurance

policy will remain a topic of considerable interest for the near term. Moreover, whenever the

advantages of public insurance are discussed, enhanced efficiency of care is always listed as one

of the major benefits of insuring more of our nation's citizens, and in particular more children.

But there is little evidence to suggest directly that providing public insurance increases the

efficiency with which care is delivered, as opposed to simply providing more care.

       We provide such evidence. We find that over the 1983-1996 period, expansions in the

Medicaid program significantly increased the rate at which children were hospitalized, with the

expansions raising hospitalization rates of children by 10%. But we also find that hospitalizations

objectively classified as avoidable by medical experts fell sharply, with the expansions inducing a

22% reduction. This suggests that public insurance can improve the efficiency of care, and

substantially reduce the share of hospitalizations that are avoidable, while at the same time

expanding overall access of low-income populations to hospital care.

       We then turned to the implications of the expansions more generally for child

hospitalization. We found that the post-expansion world was one with more hospitalizations

financed by Medicaid, more intensive treatment per hospital day but fewer days in the hospital,

and a shift from public to for-profit hospitalization.

       Our findings, taken together with other evidence on the Medicaid expansions, suggest that

increased public insurance eligibility for low-income families has led to both improved health and

more efficient use of medical care. A central question for policy-makers is whether this is likely

to continue to be the case as insurance eligibility is extended further up the income scale. Higher-
                                                32

income individuals who gain insurance coverage through Medicaid may have obtained better

ambulatory care before becoming eligible, mitigating any efficiency increases through Medicaid.

An important question for future research is to evaluate how the efficiency of care evolves as

higher-income children become eligible under the CHIP program recently enacted by Congress.
                                               33

                                         Bibliography

Begley, Charles E., Slater, Carl H., Engel, Martha J., and Thomas F. Reynolds (1994).
       "Avoidable Hospitalizations and Socio-Economic Status in Galveston County, Texas,"
       Journal of Community Health, 19, 377-3 87.

Billings, John, and Nina Teicholz (1990). "Uninsured Patients in District of Columbia
        Hospitals," Health Affairs, 9, 158-165.

Billings, John, Zeitel, Lisa, Lukomnik, Joanne, Carey, Timothy S., Black, Arthur E., and Laurie
        Newman (1993). "Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Hospital Use in New York City,"
        Health Affairs, 12, 162-173.

Casanova, Carmen, and Barbara Starfield (1995). "Hospitalizations of Children and Access to
      Primary Care: A Cross-National Comparison," International Journal of Health Services,
      25, 283-294.

CulTie, Janet. "Do Children of Immigrants Make Differential Use of Public Health Insurance?"
       Working Paper no. 5388. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 1995.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996a). "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
        Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women," Journal of Political Economy,
        104, 1263-1296.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996b). "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
        Care, and Child Health," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 431-466.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1997). "The Technology of Birth: Insurance Coverage,
        Medical Interventions, and Infant Health," NBER Working Paper #5985, April 1997.

Cutler, David (1991). "Empirical Evidence on Hospital Delivery Under Prospective Payment,"
        mimeo, MIT.

Cutler, David, and Jonathan Gruber "Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?,"
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 39 1-430.

Dubay, Lisa, and Genevieve Kenney. "Did the Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women Crowd
      Out Private Coverage?" Health Affairs 16 (January/February 1997): 185-93.

Fronstin, Paul (1998). "Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured:
       Analysis of the March 1998 Current Population Survey". Washington, D.C.: Employee
       Benefits Research Institute Issue Brief December.

Gadomski, Anne, Jenkins, Paul, and Melissa Nichols (1998). "Impact of a Medicaid Primary
                                               34

       Care Provider and Preventive Care on Pediatric Hospitalization," Pediatrics, 101.

Goodman, D.C., E.S. Fisher, A. Gittelsoim, C.H. Chang, and C. Fleming (1994). "Why Are
     Children Hospitalized? The Role of Non-Clinical Factors in Pediatric Hospitalizations,"
     Pediatrics, 93, 896-902.

Gruber, Jonathan (1997). "Health Insurance for Poor Women and Children in the U.S.: Lessons
       from the Past Decade," in Tax Policy and the Economy 11, James Poterba, ed..
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 169-211.

Hahn, B. (1992). Annual Expenses and Sources of Payment for Health Care Services, Rockville,
      MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency for
      Health Care Policy and Research, Center for General Health Services Intramural Research.
      Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Halfon, N. and P.W. Newacheck (1993). "Childhood Asthma and Poverty: Differential Impacts
       and Utilization of Health Services," Pediatrics, 91, 56-61.

Homer, C.J., Szilagyi, P., Rodewald, L., Bloom, S.R., Greenspan, P., Yazdgerdi, S., Leventhal,
      J.M., Finkeistein, D., and JM Perrin (1996). "Does Quality of Care Affect Rates of
      Hospitalization for Childhood Asthma?" Pediatrics, 98, 18-23.

McConnochie, Kenneth M., Roghrnann, Klaus J., Kitzman, Harriet J., Liptak, Gregory S., and
     John T. McBride (1997a). "Ensuring High-Quality Alternatives While Ending Pediatric
     Inpatient Care as We Know It,"Archives of Pediatric andAdolescent Medicine, 151, 341-
     349.

McConnochie, Kenneth M., Roghmann, Klaus J., and Gregory S. Liptak (1997b).
     "Socioeconomic Variation in Discretionary and Mandatory Hospitalization of
     Infants: An Ecologic Analysis," Pediatrics, 99, 774-784.

Manning, Willard G., Newhouse, Joseph P., Duan, Naihua, Keeler, Emmett B. and Arleen
      Leibowitz (1987). "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
      from a Randomized Experiment," American Economic Review, 77, 25 1-277.

Pappas, Gregory, Hadden, Wilbur C., Kozak, Lola Jean, and Gail F. Fisher (1997).
       "Potentially Avoidable Hospitalizations: Inequalities in Rates between US
       Socioeconomic Groups," American Journal of Public Health, 87, 811-816.

Parchrnan, Michael and Steven Culler (1994). "Primary Care Physicians and Avoidable
       Hospitalizations," Journal of Family Practice, 39, 123-128.

Roos, Noralou P., Wennberg, John E., and Klim McPherson (1988). "Using Diagnosis-
       Related Groups for Studying Variations in Hospital Admissions," Health Care
                                              35

       Financing Review, 9, 53-62.

Solberg, Leif I., Peterson, Kent E., Ellis, Ronald W., Romness, Kenneth, Rohrenbach,
       Elizabeth, Thell, Terry, Smith, Angela, Routier, Ann, Stilimank, Mary Wermuth,
       and Soloman Zak (1990). "The Minnesota Project: A Focused Approach to
       Ambulatory Quality Assessment," Inquiry, 27, 359-367.

Soulen, Jeffrey, Anne Duggan, and Catherine DeAngelis (1994). "Identification of
      Potentially Avoidable Pediatric Hospital Use: Admitting Physician Judgment as a
       Complement to Utilization Review," Pediatrics, 94, 42 1-424

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1998). Health Care Financing Review
      Annual Statistical Supplement, HCFA serial.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1994). Health Care Reform: Potential Difficulties in
      Determining Eligi bility for Low-Income People, GAO/HEHS-94- 176.
       Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

Weissman, Joel S. and Arnold M. Epstein. Falling through the Safety Net (Baltimore: The
      Johns Hopkins University Press), 1990.

Weissman, Joel S., Gatsonis, Constantine, and Arnold M. Epstein (1992). "Rates of
      Avoidable Hospitalization by Insurance Status in Massachusetts and Maryland,"
      Journal of the American Medical Association, 268, 2388-94
                                                 36

                             Appendix : The Medicaid Expansions

Deficit Reconciliation Act, 1984: Effective October 1, 1984. Required states to extend Medicaid
coverage to children born after September 30, 1983, if those children lived in families that were
income-eligible for AFDC.

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1986: Effective April 1, 1987. Permitted states to extend
Medicaid coverage to children in families with incomes below the federal poverty level.
Begiiming in fiscal year 1988, states could increase the age cutoff by one year each year, until all
children under age five were covered.

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1987: Effective July 1, 1988. Permitted states to cover
children under age 2, 3, 4, or 5, who were born after September 30, 1983. Effective October 1,
1988, states could expand coverage to children under age 8 born after September 30, 1983.
Allows states to extend Medicaid eligibility to infants up to one year of age in families with
incomes up to 185 percent of the federal poverty level. States were required to cover children
through age 5 in fiscal year 1989, and through age 6 in fiscal year 1990, if the families met AFDC
income standards.

Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act, 1988: Effective July 1, 1989, states were required to
cover infants up to age on in families with incomes less than 75 percent of the federal poverty
level. Effective July 1, 1990, the income threshold was raised to 100 percent of poverty.

Family Support Act, 1988: Effective April 1, 1990. States were required to continue Medicaid
coverage for 12 months among families who had received AFDC in three of the previous six
months, but who had become ineligible because of earnings.

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1989: Effective April 1, 1990. Required states to extend
Medicaid eligibility to children up to age 6 with family incomes up to 133 percent of the federal
poverty line.

Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1990: Effective July 1, 1991. States were required to cover
all children under age 19 who were born after September 30, 1983 and whose family incomes
were below 100 percent of the Federal poverty level.
                                                               37


                                           Hospitalization Rates by Age Group

    450                --                             ____________________________________


    400



    350



    300   -                       -           _____________                 ________________________________________



a 250
                                                                                                                        Under 15
S                                                                                                                       -15-64
    200                                                              ____________________________________________          65 pIus




     50



     0
          __.                 I       I   I      I
                                                                    -.

                                                                         I
                                                                              
                                                                                        I


          1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
                                                                                            


                                                                                                                1996




          Source: National Center for Health Statistics (various years)
                                                      38


                           Avoidable Hospitalizations of Children Under 16, 1983-1 996

      17                                                                                 31%



      16
                                                                                         29%


      15
                                                                                         27%
C                                                                                              a)
a)

      14
                                                                                               0
C.,
                                                                                         25% >
0
0
0                                                                                              C,
                                                                                               I-
      13
a
C,
                                                                                         23%
                                                                                                     a--- AVH Rate

I>
U)

      12
                                                                                               a
                                                                                               (I)
                                                                                               (0
                                                                                               0
                                                                                                     HAvH Share

0                                                                                              .4-
a)                                                                                       21% .2
.0                                                                                             C
      11                                                                                       a)
E                                                                                              C.,
                                                                                               I-
z                                                                                              a)
                                                                                               a-
                                                                                         19%
      10



       9                                                                                 17%



       8                                                                                 15%
           1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
                                                39

          Table 1: Top Hospital Diagnoses and Prevalence by Age Category, 1996

                                              Number (000s)            % of total
Under 15
Diseases of the respiratory system                       653             30%
Injury and poisoning                                     223             10%
Diseases of the digestive system                         205              9%
Endocrine, nutritional and                               155              7%
metabolic diseases, and immunity
disorders
Infectious and parasitic diseases                        153              7%
All diagnoses                                           2,207            100%

15-64
Deliveries                                              3,817            23%
Diseases of the circulatory system                      2,119            13%
Mental disorders                                        1,546             9%
Diseases of the digestive system                        1,503             9%
Injury and poisoning                                    1,350             8%
All diagnoses                                          16,619            100%

65 plus
Diseases of the circulatory system                      3,963             34%
Diseases of the respiratory system                      1,550             13%
Diseases of the digestive system                        1,198             10%
Injury and poisoning                                      977              8%
Neoplasms                                                 826              7%
All diagnoses                                          11,718            100%

All diagnoses, all ages                                30,544

Notes: National Center for Health Statistics (1998).
                                                           40

                            Table 2: Pediatric Avoidable Hospitalization Conditions

                     Condition                          ICD-9-CM Code(s)               Qualifiers
 Immunization preventable conditions                    033, 037, 045,         Haemophilus meningitis
                                                        320.0, 390, 391        (320.2) for age 1-5 only
 Grand Mal status and other epileptic convulsions       345
  Convulsions "A"                                       780.3                  Age 0-5 years
  Convulsions "B"                                       780.3                  Age > 5 years
 Severe ENT infections                                  382, 462, 463, 465,    Exclude otitis media (382)
                                                        472.1                  with myringotomy with
                                                                               insertion of tube
                                                                               (procedure 20.01)
 Bacterial pneumonia                                    481, 482.2, 482.3,     Exclude cases with
                                                        482.9, 483, 485,       secondary diagnosis of
                                                        486                    sickle cell (282.6) and
                                                                               patients <2 months
 Asthma                                                 493

 Tuberculosis                                           011-018
 Cellulitis                                             681, 682, 683, 686     Exclude cases with a
                                                                               surgical procedure (01-
                                                                               86.99)
 Diabetes "A"                                           250.1, 250.2, 250.3
 Diabetes "B"                                           250.8, 250.9
 Diabetes "C"                                           250.0

 Hypoglycemia                                           251.2
 Gastroenteritis                                        558.9

 Kidney/urinary infection                               590, 599.0, 599.9

 Dehydration-volume depletion                           276.5

 Iron deficiency anemia                                 280.1, 280.8, 280.9    Age 0-5 years
 Nutritional deficiencies                               260, 261, 262,
                                                        268.0, 268.1
 Failure to thrive                                      783.4                  Age < 1 year

Source: Gadomski et al. (1998)
                                                   41

                                  Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
                                                            Mean     Standard Deviation
NHDS
Statistics for Total Population (N = 3,208)
Hospitalization Rate
   Overall                                                 10.25%         1.08%
   Medicaid                                                3.07%          0.47%
   Private insurance                                       5.4 1%         0.62%
   Uninsured                                               0.95%          0.28%
   Other/unknown                                            1.45%         0.41%
AVHrate
   Overall                                                  2.48%         0.32%
   Asthma                                                   0.44%         0.06%
   Pneumonia                                                0.52%         0.09%
   Gastroenteritis                                          0.4 1%        0.09%
   ENT infections                                           0.42%         0.09%
   Kidney/Urinary Tract Infections                          0.13%         0.03%
   Dehydration                                              0.25%         0.07%
Statistics for Hospitalizations (N = 3,206
AVHshare                                                   24.93%          1.33%
Share by Race
  Black                                                    14.59%         1.59%
  White                                                    62.13%         2.41%
  Other                                                     7.03%         1.36%
  Unknown                                                  16.25%         2.20%
Share by Payer
  Medicaid                                                 25.27%          1.37%
  Private insurance                                        56.19%          1.7 1%
  Uninsured                                                 7.40%         0.62%
  Other/unknown                                            11.14%         1.35%
Share by Hospital Ownership
  For profit                                               4.94%          1.12%
   Notforprofit                                            81.27%         2.41%
   Government                                              13.80%         2.01%
Average LOS                                                 4.27           0.16
Fraction with procedures                                   47.68%         1.80%
Average number ofprocedures                                  0.81          0.04

CFS (N = 3,208)
ELIG                                                       23.37%          1.45%
SIMELIG                                                    24.21%          1.28%
                                                 42

           Table 4: Basic Results For Total and Avoidable Hospitalizations (N=2,308)

                                     Total Hospitalizations/Pop              Avoidable
                                                                         Hospitalizations/Pop
      Medicaid Eligibility                     0.066                           -0.034
                                              (0.026)                          (0.010)
      Mean of Dependent                        0.103                            0.025
          Variable

Notes: Coefficient is that on Medicaid eligibility from estimating regressions such as (1) in the
text, using SIMELIG as an instrument for ELIG. Fixed effects for age group, state, and year, as
well as state*year interactions are also included. Standard errors are in parentheses.



                        Table 5: Specific Avoidable Conditions (Nr=2,308)
              Condition                  Medicaid Eligibility Coefficient           Mean
              Pneumonia                                -0.0 106                     0.0052
                                                       (0.003 5)
               Asthma                                 -0.0016                       0.0044
                                                      (0.0026)
            ENT Infections                             -0.0 152                     0.0042
                                                      (0.0033)
            Gastroenteritis                           -0.0175                       0.0041
                                                      (0.0037)
             Dehydration                               0.0127                       0.0025
                                                      (0.0028)
   Kidney/Urinary Tract Infections                     0.00 13                      0.00 13
                                                      (0.0014)

Notes: Coefficient is that on Medicaid eligibility from estimating regressions such as (1) in the
text, using S]IMELIG as an instrument for ELIG. Fixed effects for age group, state, and year, as
well as state*year interactions are also included.
                                                   43

                               Table 6: Insurance Coverage (N=2,308)
                             Medicaid Covered           Privately Insured         Uninsured
  Medicaid Eligibility              .057                        .011                -.032
                                   (.015)                      (.019)               (.011)
  Mean of Dependent                 .031                         .054                .009
      Variable


Notes: Coefficient is that on Medicaid eligibility from estimating regressions such as (1) in the
text, using STIMELIG as an instrument for ELIG. Fixed effects for age group, state, and year, as
well as state*year interactions are also included.



                         Table 7: Treatment and Type of Hospital (N=2,306)
                                           Medicaid Eligibility Coefficient   Mean of Dependent
                                                                                  Variable
                                               Treatment

           Length of Stay                               -1.082                       4.27
                                                        (.640)
       Number of Procedures                              .375                        .811
                                                        (.107)
           Any Procedures                                .300                        .476
                                                        (.045)
                                            Type of Hospital
         For-Profit Hospital                             .056                        .049
                                                        (.025)
         Non-Profit Hospital                            -.003                        .813
                                                        (.032)
           Public Hospital                              -.053                        .138
                                                        (.028)

Notes: Coefficient is that on Medicaid eligibility from estimating regressions such as (1) in the
text, using SIMELIG as an instrument for ELIG. Fixed effects for age group, state, and year, as
well as state*year interactions are also included.
