                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MONETARY POLICY AND ASSET PRICE VOLATILITY


                                              Ben Bernanke
                                              Mark Gertler


                                          Working Paper 7559
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7559

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “New Challenges for Monetary Policy”,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28, 1999. The authors acknowledge research support from the National
Science Foundation. Refet Gurkaynak, Matthew Moore, Pau Rabenal, and Federico Ravenna provided
excellent research assistance. We thank Rudiger Dornbusch for useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2000 by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility
Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler
NBER Working Paper No. 7559
February 2000
JEL No. E5, E44

                                           ABSTRACT

     We explore the implications of asset price volatility for the management of monetary policy.
We show that it is desirable for central banks to focus on underlying inflationary pressures. Asset
prices become relevant only to the extent they may signal potential inflationary or deflationary
forces. Rules that directly target asset prices appear to have undesirable side effects. We base our
conclusions on (i) simulation of different policy rules in a small scale macro model and (ii) a
comparative analysis of recent U.S. and Japanese monetary policy.


Ben Bernanke                                                 Mark Gertler
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and                          Department of Economics
International Affairs                                        New York University
Princeton University                                         269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
Princeton, NJ 08544                                          New York, NY 10003
and NBER                                                     and NBER
bernanke@princeton.edu                                       gertlerm@fasecon.econ.nyu.edu
Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “New
Challenges for Monetary Policy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28,
1999. The authors acknowledge research support from the National
Science Foundation. Refet Gurkaynak, Matthew Moore, Pau Rabanal, and
Federico Ravenna provided excellent research assistance. We thank
Rudiger Dornbusch for useful comments.


Introduction

      Over the past twenty years the world’s major central banks have

been largely successful at bringing inflation under control.     While it

is premature to suggest that inflation is no longer an issue of great

concern, it is quite conceivable that the next battles facing central

bankers will lie on a different front.     One development that has already

concentrated the minds of policy-makers is an apparent increase in

financial instability, of which one important dimension is increased

volatility of asset prices.     Borio, Kennedy, and Prowse (1994), among

others, document the emergence of major boom-bust cycles in the prices

of equity and real estate in a number of industrialized countries during

the 1980s.     Notable examples include the United States, Japan, the

United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Finland.

      Associated with the “bust” part of the asset price cycle in many

of these cases were significant contractions in real economic activity.

For example, many economists attribute at least some part of the 1990

recession (and the slow recovery) in the United States to the preceding

decline in commercial real estate prices, which weakened the capital

positions of banks and the balance sheets of corporate borrowers

(Bernanke and Lown, 1991).     More recently, of course, we have seen asset

price crashes in East Asia and Latin America, along with continued

stagnation of stock and land prices in Japan, all of which have been

associated with poor economic performance.     With these experiences in



                                                                            2
mind, some observers have viewed the remarkable rise of the past few

years in U.S. stock prices, and to a lesser extent in real estate

prices, as an ominous development.   Of course, as of this writing,

whether the U.S. stock market boom will be sustained or will end in

tears is anybody’s guess.

      In this paper we address the question of how central bankers ought

to respond to asset price volatility, in the context of an overall

strategy for monetary policy.   To be clear, we agree that monetary

policy is not by itself a sufficient tool to contain the potentially

damaging effects of booms and busts in asset prices.     Well-designed and

transparent legal and accounting systems, a sound regulatory structure

that helps to limit the risk exposure of banks and corporations, and

prudent fiscal policies that help instill public confidence in economic

fundamentals, are all vital components of an overall strategy to

insulate the economy from financial disturbances.     However, our reading

of history is that asset price crashes have done sustained damage to the

economy only in cases when monetary policy remained unresponsive or

actively reinforced deflationary pressures.   This observation is our

justification for focusing on monetary policy here.

      The principal argument of the paper is easily stated.     Our view is

that, in the context of short-term monetary policy management, central

banks should view price stability and financial stability as highly

complementary and mutually consistent objectives, to be pursued within a

unified policy framework.   In particular, we believe that the best

policy framework for attaining both objectives is a regime of flexible

inflation targeting, either of the implicit form now practiced in the

United States or of the more explicit and transparent type that has been



                                                                             3
adopted in many other countries.     (We prefer the latter, for reasons

explained briefly at the conclusion of the paper.)

         The inflation-targeting approach dictates that central banks

should adjust monetary policy actively and preemptively to offset

incipient inflationary or deflationary pressures.     Importantly for

present purposes, it also implies that policy should not respond to

changes in asset prices, except insofar as they signal changes in

expected inflation.     Trying to stabilize asset prices per se is

problematic for a variety of reasons, not the least of which is that it

is nearly impossible to know for sure whether a given change in asset

values results from fundamental factors, non-fundamental factors, or

both.     By focusing on the inflationary or deflationary pressures

generated by asset price movements, a central bank effectively responds

to the toxic side effects of asset booms and busts without getting into

the business of deciding what is a fundamental and what is not.       It also

avoids the historically relevant risk that a bubble, once “pricked”, can

easily degenerate into a panic.     Finally, because inflation targeting

both helps to provide stable macroeconomic conditions and also implies

that interest rates will tend to rise during (inflationary) asset price

booms and fall during (deflationary) asset price busts, this approach

may reduce the potential for financial panics to arise in the first

place.

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.   We begin in

section I with an informal summary of our views on how asset prices

interact with the real economy and of the associated implications for

monetary policy.     To address these issues more formally, sections II and

III present some illustrative policy simulations derived from a small-



                                                                             4
scale macroeconomic model that features an explicit role for financial

conditions in determining real activity.   We move from theory to

practice in section IV, in which we briefly examine the recent

performance of monetary policy in the United States and Japan, both of

which have experienced asset price volatility.   Section V concludes with

some discussion of additional issues.   An appendix provides more details

of the simulation model employed in sections II and III.



Section I.    Asset Prices, the Economy, and Monetary Policy: An Overview

      Asset prices, including in particular the prices of equities and

real estate, are remarkably variable; and, although we must not lose

sight of the fact that ultimately asset prices are endogenous variables,

there are periods when asset values seem all but disconnected from the

current state of the economy.   As we noted in the introduction, over the

past two decades economies across the globe have experienced large boom-

and-bust cycles in the prices of various assets, including equities,

commercial real estate, residential housing, and others.

      Should fluctuations in asset prices be of concern to policy-

makers?   In the economist’s usual benchmark case, a world of efficient

capital markets and without regulatory distortions, movements in asset

prices simply reflect changes in underlying economic fundamentals.

Under these circumstances, central bankers would have no reason to

concern themselves with asset price volatility per se.     Asset prices

would be of interest only to the extent that they provide useful

information about the state of the economy.

      Matters change, however if two conditions are met.     The first is

that “non-fundamental” factors sometime underlie asset market



                                                                            5
volatility.     The second is that changes in asset prices unrelated to

fundamental factors have potentially significant impacts on the rest of

the economy.     If these two conditions are satisfied, then asset price

volatility becomes to some degree an independent source of economic

instability, of which policy-makers should take account.

      That both of these conditions hold seems plausible to us, though

there is room for disagreement on either count.     We briefly discuss each

in turn.

      As potential sources of “non-fundamental” fluctuations in asset

prices, at least two possibilities have been suggested: poor regulatory

practice and imperfect rationality on the part of investors (“market

psychology”).     Regarding the former, Borio et al. (1994) present

evidence for the view that financial reforms which dramatically

increased access to credit by firms and households contributed to asset-

price booms in the 1980s in Scandinavia, Japan, the Netherlands, the

United Kingdom, and elsewhere.     Financial liberalizations in developing

countries that have opened the gates for capital inflows from abroad

have also been associated in some cases with sharply rising asset

values, along with booms in consumption and lending.

      But aren’t liberalizations a good thing?     It depends.   As Allen

and Gale (1998) and others have emphasized, problems arise when

financial liberalizations are not well coordinated with the regulatory

safety net (e.g., deposit insurance and lender-of-last resort

commitments).     If liberalization gives additional powers to private

lenders and borrowers while retaining government guarantees of

liabilities, excessive risk-taking and speculation will follow, leading

in many cases to asset-price booms.     Ultimately, however, unsound



                                                                             6
financial conditions are exposed and lending and asset prices collapse.

This scenario seems to characterize reasonably well the banking crises

recently experienced in a number of countries, including the United

States and Japan, as well as some of the recent crises in East Asia and

Latin America.

      The other possible source of non-fundamental movements in asset

prices which has received much attention is irrational behavior by

investors, e.g., herd behavior, excessive optimism, or short-termism.

There is of course a large literature in finance on bubbles, fads, and

the like.   This literature has gained a measure of credence because of

the great difficulty of explaining the observed level of financial

volatility by models based solely on economic fundamentals (see for

example the recent survey by Campbell, forthcoming).   Advocates of

bubbles would probably be forced to admit that it is difficult or

impossible to identify any particular episode conclusively as a bubble,

even after the fact.1   Nevertheless, episodes of “irrational exuberance”

in financial markets are certainly a logical possibility, and one about

which at least some central bankers are evidently concerned.   With this

concern as motivation, we present simulations of the economic effects of

bubbles and of alternative policy responses to bubbles in section III.

      The second necessary condition for asset-price volatility to be of

concern to policy-makers is that booms and busts in asset markets have


1
  As we show in the context of our simulation model below, even when a
bubble is present, the market price can still be expressed as a
discounted stream of cash flows, though with a discount rate that
differs from the fundamental rate. In particular, periods in which the
market price is above the fundamental are also periods in which the
implied discount rate is below the true fundamental rate, and vice
versa. Because the “fundamental discount rate” is not directly
observable, it is in general impossible to know whether there is a non-
fundamental component to the current stock price.


                                                                           7
important effects on the real economy.   Although the two-way causality

between the economy and asset prices makes it difficult to obtain sharp

estimates of the real effects of changes in asset prices, the historical

experience – from the Great Depression of the 1930s to the most recent

epidemic of crises — is supportive of the view that large asset-price

fluctuations can have important effects on the economy.

      What are the mechanisms?   One much-cited possibility is that

changes in asset prices affect consumption spending via their effects on

household wealth.   We are not inclined to place a heavy weight on this

channel, however.   Empirical studies (e.g., Ludvigson and Steindel,

1999; Parker, forthcoming) have not found a strong or reliable

connection between stock market wealth and consumption for example.

This result is perhaps not too surprising, as much of the stock owned by

households is held in pension accounts, implying that changes in stock

values have relatively little direct impact on spendable cash.

      Our own view is that the quantitatively most important connections

between asset prices and the real economy operate through aspects of

what in earlier work we have called the “balance sheet channel”.2     The

world in which we live, as opposed to the one envisioned by the

benchmark neoclassical model, is one in which credit markets are not

frictionless, i.e., problems of information, incentives, and enforcement

are pervasive.   Because of these problems, credit can be extended more

freely and at lower cost to borrowers who already have strong financial

positions (hence Ambrose Bierce’s definition of a banker as someone who


2
  To be clear, for the analysis that follows it is only necessary that
non-fundamental movements in asset prices affect aggregate demand. In
other work we have found that, to explain the observed volatility of
output, it is necessary to have a balance-sheet channel supplementing
the traditional wealth effect.


                                                                            8
lends you an umbrella when the sun is shining and wants it back when it

starts to rain).

      A key implication of the existence of credit-market frictions is

that cash flows and the condition of balance sheets are important

determinants of agents’ ability to borrow and lend.     Research suggests

that the effects of asset price changes on the economy are transmitted

to a very significant extent through their effects on the balance sheets

of households, firms, and financial intermediaries (see for example

Bernanke, Gertler, Gilchrist, forthcoming; Bernanke and Gertler, 1995).

For example, firms or households may use assets they hold as collateral

when borrowing, in order to ameliorate information and incentive

problems that would otherwise interfere with credit extension.     Under

such circumstances, a decline in asset values (for example, a fall in

home equity values) reduces available collateral, leads to an unplanned

increase in leverage on the part of borrowers, and impedes potential

borrowers’ access to credit.    Financial intermediaries, which must

maintain an adequate ratio of capital to assets, can be deterred from

lending, or induced to shift the composition of loans away from bank-

dependent sectors such as small business, by declines in the values of

the assets they hold.

      Deteriorating balance sheets and reduced credit flows operate

primarily on spending and aggregate demand in the short run, although in

the longer run they may also affect aggregate supply by inhibiting

capital formation and reducing working capital.    There are also likely

to be significant feedback and magnification effects:     First, declining

sales and employment imply continuing weakening of cash flows and hence

further declines in spending.    Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996)



                                                                             9
refer to this magnification effect as the “financial accelerator” (see

Bernanke and Gertler, 1989, for an early formalization).   Second, there

may also be feedback to asset prices, as declining spending and income,

together with forced asset sales, lead to further decreases in asset

values.   This “debt-deflation” mechanism, first described by Irving

Fisher (1933), has been modeled formally by Bernanke and Gertler (1989),

Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist

(forthcoming).

      A large literature has studied the macroeconomic implications of

credit-market frictions, both theoretically and empirically.3   We have

reviewed that body of research on several occasions and will not attempt

to do so here.   We note, however, that in general this perspective has

proved quite useful for interpreting a number of historical episodes,

including the Great Depression (Bernanke, 1983; Bernanke and James,

1991), the deep Scandinavian recession of the 1980s, the “credit crunch”

episode of 1990-91 in the United States (Bernanke and Lown, 1991), and

the protracted weakness of the Japanese economy in the 1990s.     A number

of observers (Mishkin, 1997; Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee, 1999;

Krumgan, 1999) have also used this framework to make sense of the fact

that, contrary to conventional wisdom, exchange-rate devaluations have

appeared to be contractionary in a number of the developing countries

that experienced financial crises in recent years.   The explanation is

tied to the fact that — beguiled by sometimes large interest

differentials between loans made in foreign and domestic currencies —

banks and corporations in these countries made liberal use of unhedged,


3
  For relevant surveys see Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Hubbard (1997),
Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998), and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist
(forthcoming).


                                                                          10
foreign-currency-denominated debt.     The large devaluations that

subsequently occurred raised the domestic-currency value of these debts,

wreaking havoc with bank and corporate balance sheets and inducing

financial distress and major dislocations in credit, employment, and

supplier relationships.

         Beyond providing a mechanism via which non-fundamental movements

in asset prices may disrupt the economy, a key implication of the

credit-market-frictions perspective is that the magnitude of the effects

of asset-price fluctuations on the economy will depend strongly on

initial financial conditions.     By the term we mean primarily the initial

state of household, firm, and intermediary balance sheets.4    In

particular, the theory predicts a highly nonlinear effect of asset

prices on spending (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989).     Thus, if balance

sheets are initially strong, with low leverage and strong cash flows,

then even rather large declines in asset prices are unlikely to push

households and firms into the region of financial distress, in which

normal access to credit is jeopardized, or to lead to severe capital

problems for banks.     Put another way, the extent to which an asset-price

contraction weakens private sector balance sheets depends on the degree

and sectoral distribution of initial risk exposure.

         The current (1999) U.S. economy is, we conjecture, a case in

point.     After many years of expansion, strong profits in both the



4
  We implicitly include in this definition any institutional and
regulatory structure that may affect private sector risk exposure. For
example, both U.S. and Japanese banks hold real estate (or make loans
with real estate as collateral), but by law only Japanese banks are
allowed to hold equities. This apparently incidental difference has
strong implications for the likely effects of a stock-price collapse on
bank capital and bank lending in the two countries, as indeed we have
seen in Japan in the past few years.


                                                                            11
corporate and banking sectors, and enormous increases in the values of

equities and other assets, U.S. balance sheets are in excellent

condition.   A correction in the stock market of, say, 25% would no doubt

slow the economy, but our guess is that the effects would be relatively

transitory, particularly if monetary policy responds appropriately.     In

contrast, a 25% decline in Japanese stock prices, given the parlous

condition of its financial system and its seeming inability to implement

a coherent stabilization policy, would (we expect) create grave and

long-lasting problems for that economy.

      If we believe that asset price swings can occur for non-

fundamental reasons, and that these swings – either through balance-

sheet effects or some other channel – have the potential to destabilize

the real economy, then what are the implications for monetary policy?

As suggested in the introduction, our view is that central banks can and

should treat price stability and financial stability as consistent and

mutually reinforcing objectives.   In practice, we believe, this is best

accomplished by adopting a strategy of flexible inflation targeting.5

      What is flexible inflation targeting?   Although specific practices

differ, broadly speaking a regime of inflation targeting has three

characteristics.   First, as the name suggests, under inflation targeting

monetary policy is committed to achieving a specific level of inflation

in the long run, and long-run price stability is designated the

“overriding” or “primary” long-run goal of policy.   Importantly,


5
  Inflation targeting has been adopted in recent years by a substantial
number of industrialized and developing countries, including (among many
others) the United Kingdom, Sweden, Canada, New Zealand, Chile, and most
recently Brazil. An extensive literature has developed on the early
experience with this approach; see for example Goodhart and Viñals
(1994), Haldane (1995), Leiderman and Svensson (1995), Bernanke and
Mishkin (1997), and Bernanke et al. (1999) for comparative analyses.


                                                                         12
inflation targeters are concerned that inflation not be too low as well

as that it not be too high; avoidance of deflation is as important (or

perhaps even more important) as avoidance of high inflation.   Second,

within the constraints imposed by the long-run inflation objective, the

central bank has some flexibility in the short run to pursue other

objectives, including output stabilization – hence the nomenclature

“flexible inflation targeting”.6   Third, inflation targeting is

generally characterized by substantial openness and transparency on the

part of monetary policymakers, including for example the issuance of

regular reports on the inflation situation and open public discussion of

policy options and plans.

      Our characterization of Federal Reserve policy in recent years is

that it meets the first two parts of the definition of inflation

targeting (see section IV for econometric support of this view) but not

the third, i.e., the Fed practices “implicit” rather than “explicit”

inflation targeting.   Bernanke et al. (1999) argue that the Fed ought to


6
  Inflation targeting has been castigated in some quarters as a policy
of “inflation nutters”, to use Mervyn King’s descriptive phrase. This
criticism is simply incorrect, however. As Lars Svensson (1997, 1999)
has shown, inflation targeting is completely consistent with a
conventional quadratic central-bank loss function that places arbitrary
weights on the output gap and inflation; in other words, inflation
targeting in no way precludes significant attention to conventional
stabilization objectives.
      So what then is new? One important advantage is that an inflation-
targeting framework makes explicit (for both policymakers and the
public) the simple fact that monetary-policy actions that expand output
and employment, but which also leave the inflation rate higher than it
was initially, do not necessarily increase social welfare on net.
Instead, account must also be taken of the future losses in output and
employment that will be necessary to bring inflation back to its initial
level; or, alternatively, of the various distortions and reductions in
long-term economic growth associated with a permanent increase in
inflation. By enforcing the requirement that any sequence of policy
actions be consistent with the long-run inflation target (a sort of
nominal anchor requirement), the inflation-targeting framework
eliminates the upward inflation ratchet that proved so costly in many


                                                                         13
take the next step and adopt explicit inflation targeting.     For most of

the present paper, however, we make no distinction between implicit and

explicit inflation targeting; we return to the issue briefly in the

conclusion.

      For our purposes here, the main advantage of flexible inflation

targeting is that it provides a unified framework both for making

monetary policy in normal times, and for preventing and ameliorating the

effects of financial crises.     In particular, a key advantage of the

inflation-targeting framework is that it induces policymakers to

automatically adjust interest rates in a stabilizing direction in the

face of asset-price instability or other financial disturbances.     The

logic is straightforward; since asset price increases stimulate

aggregate demand and asset price declines reduce it, the strong focus of

inflation targeters on stabilizing aggregate demand will result in

“leaning against the wind”---raising interest rates as asset prices rise

and reducing them when they fall.     This automatic response not only

stabilizes the economy but is likely to be stabilizing for financial

markets themselves, for several reasons:     First, macroeconomic

stability, particularly the absence of inflation or deflation, is itself

calming to financial markets.7    Second, the central bank’s easing in the

face of asset price declines should help to insulate balance sheets to

some degree, reducing the economy’s vulnerability to further adverse

shocks.   And finally, if financial-market participants expect the

central bank to behave in this countercyclical manner, raising interest



countries in the 1960s, 1970s, and early 1980s.
7
  Note that even theories that stress the self-fulfilling nature of
crisis expectations (e.g. Obstfeld, 1994), usually imply that such
expectations can only arise if fundamentals are relatively weak.


                                                                           14
rates when asset price increases threaten to overheat the economy and

vice versa, it is possible that overreactions in asset prices arising

from market psychology and other non-fundamental forces might be

moderated.

      The logic of inflation targeting also implies that central banks

should ignore movements in stock prices that do not appear to be

generating inflationary or deflationary pressures.    We concede that

forecasting the aggregate demand effects of asset-price movements may

not always be an easy task.   However it is certainly easier than, first,

attempting to distinguish between fundamental and non-fundamental

fluctuations in asset prices and, second, attempting to surgically

“prick” the bubble without doing collateral damage to financial markets

or the economy.   We explore the implications of alternative policy

responses to asset-price fluctuations in greater detail in the next two

sections.



Section II. Monetary Policy in the Presence of Asset Price Bubbles: A
Quantitative Model

      To make the discussion of section I more concrete, we will present

some model-based simulations of the performance of alternative monetary

rules in the presence of bubbles in asset prices.    To do this, we extend

a small-scale macroeconomic model developed by Bernanke, Gertler, and

Gilchrist (forthcoming), henceforth BGG.   For the most part, the BGG

model is a standard dynamic new Keynesian model, modified to allow for

financial accelerator effects, as described in the previous section.

Our principal extension of the BGG model here is to allow for exogenous

bubbles in asset prices.




                                                                         15
      In this section we first provide an informal overview of the BGG

model and then describe how we modify the model to allow for bubbles in

asset prices.     The equations of the complete model are given in the

Appendix.8   Readers not interested in any of this background material

may wish to skip directly to the simulation results in section III.




      The BGG Model

      As noted, the foundation of the BGG model is a standard dynamic

new Keynesian framework.     The most important sectors are a household

sector and a business sector.     Households are infinitely lived; they

work, consume, and save.     Business firms are owned by entrepreneurs who

have finite expected life.9    There is also a government that manages

fiscal and monetary policy.

      Firms own the stock of physical capital, financing the acquisition

of capital through internally generated funds (primarily revenues from

production and capital gains on assets) and by borrowing from the

public.   With their accumulated capital plus hired labor, firms produce

output, which may be used for consumption, investment, or government

purchases.     There is no foreign sector.

      Following Taylor (1980), Calvo (1983), and others, BGG assume the

existence of staggered nominal price setting.     The resulting

“stickiness” in prices allows monetary policy to have real effects on

the economy.     Optimization and forward-looking behavior are assumed



8
  Interested readers are referred to Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(forthcoming) for additional detail.
9
  Finite lives are a metaphor for the entry and exit of firms and the
associated turnover in credit markets. The assumption of finite lives
also prevents the business sector from ever reaching a steady state in
which it is entirely self-financing.


                                                                          16
throughout; the single exception is the Phillips curve relationship, in

which inflation expectations are modeled as being formed by a

combination of forward- and backward-looking behavior.10    This

modification increases the persistence of the inflation process,

allowing a closer fit to the data.

      The BGG model differs from this standard dynamic new Keynesian

framework primarily in assuming the existence of credit-market

frictions, i.e., problems of information, incentives, and enforcement in

credit relationships.     The presence of these frictions gives rise to a

“financial accelerator” that affects output dynamics.     In particular, in

the BGG model credit-market frictions make uncollateralized external

finance more expensive than internal finance; this premium for external

finance affects the overall cost of capital and thus the real investment

decisions of firms.     The external finance premium depends inversely on

the financial condition of potential borrowers; for example, a borrowing

firm with more internal equity can offer more collateral to lenders.

Thus, procyclical movements in the financial condition of potential

borrowers translate into countercyclical movements in the premium for

external finance, which in turn magnify investment and output

fluctuations in the BGG model (the financial accelerator).

      Consider, for example, a shock to the economy that improves

fundamentals, such as a technological breakthrough.     This shock will

have direct effects on output, employment, and the like.     In the BGG

model, however, there are also indirect effects of the shock, arising


10
  Specifically, we use a variant of Calvo’s (1983) staggered price
setting model developed by Gali and Gertler (forthcoming) that allows a
subset of firms to use rule-of-thumb pricing behavior. The resulting
aggregate supply equation is similar in spirit to the “sticky inflation”
model of Fuhrer and Moore (1995).


                                                                            17
from the associated increase in asset prices.     Higher asset prices

improve balance sheets, reducing the external finance premium and

further stimulating investment spending.     The increase in investment may

also lead to further increases in asset prices and cash flows, inducing

additional feedback effects on spending.     Thus the financial accelerator

enhances the effects of primitive shocks to the economy.

      The financial accelerator mechanism also has potentially important

implications for the workings of monetary policy.     As in conventional

frameworks, the existence of nominal rigidities gives the central bank

in the BGG model some control over the short-term real interest rate.

However, beyond the usual neoclassical channels through which the real

interest rate affects spending, in the BGG model there is an additional

effect that arises from the impact of interest rates on borrower balance

sheets.   For example, a reduction in the real interest rate (a policy

easing) raises asset prices, improving the financial condition of

borrowers and reducing the external finance premium.     The reduction in

the premium provides additional stimulus for investment.     BGG find the

extra “kick” provided by this mechanism to be important for explaining

the quantitative effects of monetary policy.     Note also that, to the

extent that financial crises are associated with deteriorating private-

sector balance sheets, the BGG framework implies that monetary policy

has a direct means of calming such crises.

      The BGG model assumes that only fundamentals drive asset prices,

so that the financial accelerator serves to amplify only fundamental

shocks, such as shocks to productivity or spending.     Our extension of

the BGG framework in this paper allows for the possibility that non-




                                                                            18
fundamental factors affect asset prices, which in turn affect the real

economy via the financial accelerator.




        Adding Exogenous Asset Price Bubbles

        The fundamental value of capital is the present value of the

dividends the capital is expected to generate.                Formally, define the

fundamental value of depreciable capital in period t,                Qt , as:



                        ∞                       i
              Qt = E t ∑ [(1 − δ ) i Dt+1+ i / ∏ Rtq+1+ j ]
(2.1)                   i= 0                   j =0

                  = Et {[ Dt +1 + (1 − δ )Qt +1 ] / Rtq+1}



where   Et indicates the expectation as of period t, δ is the physical

depreciation rate of capital,              Dt +i are dividends, and Rtq+1 is the

relevant stochastic gross discount rate at t for dividends received in

period t+1.

        As noted, our principal modification of the BGG model is to allow

for the possibility that observed equity prices differ persistently from

fundamental values, e.g., because of “bubbles” or “fads”.11                We use the

term “bubble” here loosely to denote temporary deviations of asset

prices from fundamental values, due for example to liquidity trading or

to waves of optimism or pessimism.12



11
   We also make some smaller changes that are important for the
simulations we want to do, such as calibrating a realistic effect of
changes in asset prices on consumption.
12
   We do not attempt to rationalize why investors do not arbitrage the
difference between the market and fundamental returns. To our
knowledge, any theory of bubbles based on market psychology relies on
some arbitrary assumption along these lines. This point also applies to


                                                                                     19
        The key new assumption is that the market price of capital,                   St ,

may differ from capital’s fundamental value,               Qt .   A bubble exists


whenever    S t − Qt ≠ 0 .       We assume that if a bubble exists at date t it

persists with probability                p and grows as follows13:



                                   a
(2.2)           S t+1 − Qt +1 =      ( S t − Qt ) Rtq+1
                                   p



with    p < a <1.       If the bubble crashes, with probability        1 − p , then



(2.3)           S t+1 − Qt +1 = 0



Note that, since          a p > 1 , the bubble will grow until such time as it

bursts.    For simplicity, we assume that if a bubble crashes it is not

expected to re-emerge.               These assumptions imply that the expected part

of the bubble follows the process




                       S t +1 − Qt+1
(2.4)           Et (                 ) = a ( S t − Qt )
                             Rtq+1


the so-called rational bubbles of Blanchard and Watson (1982). We do
not use Blanchard-Watson rational bubbles in this paper because their
non-stationarity creates technical problems in our framework.
13
   By treating the probability that the bubble bursts as exogenous, we
rule out the possibility that monetary policy can surgically prick the
bubble. Although it is certainly possible to endogenize this
probability, so little is known about the effects of policy actions on
market psychology that any modification along these lines would
necessarily be ad hoc. Note that it is nevertheless the case in our
framework that asset prices will be highly sensitive to monetary policy,
since policy can affect the fundamental component. Thus the empirical
observation that asset prices react strongly to monetary policy actions



                                                                                             20
Since the parameter            a   is restricted to be less than unity, the

discounted value of the bubble converges to zero over time, with the

rate governed by the value of                   a .14     That is, bubbles are not expected to

last forever.

        Using (2.1) and (2.4) we can derive an expression for the

evolution of the stock price, inclusive of the bubble:




(2.5)          S t = Et {[ Dt +1 + (1 − δ ) St +1 ] / Rts+1}



where the return on stocks,                  Rts+1 , is related to the fundamental return

on capital,       Rtq+1 , by



                                               Qt
(2.6)             Rts+1 = Rtq+1[b + (1 − b)       ]
                                               St



and   b ≡ a (1 − δ ) .

        Equation (2.6) shows that, in the presence of bubbles, the

expected return on stocks will differ from the return implied by

fundamentals.            If there is a positive bubble,               S t Qt > 1 , the expected

return on stocks will be below the fundamental return, and vice versa if

there is a negative bubble,                  S t Qt < 1 .      However, if the bubble persists




is not direct evidence against the exogeneity assumption made here.
14
   Note that a = 1 corresponds to the so-called rational bubble described
in Blanchard and Watson (1982). Hence our bubble specification can be
made arbitrarily close to a rational bubble by the assumption that a is
close to one.


                                                                                                  21
(does not “pop”) a series of supranormal returns will be observed.        This

process seems to us to provide a reasonable description of speculative

swings in the stock market.

        The bubble affects real activity in the extended model in two

ways.    First, there is a wealth effect on consumption.   Following

estimates of the wealth effect presented in Ludvigson and Steindel

(1999), we parameterize the model so that these effects are relatively

modest (about four cents of consumption spending for each extra dollar

of stock market wealth). Second, since the quality of firms’ balance

sheets depends on the market values of their assets rather than the

fundamental values, a bubble in asset prices affects firms’ financial

positions and thus the premium for external finance.

        Although bubbles in the stock market affect balance sheets and

thus the cost of capital, we continue to assume that - conditional on

the cost of capital - firms make investments based on fundamental

considerations, such as net present value, rather than on valuations of

capital including the bubble.    This assumption rules out the arbitrage

of building new capital and selling it at the market price cum bubble

(or, equivalently, issuing new shares to finance new capital).     This

assumption is theoretically justifiable, for example by the lemons

premium associated with new equity issues, and also seems empirically

realistic; see, e.g., Bond and Cummins (1999).

        In summary, the main change effected by our extension of the BGG

framework is to allow non-fundamental movements in asset prices to

influence real activity.    Though the source of the shock may differ,

however, the main link between changes in asset prices and the real

economy remains the financial accelerator, as in the BGG model.



                                                                            22
Section III. The Impact of Asset-Price Fluctuations Under Alternative
Monetary Policy Rules

        In this section we use the extended BGG model to simulate the

effects of asset-price bubbles and related shocks, such as innovations

to the risk spread, on the economy.            Our goal is to explore what types

of policy rules are best at moderating the disruptive effects of asset-

market disturbances.            To foreshadow the results, we find that a policy

rule that is actively focused on stabilizing inflation seems to work

well, and that this result is reasonably robust across different

scenarios.

        As a baseline, we assume that the central bank follows a simple

forward-looking policy rule of the form




(3.1)   rtn = r n + βEtπ t +1



where   rtn is the nominal instrument interest rate controlled by the

central bank,       r n is the steady-state value of the nominal interest

rate, and     Et π t+1 is the rate of inflation expected in the next model

“period”.      We will always assume       β > 1 , so that the central bank

responds to a one percentage point increase in expected inflation by

raising the nominal interest rate by more than one percentage point.

This ensures that the real interest rate increases in the face of rising

expected inflation, so that policy is stabilizing.




                                                                                   23
      The policy rule given by equation (3.1) differs from the

conventional Taylor rule in at least two ways.15   First, policy is

assumed to respond to anticipations of inflation rather than past values

of inflation.    Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, forthcoming) show that

forward-looking reaction functions are empirically descriptive of the

behavior of the major central banks since 1979; see also the estimates

presented in the next section of this paper.    The second difference from

the standard Taylor rule is that equation (3.1) omits the usual output

gap term.    We do this primarily for simplicity and to reduce the number

of dimensions along which the simulations must be varied.    There are a

number of rationales for this omission that are worth brief mention,

however:    First, for shocks that primarily affect aggregate demand, such

as shocks to asset prices, rules of the form (3.1) and rules that

include an output gap term will be essentially equivalent in their

effects.    Second, as we will see in the next section, empirical

estimates of the responsiveness of central banks to the output gap

conditional on expected inflation are often rather small.    Finally,

assuming for simulation purposes that the central bank can actually

observe the output gap with precision probably overstates the case in

reality; by leaving out this term we avoid the issue of how accurately

the central bank can estimate the gap.

      Although we do not include the output gap in the policy rule

(3.1), because of our focus on asset price fluctuations we do consider a


15
  Note also that the rule given by (3.1) abstracts from an interest-
rate smoothing motive, which appears to be important empirically; again
see Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998) and the estimates in the next
section. Ignoring this aspect of policy makes the simulation results
presented below look somewhat less realistic (because policy reacts “too
quickly” to changes in the economy) but does not affect the qualitative
nature of the results.


                                                                           24
variant of (3.1) that allows the central bank to respond to changes in

stock prices.       Specifically, as an alternative to (3.1) we assume that

the instrument rate responds to the once-lagged log-level of the stock

price, relative to its steady-state value:




                                         S t −1
(3.2)   rtn = r n + βEtπ t +1 + ξ log(          )
                                          S


Alternative interpretations of policy rules like (3.2) are discussed in

the next section.

        We conducted a variety of simulation experiments, of which we here

report an illustrative sampling.                    We begin with simulations of the

effects of a stock-market bubble that begins with an exogenous one

percentage point increase in stock prices (above fundamentals).                    We

parameterize equation (2.4), which governs the bubble process, so that

the non-fundamental component of the stock price roughly doubles each

period, as long as the bubble persists.16                   The bubble is assumed to last

for five periods and then burst.17                   Just before the collapse, the non-

fundamental component is worth about sixteen percent of the initial

steady state fundamental value.




        Asset bubbles with policy responding only to inflation.                  Figure 1

illustrates the simulated responses of the economy18 to the bubble under

two policy rules of the form (3.1): an “inflation accommodating” policy



16
   We assume p = 0.5 and a = 0.98.
17
   To be clear, agents in the model know only the ex ante stochastic
process for the bubble and not the time that it will burst.
18
   All simulations are reported as deviations from the steady state.


                                                                                          25
for which    β = 1.01 and a more aggressive “inflation targeting” policy

for which    β = 2.0 .19

         As Figure 1 shows, under the accommodating policy the bubble

stimulates aggregate demand, leading the economy to “overheat”.

Inflation and output rise sharply.       The rise in stock prices stimulates

spending and output both through the balance sheet effects described

earlier (notice the decline in the external finance premium in the

figure, which stimulates borrowing) and through wealth effects on

consumption (which are the relatively less important quantitatively).

When the bubble bursts there is a corresponding collapse in firms’ net

worth.     The resulting deterioration in credit markets is reflected in a

sharp increase in the external finance premium (the spread between

firms’ borrowing rates and the safe rate) and a rapid fall in output.

The decline in output after the bursting of the bubble is greater than

the initial expansion, although the “integral” of output over the

episode is positive.       In the absence of further shocks, output does not

continue to spiral downwards but stabilizes at a level just below the

initial level of output.       Below we consider scenarios in which the

collapse of a bubble is followed by a financial panic (a negative

bubble), which causes the economy to deteriorate further.

         In contrast to the accommodative policy, Figure 1 shows that the

more aggressive “inflation targeting” policy greatly moderates the

effects of the bubble.       Although policy is assumed not to respond

directly to the stock market per se, under the more aggressive rule

interest rates are known by the public to be highly responsive to the


19
  We consider the accommodating policy not because it is a realistic
alternative, but rather to underscore the point that the impact of a



                                                                            26
incipient inflationary pressures created by the bubble.      The expectation

that interest rates will rise if output and inflation rise is sufficient

both to dampen the response of overall asset prices to the bubble and to

stabilize output and inflation---even though, ex post, interest rates

are not required to move by as much as in the accommodative policy.




      Asset bubbles with a policy response to stock prices.      Figure 2

shows simulation results analogous to those in Figure 1, except that now

the central bank is allowed to respond directly to stock prices as well

as to expected inflation.   We set the parameter   ξ in equation (3.2)

equal to 0.1, implying that (for constant expected inflation) a ten

percentage point rise in the stock market leads to a one percentage

point rise in the instrument rate.     Of course the full response of the

short-term rate to a stock market appreciation is greater than that,

since policy also responds to the change in expected inflation induced

by a bubble.20

      Figure 2 shows that the effect of allowing policy to respond to

stock prices depends greatly on whether policy is assumed to be

accommodating or aggressive with respect to expected inflation.      Under

the accommodating policy ( β   = 1.01 ), allowing a response to stock prices

produces a perverse outcome.    The expectation by the public that rates

will rise in the wake of the bubble pushes down the fundamental

component of stock prices, even though overall stock prices (inclusive


bubble is highly sensitive to the response of monetary policy.
20
   Note that we assume that policy responds to the (observable) level of
stock prices, not the (unobservable) level of the bubble, which seems
realistic. That distinction is not important in the present exercise
but will become important in scenarios in which the central bank is
uncertain about the source of the appreciation in stock prices.


                                                                             27
of the bubble component) rise.   Somewhat counter-intuitively, the rise

in rates and the decline in fundamental values actually more than offset

the stimulative effects of the bubble, leading output and inflation to

decline - an example of the possible “collateral” damage to the economy

that may occur when the central bank responds to stock prices.      The

result that the economy actually contracts, though a robust one in our

simulations, may rely too heavily on sophisticated forward-looking

behavior on the part of private-sector investors to be entirely

plausible as a realistic description of the actual economy.      However,

the general point here is, we believe a valid one; namely, that a

monetary policy regime that focuses on asset prices rather than on

macroeconomic fundamentals may well be actively destabilizing.      The

problem is that the central bank is targeting the wrong indicator.

      Under the aggressive policy ( β   = 2.0 ), in contrast, allowing

policy to respond to the stock price does little to alter the dynamic

responses of the economy.   Evidently, the active component of the

monetary rule, which strongly adjusts the real rate to offset movements

in expected inflation, compensates for perverse effects generated by the

response of policy to stock prices.

      To recapitulate, the lesson that we take from Figure 2 is that it

can be quite dangerous for policy simultaneously to respond to stock

prices and to accommodate inflation.    However, when policy acts

aggressively to stabilize expected inflation, whether policy also

responds independently to stock prices is not of great consequence.

      As an alternative metric for evaluating policy responses to

bubbles we also computed the unconditional variances of output and

inflation under the four different policy scenarios (accommodative



                                                                            28
versus non-accommodative on inflation, responding to stock prices versus

not responding).   We considered bubbles lasting one, two, and three

periods, weighting them in the population according to their relative

likelihood of being realized (conditional on a bubble starting.)      The

left panel of Table 1 reports the results.   The table shows that a

policy of focusing aggressively on inflation and ignoring stock prices

does best by a significant margin, achieving the lowest unconditional

variance of both output and inflation.21




      Asset bubble then asset bust.   So far in the simulations we have

assumed that, after the collapse of the bubble, asset prices are again

governed solely by fundamentals.   With this assumption we tend to find

that a stock-price crash wipes out the output gains from the bubble but

not much more; there is only a slight overreaction in the decline in

output.22

      An alternative scenario, which may be of the greatest concern to

policymakers, is that the collapse of a bubble might damage investor

confidence sufficiently to set off a panic in financial markets.      We

model this possibility in a simple way by assuming that the crash of the

bubble sets off a negative bubble in stock prices (an undervaluation)

that is exactly symmetric with the positive bubble that preceded it.

This panic is unanticipated by investors before it happens.   If we

maintain the assumption that the initial, positive bubble lasts five



21
   Under the usual assumption that social welfare depends on the output
gap and inflation, we can therefore unambiguously conclude that the
inflation-targeting rule maximizes welfare.
22
   The model does not include raw-material or finished-goods
inventories. Inclusion of inventory stocks in the model would likely
increase the downward reaction, by adding an endogenous inventory cycle.


                                                                            29
periods before popping, then this alternative scenario implies a ten-

period “boom-bust” scenario.

       Figure 3 shows simulation results under the accommodative

(β   = 1.01 ) and aggressive ( β = 2.0 ) policy rules, and assuming no direct

response of policy to stock price movements ( ξ    = 0 ).   The positive

bubble followed by the negative bubble sets off an oscillation in both

financial markets and the general economy.      However, the magnitude of

the oscillation depends critically on the type of monetary policy

employed.    Under the accommodative policy the cycle is large, whereas

the more aggressive policy significantly dampens the oscillation.          By

strongly targeting expected inflation, monetary policy stabilizes

aggregate demand and thus greatly reduces the economic effects of the

volatility in stock prices.

       Note that in the experiment we assume that the negative asset

bubble arises after the initial crash, regardless of the policy

environment. However, if there is some connection between market

psychology and fundamentals (e.g., markets overreact to movements in

fundamentals), and if financial market participants perceive policy has

been effective in stabilizing fundamentals, then perhaps the panic might

not arise in the first place.     Put differently, an added benefit of the

aggressive policy, not accounted for in our simulations, might be to

reduce the overall likelihood of the follow-on panic.




       Implications of reduced leverage.     As we mentioned earlier, in a

model with a financial accelerator the impact of the bubble on real

activity also depends on initial financial conditions, such as the

degree of leverage among borrowers.     Figure 4 explores the impact of a



                                                                                30
lower steady-state leverage ratio, 25% instead of 50% as in the baseline

scenario.   The figure shows that a reduction in leverage significantly

moderates the cycle.   Besides its reaffirmation of the superiority of

inflation-focused monetary policy, this simulation also suggests a

rationale for regulatory and tax policies that discourage excessive

leverage.




      Asset-price fluctuations arising from a mixture of fundamental and

non-fundamental sources.   We saw in Figure 2 that allowing monetary

policy to respond to asset prices can be destabilizing, particularly if

policy is accommodative of inflation.    The costs of targeting asset

prices are probably greater in practice than suggested by the bubble

scenario of Figure 2, because it is quite difficult or impossible for

the central bank to discern whether changes in asset prices reflect

fundamental forces, non-fundamental forces, or a combination of both.

To the extent that asset price movements reflect fundamental forces,

they should be accommodated rather than resisted; attempts to

“stabilize” asset prices in that case are directly counterproductive.

      To illustrate these issues, we consider a scenario in which

improvements in productivity generate a rise in market fundamentals, as

well as increasing potential output.    However, a euphoric response to

the fundamental boom also sets off a bubble.    Specifically, we suppose

that there is a one percent permanent increase in productivity which is

followed one period later by the inception of a stock-price bubble,

which we again assume lasts for five periods.     Figure 5 shows the

results, comparing an aggressive inflation stabilization policy with one

that also allows for responses to stock prices.     As the figure shows, in



                                                                           31
this scenario tightening policy in response to the increase in asset

prices prevents output from rising by the amount of the increase in

potential output.    In other words, responding to the rise in asset

prices has the undesirable effect of temporarily stifling the beneficial

impact of the technology boom.

      We explore the issue a bit further by calculating the

unconditional variability of the output gap (output minus potential

output) under the four different policy scenarios, assuming in this case

that only a productivity shock has buffeted the economy.23    The right

panel of Table 1 reports the results.    As with the case of bubble

shocks, the results indicate that the policy that responds aggressively

to inflation and does not target stock prices works best.




      A shock to the external finance premium.    The last scenario we

consider is a disruption of financial markets that temporarily tightens

credit conditions.    A real-world example is the default on Russian bonds

in the fall of 1998 that induced significant capital losses for key bank

creditors and drove up premiums on long-term corporate bonds.24    The

analogue in our model is a shock that drives up the premium for external

finance, holding constant firm balance-sheet positions; formally this

can be modeled as a decline in the efficiency of the financial

intermediation process (see Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist,

forthcoming).   Figure 6 shows the responses of output and inflation to

an exogenous fifty-basis-point rise in the external finance premium,


23
   That is, for simplicity here we do not include a confounding bubble
shock. The welfare comparisons would not be affected by including a
bubble shock.
24
   For evidence that general credit conditions tightened at this time,



                                                                          32
under both the aggressive and accommodative policy rules (it is assumed

here that policy does not respond to asset prices).     The figure shows

clearly that the aggressive policy response works best.     We believe that

this experiment helps to provide a rationale for the Fed’s intervention

in the fall of 1998.     Basically, because the rise in the spread observed

at that time had a potentially deflationary effect on the economy, it

was appropriate to ease policy in response.




Section IV. Estimated Reaction Functions for the Federal Reserve and
the Bank of Japan


      Section III considered the stabilizing properties of various

hypothetical interest rate rules for central banks.     These experiments

raise the question of what rules (reaction functions) best describe the

actual practice of contemporary central banks.     In practice, do central

banks react to forecasts of inflation and the output gap in a

stabilizing manner?     And do they react to stock prices, over and above

the reaction to stock prices implied by the pursuit of output and

inflation stabilization?

      In this section we apply the methods of Clarida, Gertler, and Gali

(1998, forthcoming), henceforth CGG, to estimate forward-looking

reaction functions for the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan for the

period since 1979.     To preview the results, we find that the Fed has

largely followed our advice over the past two decades, reacting in a

strongly stabilizing manner to changes in the inflation forecast and the

expected output gap but, for the most part, not reacting to changes in

stock prices (except to the extent that they contain information about


see Gertler and Lown (1999).

                                                                            33
inflation and output).                The record of the Bank of Japan is less

satisfactory, by our estimates:                      We find that easy monetary policy in

Japan actively fueled the increase in stock prices during the 1987-89

period.     After the stock market crashed in 1990, Japanese monetary

policy appeared to make some attempt to support stock prices but failed

to react sufficiently aggressively to the declining rate of inflation.

Consequently, Japanese monetary policy was too tight from late 1992 at

least until the beginning of 1996.                        To some extent, it should be noted,

these problems reflected the very slow rate of adjustment of nominal

interest rates in the face of changing macroeconomic conditions.

        CGG’s approach, which we follow here, is to estimate forward-

looking reaction functions of the form




(4.1)   rt* = r + βE t (π t+12 − π * ) + γE t ( y t − y *t ) + ξE t z t



where   rt* is the targeted value of the nominal instrument rate (the

federal funds rate for the U.S., the call rate for Japan);                               r is the

long-run equilibrium nominal rate;                       Et (π t +12 − π * ) is the expected

deviation of inflation from its target rate over the next twelve months;

Et ( yt − yt* ) is the contemporaneous value of the output gap, conditional

on information available to the central bank at time t; and                               zt

represents other variables that may affect the target interest rate.                                   We

expect the parameters              β and γ to be positive; CGG point out that

stabilization of inflation further requires                               β > 1 , i.e., for the real

interest rate to rise when expected inflation rises, the nominal




                                                                                                       34
interest rate must be raised by more than the increase in expected

inflation.       In practice, values of    β for central banks with

significant emphasis on inflation stabilization are estimated to be

closer to 2.0.          Values less than 1.3 or so indicate a weak commitment to

inflation stabilization (at these values of         β the real interest rate

moves relatively little in response to changes in expected inflation).

        Because of unmodeled motives for interest-rate smoothing,

adjustment of the actual nominal interest rate towards its target may be

gradual.      CGG allow for this by assuming a partial adjustment mechanism,

e.g.,




(4.2)   rt = (1 − ρ ) rt* + ρrt −1 + υ t



where   rt is the actual nominal interest rate and ρ ∈ [0,1) captures the

degree of interest-rate smoothing.          Below we follow CGG in assuming a

first-order partial adjustment mechanism, as in equation (4.2), for

Japan and a second-order partial adjustment mechanism for the United

States.

        To estimate the reaction function implied by equations (4.1) and

(4.2), CGG replace the expectations of variables in equation (4.1) with

actual realized values of the variables, then apply an instrumental

variables methodology, using as instruments only variables known at time

t-1 or earlier.          Under the assumption of rational expectations,

expectational errors will be uncorrelated with the instruments, so that




                                                                                35
the IV procedure produces consistent estimates of the reaction function

parameters.25

      Estimation results are shown in Table 2 for the Federal Reserve

and Table 3 for the Bank of Japan.    Following CGG, we begin the U.S.

sample period in 1979:10, the date of the Volcker regime shift, and the

Japanese sample period in 1979:04, a period CGG refer to as one of

“significant financial deregulation”.    The end date in each case is

1997:12 (our data end in 1998:12 but we must allow for the fact that one

year of future price change is included on the right-hand side).26      We

also look at two sub-samples for Japan, the periods before and after

1989:6.    It was at the end of 1989 that increases in Bank of Japan

interest rates were followed by the collapse of stock prices and land

values.


      25
         More specifically, CGG apply a GMM estimator with a correction
for the moving average error induced by overlapping forecasts (see their
footnote 11 for details). Our estimation procedure follows the CGG
method very closely, with minor differences described below. In
particular, we follow CGG in using as instruments a constant, and lags
1-6, 9, and 12 of log-differenced commodity price index, the log-
differenced CPI, the log-differenced output gap, and the instrument
interest rate. For Japan, lags 1-6, 9 and 12 of the real yen-dollar
exchange rate are also included as instruments. For the commodity price
index we use slightly different series from CGG, specifically, an IMF
series for Japan and the Dow-Jones commodity price index for the United
States. In auxiliary regressions, discussed below, we also use lags 1
to 6 of the log-difference of the stock price index (TOPIX in Japan and
the S&P 500 for the United States).
       Following CGG, we construct the output gap for the United States
as the residuals of a regression of industrial production on a constant,
time, and time squared, for the sample period 1960:1 through 1998:12.
Because we believe that Japan has been well below potential output since
about 1990, the output gap variable we construct for Japan is based on a
quadratic trend for industrial production based on data beginning in
1968:1 and ending in 1989:6. Through 1989:6 the Japanese output gap is
measured as the residual from this regression, subsequently it is
equated to actual output less the extrapolated quadratic trend value of
output.
       We thank Richard Clarida for providing the estimation programs.
26
   Estimates (not shown) from samples ending in 1994:12, the end date
used by CGG, closely replicated their results.


                                                                             36
      For each country and sample period the tables report two

specifications.   As in CGG, the baseline specification shows the

response of the target for the instrument interest rate to the expected

output gap and expected inflation.    The second, alternative

specification adds to the reaction function the current value and five

lags of the log-difference of an index of the stock market (the S&P 500

for the United States and the TOPIX index for Japan).     To help control

for simultaneity bias, we instrument for the contemporaneous log-

difference in the stock market index; in particular, we add lags 1

through 6 of the log-difference of the stock market index to our list of

instruments (see footnote 20).   Note therefore that, in these estimates,

the responses of policy to stock market returns arising from the

predictive power of stock returns for output and inflation are fully

accounted for; any estimated response of policy to stock returns must

therefore be over and above the part due to the predictive power of

stock returns.

      There are two ways to think about the addition of stock market

returns to the reaction function:    The first is to interpret it

literally as saying that monetary policy is reacting directly to stock

prices, as well as to the output gap and expected inflation.     The second

is to treat the addition of stock returns as a general specification

test that reveals whether monetary policy is pursuing other objectives

besides stabilization of output and expected inflation.     To the extent

that policy has other objectives, and there is information about these

objectives in the stock market, then we would expect to see stock

returns enter the central bank’s reaction function with a statistically

significant coefficient.



                                                                            37
      For the United States, the estimates of the baseline reaction

function (first line of Table 2) indicate that over the full sample

period the Fed responded reasonably strongly to changes in forecasted

inflation ( β   = 1.60) .   It also reacted in a stabilizing manner to

forecasts of the output gap ( γ     = 0.14 ).   Both parameter estimates are

highly statistically significant.       The CGG procedure also permits

estimation of the implied target rate of inflation (see their paper);

for the U.S., the estimated target inflation rate for the full period is

2.88% per year.     Figure 7 shows that the actual and fitted values of the

federal funds rate are very close for the full sample period.27

      In the results reported in the second line of Table 2 we allow for

the possibility that the Fed responded to stock market returns

information contained in stock market returns), independently of their

implication for forecasts of inflation and the output gap.         The

estimated response of the funds rate to stock returns, -0.08, is

relatively small, the “wrong” sign (if we think of the Fed as being

tempted to try to stabilize stock prices), and statistically

insignificant.     Other parameter estimates are largely unchanged from the

baseline specification.       The force of these estimates is that,

consistent with the advice we give in this paper, the Fed has focused

its attention on expected inflation and the output gap and has neither

actively sought to stabilize stock prices nor reacted to information in

stock returns other than that useful for forecasting the output gap and

inflation.




27
  The fitted values assume that expected inflation and the expected
output gap are the realized values. They are thus comparable to the
target values reported in Figure 8; see below.


                                                                               38
         To help put the Fed’s behavior into its historical context, Figure

8 shows the actual value and the estimated target value of the federal

funds rate for the period January 1984 to the present.     The target value

differs from the fitted value in that the latter incorporates the

interest-rate smoothing parameters and the former implicitly sets these

to zero, i.e., the target value is the interest rate given by equation

(4.1).      For this figure the target value at each date is calculated

assuming that the Fed had perfect knowledge of the current output gap

and inflation over the next year; we do this in order to concentrate on

intentional deviations of policy from the average reaction function, as

opposed to deviations driven primarily by forecast errors.     Because the

target value abstracts from the interest-rate smoothing motive, there is

a tendency for the actual rate to lag somewhat behind the target.

Nevertheless, Figure 8 suggests that the Fed’s actual choice of short-

term rates followed target rates reasonably closely.

         There are, however, three periods of deviation of the actual fed

funds rate from the target rate in Figure 8 that deserve comment.

         First, as was much remarked at the time, the Fed did not ease

policy in 1985-86, even though a sharp decline in oil prices reduced

inflation during those years.28    The view expressed by some contemporary

observers was that the Fed made a conscious decision in 1986 to enjoy

the beneficial supply shock in the form of a lower inflation rate rather

than real economic expansion.     However, it is also likely that much of

the decline in inflation in 1986 was unanticipated, contrary to the

perfect foresight assumption made in constructing the figure.     If true,


28
  Kozicki (1999) observes however that this gap is greatly reduced if a
core inflation measure is used in the estimation of the Fed’s reaction
function.


                                                                            39
this would account for much of the deviation of actual rates from target

in 1985.

      Second, the Fed kept rates somewhat below target in the aftermath

of the 1987 stock market crash.   Again, forecasting errors may account

for this deviation; the Fed was concerned at the time that the

depressing effects of the crash would be larger than in fact they turned

out to be.

      Finally, and most interesting to us, the Fed kept the funds rate

significantly below target from late 1991 until the beginning of 1995.

This was a period of slow recovery from the 1990-91 recession, which Fed

officials argued was caused by financial “headwinds”, such as excessive

corporate leverage and bank capital problems.    We interpret the 1991-95

easing as being consistent with our advice, in that the Fed was

concerned about financial conditions not for themselves but primarily

for their implications for the macroeconomy.29   In the event, though, it

appears that the Fed eased by more than necessary in this period.30,31


29
   Kozicki (1999) makes a similar observation and provides support for
her contention with the following revealing quote from Chairman
Greenspan:
       “In the spring of 1989, we began to ease monetary conditions as we
observed the consequence of balance-sheet strains resulting from
increased debt, along with significant weakness in the collateral
underlying that debt. Households and businesses began much more
reluctant to borrow and spend and lenders to extend credit – a
phenomenon often referred to as the ‘credit crunch’. In an endeavor to
defuse these financial strains we moved short-term rates lower in a long
series of steps that ended in the late summer of 1992, and we held them
at unusually low levels through the end of 1993 – both absolutely and,
importantly, relative to inflation.” (Testimony of June 22, 1994).
30
   An alternative interpretation, which is consistent with our general
approach, is that financial conditions in certain key sectors and
regions were sufficiently bad—e.g., bank capital positions well below
regulatory minima—that the impact of small interest-rate changes on the
economy was reduced. A reduction in the policy multiplier would justify
more aggressive Fed policies during this period.
31
   Our sample period does not include the episode of Fall 1998, when the
Fed reacted to increased quality spreads in the bond market by easing.


                                                                          40
      We turn now to the case of Japan.      For the entire sample period,

estimates of the Bank of Japan’s reaction function (Table 3) look

qualitatively similar to those found for the Fed.       For the whole 1979-

1997 period, we estimate that the Bank of Japan responded actively to

both expected inflation ( β   = 2.21 ) and to the output gap ( γ = 0.20 ).   The

equation also fits the data quite well (Figure 9).32      However,

inspection of the data suggests two very different economic and policy

regimes during this period:    the so-called “bubble economy” of the

1980s, during which the economy and asset prices boomed, and the period

since 1990 during which asset prices have collapsed and the economy has

been extremely weak.   Accordingly, and keeping in mind the problems

inherent in estimation based on small samples, we re-estimated the Bank

of Japan’s reaction function for the period before and after 1989:06.

The date was chosen to separate the periods before and after the

accession of Governor Mieno, who instigated a significant policy

tightening at the end of 1989.

      Table 3 shows that, for the first half of the sample period, the

Bank of Japan remained committed to stabilization of inflation ( β       = 2.00

in the baseline specification,    β = 1.85 in the specification including

stock returns).   However, the specification including stock returns also

shows that, wittingly or unwittingly, the Bank of Japan was also

strongly reinforcing the asset price explosion:       The estimated reaction

of the Japanese call rate to stock returns over the past six months is




Again, this action seems justifiable to us, in that the widening spreads
could well have been interpreted as predicting a slowdown in the general
economy.
32
   The fitted values again assume perfect foresight by the central bank
for inflation and the output gap.


                                                                              41
–0.286 in the first half of the sample, with a standard error of 0.111.

This says that each 10% increase in stock prices was associated with a

286-basis-point decline in the call rate - a number too large to be

taken seriously, but an indication that policy was destabilizing toward

the stock market prior to 1989.     As noted, we do not necessarily

interpret these results as saying that the Bank was actively attempting

to raise stock prices.   But it does seem that the Bank was pursuing

objectives other than output and inflation stabilization (exchange

rates?) which led it to ease excessively, and the stock market reflected

that ease.33

      For the second half of the sample, the results are much different.

As the bottom third of Table 3 indicates, after 1989 the Bank of Japan

greatly weakened its commitment to inflation stabilization ( β     = 1.12 in

the baseline stabilization).     We interpret the low estimated value of

β , together with the negative estimated values of the inflation

target, as indicating that the Bank was not actively resisting the

powerful deflationary forces of this period.       However, our estimates

suggest that the Bank may have been attempting to stabilize the stock

market, or some other factor proxied by the stock market; the estimated

reaction of the call rate to stock market returns switches from the

large negative value in the earlier subsample to a large and highly

significant positive value ( ξ   = 0.188 ).   From the perspective of the

arguments advanced in this paper, the Bank of Japan would have done



33
  Note that it would not be correct to argue that stock prices matter
because of their predictive power for the output gap and inflation. We
include stock returns in the information sets for forecasting these
variables, thereby controlling for the predictive power of stock
returns.


                                                                            42
better to focus instead on stabilizing the inflation rate (in this case,

preventing the plunge into deflation) than in responding to other

factors.

      Again a picture helps to provide historical context.     In analogy

to Figure 8, Figure 10 shows the actual call money rate and the

estimated target rate in Japan after 1984.   In this case, unlike in

Figure 8, we calculate the target rate using the reaction function

estimated for the pre-1989:07 sample, without stock returns.     This

reaction function seems the right one to use as a benchmark, since it

implies strongly stabilizing monetary policy, as suggested by the

simulations in the previous section.   Thus the target rate for the post-

1989 period in Figure 10 indicates what policy would have been if the

earlier policies had been continued, with no attention paid to stock

returns (except as forecasters of the output gap and inflation).

      The results are again quite interesting.    The target rate in Japan

changed sharply during several episodes, and - possibly as a result of

an excessive attachment to interest-rate smoothing - the actual call

rate lagged far behind.   Figure 10 suggests that policy was on the whole

rather tight in Japan during the 1985-87 period, despite the easing that

followed the Plaza Agreement of September 1985.    From 1987-89, however,

Japan faced strong inflationary pressures (including rocketing asset

prices and rapid real growth), to which the Bank of Japan responded

extremely slowly.34   No doubt it is this period that is responsible for


34
  Figure 10 suggests that the Bank of Japan should have raised its key
interest rate as high as 8-10% during 1987-89, which some commentators
at the conference thought would not have been politically feasible given
that contemporaneous inflation (possibly as a result of exchange rate
appreciation) remained low. Our specific measure of the target rate is
sensitive to our estimates of the size of the output gap in Japan at the
time and is not to be treated as precise. What is striking about the


                                                                            43
our estimated result that monetary policy actively destabilized the

stock market in the pre-1990 period.

      Rates began to rise sharply following the appointment of Governor

Mieno in December 1989, and continued to rise until the spring of 1991.

The rate increase was undertaken with the intention of curbing the stock

market and - like many other attempts to prick market bubbles, including

the U.S. boom in 1929 - the attempt was too successful for the good of

the economy.     Asset prices collapsed; and because Japan’s financial

arrangements were particularly sensitive to asset values (we would

argue), the real economy collapsed as well.

      Our estimates of the Bank of Japan’s reaction function for the

second half of the sample suggest two countervailing forces:     On the one

hand, there was now some attempt to stabilize the stock market, or some

factor proxied by the stock market, by cutting rates as the market fell.

On the other hand, the Bank of Japan’s commitment to stabilizing

inflation (here, resisting deflation) seems to have become much weaker.

The net effect was policy that was significantly too tight, at least

until the beginning of 1996.35

      We do not want to overstate the conclusions that can be drawn from

this short comparison of U.S. and Japanese monetary policy since the

mid-1980s.     The comparative experience is at least suggestive however

that focusing on the traditional goals of monetary policy - the output



period is not that the BOJ failed to tighten radically, but that it
failed to tighten at all. In any case, for the record, we consider the
failure to respond to deflationary pressures during 1992-96 (see below)
to be the most serious shortcoming of Japanese monetary policy during
this period.
35
   As can be seen in Figure 10, the target call rate went negative in
1993, out of the feasible range of the actual rate. Still, it was not
until 1995 that the actual call rate went below 2.0%.


                                                                           44
gap and expected inflation - is the more effective means of avoiding

extended swings in asset prices and the resulting damage to the economy.



Section V.      Conclusion

         In order to explore the issue of how monetary policy should

respond to variability in asset prices, we incorporated non-fundamental

movements in asset prices into a dynamic macroeconomic framework.        To a

first approximation at least, we believe that our framework captures the

main concerns that policy-makers have about possible bubbles in asset

prices.     In particular, in our model a large positive bubble exposes the

economy to the risk of a sharp market correction, with adverse effects

on aggregate demand and economic activity.     In the absence of an

appropriate policy response the resulting economic contraction could be

quite large.     A severe market drop in our model also weakens balance

sheets, induces financial distress, leads to further declines in asset

prices, and widens spreads in bond markets.     Although our framework

omits some of the microeconomic details of episodes of stress (e.g.,

non-price credit rationing, reduced liquidity of financial markets), and

hence is silent about certain types of lender-of-last-resort

interventions that the central bank might undertake, we believe that

these omissions are unlikely to affect our central conclusions about

aggregate stabilization policy.36

         The principal conclusion of this paper has been stated several

times:     In brief, it is that flexible inflation-targeting provides an

effective, unified framework for achieving both general macroeconomic


36
  Further, to the extent that (say) collapse of the banking system
would be deflationary, perhaps in a highly discontinuous way, it seems
to us that lender-of-last resort interventions are consistent with the


                                                                            45
stability and financial stability.     Given a strong commitment to

stabilizing expected inflation, it is neither necessary nor desirable

for monetary policy to respond to changes in asset prices, except to the

extent that they help to forecast inflationary or deflationary

pressures.

         A couple of additional issues deserve very brief comment.     First,

our implicit focus in this paper has been on large industrial economies

like the United States and Japan.     However, many of the recent financial

crises around the world have occurred in small open economies, with

international capital flows and attacks on the currency playing major

roles.     What lessons does our analysis bear for these countries?

         More work would need to be done to extend our model to the open-

economy case, and to include other sources of financial crisis such as

speculative attacks on the currency and bank runs.     Such an extension

would be worthwhile, we believe, because it seems to us that balance-

sheet effects of the type captured in the BGG model have played an

important role in propagating the effects of financial crises through

the real economy.     Although we have not yet done such an extension, one

likely conclusion from such an exercise seems obvious enough and

important enough to be worth stating now, viz.:     The logic of our

approach suggests strongly that fixed exchange rates, as maintained by

many of the countries recently hit by financial crises, are highly

undesirable in a financially fragile environment.

         The key problem with an exchange-rate peg is that its defense

generally requires movements in interest rates that are perverse,

relative to the objective of containing a financial crisis.     In


philosophy of flexible inflation targeting.


                                                                            46
particular, the large increases in interest rates necessary to avert

devaluation during a currency crisis exacerbate financial crises both

directly, by depressing asset prices, reducing corporate profits, and

putting pressure on banks, and also indirectly, by slowing current and

expected rates of economic activity.   In addition, fixed-exchange-rate

regimes severely limit the short-run discretion of the central bank,

either to assist the financial system (for example, through lender-of-

last-resort activities) or to correct short-term imbalances in the

economy.




                                                                          47
          Indeed, the record of fixed-exchange regimes in regard to the

incidence and severity of financial crises is notoriously bad.37       During

the Great Depression currency crises (possible, of course, only if the

exchange rate is fixed), banking panics, and stock market crashes

frequently occurred together.     Indeed, to the best of our knowledge,

every one of the dozens of major banking panics of that era occurred in

a country that was attempting to defend a fixed rate (its gold parity).

For the postwar period, in a study spanning the 1970s through the 1990s,

Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) document that banking and currency crises

frequently occurred together and appeared to be mutually reinforcing.

The strong observed association between fixed exchange rates and

financial crises appears to be weakened only under two conditions:

First, if international capital flows are highly regulated and

restricted, as was the case for example during the Bretton Woods era; or

second, if the international monetary system is cooperatively managed by

the major central banks, as was arguably the case during the classical

gold standard of the late nineteenth century (Eichengreen, 1992).

Neither of these conditions prevails today.

      So what should small open economies do?     Our analysis suggests

that, if possible, they adopt flexible inflation targeting, as part of a

broad reform package that includes improved financial regulation and

fiscal reform.38    (Brazil has recently proposed a plan along these

lines.)     The last part of the recommendation bears emphasis:   Change in

the monetary regime alone, without support from the regulatory and


37
   For an even broader indictment of fixed-exchange-rate regimes see
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995).
38
   Dollarization or a currency union represent an alternative approach
for small open economies that also avoids the instabilities of fixed



                                                                           48
fiscal arms of government, is not likely to be sufficient.     Moreover, we

recognize that successful implementation of inflation targeting requires

both ample political support from the government and a certain amount of

institutional development, e.g., the existence of adequate price indexes

(see Eichengreen et al, 1999).   With these caveats, we recommend that

small open economies head in an inflation-targeting direction.     Note

that, along with providing enhanced macroeconomic and financial

stability, a commitment to an inflation-targeting approach by a small

open economy could well deliver greater long-run stability of the

nominal exchange rate than a regime that attempts to fix the exchange

rate but suffers frequent forced devaluations.

      A second broad issue not yet addressed here concerns the

difference between implicit inflation targeting, of the type practiced

by the Greenspan Fed, and explicit inflation targeting, which involves

considerable additional transparency and communication with the public.

It is evident from recent U.S. experience that implicit inflation

targeting can give good results, and indeed our simulations help to show

why a strong focus on stabilizing expected inflation promotes overall

macroeconomic and financial stability.     We nevertheless do believe that

the U.S. would benefit from a move to explicit inflation targeting, for

at least two reasons (see Bernanke et al, 1999, for further discussion).

First, making inflation targeting explicit would serve the important

goal of ensuring continuity in monetary policy, or at least of

increasing the likelihood that future policy would take the same general

approach as recent policy has taken.     In particular, if the inflation-

targeting regime were made explicit, the transition from the current


exchange rates.   These approaches have their own problems, however.


                                                                            49
chairman to the next one would create less anxiety in financial markets

and for the economy than otherwise.   Second, transparency enhances the

stabilizing properties of forward-looking policies.    In particular, in

the simulations reported in this paper we implicitly assumed

transparency of policy, in that private-sector actors were assumed to

know the policy rule.   The results might be very different if, for

example, we assumed that private agents thought the central bank was

following the accommodative rule when in fact it was following the more

aggressive inflation-targeting policy.   Likewise, much of the

stabilizing effect of our recommended policy arises because investors

expect the central bank to raise interest rates when rising asset prices

threaten to overheat the economy, and vice versa if declining asset

prices threaten to induce an economic contraction.    From the standpoint

of maintaining both macroeconomic and financial stability in the future,

the desirability of increased transparency in U.S. monetary policymaking

is a topic deserving of close attention in the Fed’s planning.




                                                                           50
                                  References



      Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, “A

Simple Model of Monetary Policy and Currency Crises”, unpublished,

M.I.T., 1999.



      Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, “Bubble and Crises,”

unpublished, New York University, 1998.



      Bernanke, Ben S., “Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in

the Propagation of the Great Depression”, American Economic Review,

73(3), June 1983, 257-76.



      Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler, “Inside the Black Box: The

Credit Channel of Monetary Transmission”, Journal of Economic

Perspectives, 9(4), Fall 1995, 27-48.



      _______________________, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business

Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, 79(1), March 1989, 14-31.



      Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, “The

Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, in J.

B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam:

North-Holland, forthcoming.




                                                                        51
        _______________________, “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight

to Quality”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1), February 1996,

1-15.



        Bernanke, Ben S. and Harold James, “The Gold Standard, Deflation,

and Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An International

Comparison”, in R.G. Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial

Crises, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press for NBER, 1991.



        Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam

Posen, Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience,

Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.



        Bernanke, Ben S. and Cara S. Lown, “The Credit Crunch”, Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity, 1991:2, 205-39.



        Bernanke, Ben S. and Frederic S. Mishkin, “Inflation Targeting: A

New Framework for Monetary Policy?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,

11(2), 1997, 97-116.



        Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson, “Bubbles, Rational

Expectations, and Financial Markets”, in P. Wachtel, ed., Crisis in the

Economic and Financial Structure, Lexington Books, 1982.



        Bond, Stephen and Jason Cummins, “Noisy Share Prices and

Investment”, Nuffield College and New York University, preliminary

paper, July 1999.



                                                                          52
      Borio, C.E.V., N. Kennedy, and S.D. Prowse, “Exploring Aggregate

Asset Price Fluctuations Across Countries: Measurement, Determinants,

and Monetary Policy Implications”, Bank for International Settlements,

BIS Economics Papers no. 40, April 1994.



      Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing

Framework”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 1983, 383-98.



      Campbell, John, “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business

Cycle”, NBER working paper no. 6485, in J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford,

eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam:   North-Holland,

forthcoming.



      Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy

Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence”, European Economic

Review, June 1998, 1033-1068.



      _____________________________________________, “Monetary Policy

Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, forthcoming.



      Eichengreen, Barry, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the

Great Depression, 1919-1939, New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.



      Eichengreen, Barry, Paul Masson, Miguel Savastano, and Sunil

Sharma, “Transition Strategies and Nominal Anchors on the Road to



                                                                         53
Greater Exchange-Rate Flexibility”, International Finance Section,

Princeton University, Essays in International Finance no. 213, April

1999.



        Fisher, Irving, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”,

Econometrica, 1, October 1933, 337-57.



        Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. and George R. Moore, “Inflation Persistence”,

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), February 1995, 127-60.



        Hubbard, R. Glenn, “Financial Market Imperfections and

Investment,” NBER working paper no. 5996, April 1997.



        Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural

Economics Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.



        Gertler, Mark and Cara S. Lown, “The Information Content of the

High Yield Bond Spread for the Business Cycle,” unpublished, Federal

Reserve Bank of New York, 1999.



        Gilchrist, Simon and Charles Himmelberg, “Investment: Fundamentals

and Finance”, in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics

Annual, 1998.



        Goodhart, Charles A.E. and Jose’ Viñals, “Strategy and Tactics of

Monetary Policy: Examples from Europe and the Antipodes”, in Jeffrey

Fuhrer, ed., Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints for Monetary



                                                                           54
Policymakers, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series 38: 1994,

139-87.



      Haldane, Andrew G., ed., Targeting Inflation, London: Bank of

England, 1995.



      Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, “The Twin Crises:     The

Causes of   Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems”, American Economic

Review, 89(3), June 1999, 473-500.



      Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, “Credit Cycles”, Journal of

Political Economy, 105(2), April 1997, 211-48.



      Kozicki, Sharon, “How Useful Are Taylor Rules for Monetary

Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, Second

Quarter 1999, 5-33.



      Krugman, Paul, “Analytical Afterthoughts on the Asian Crisis”,

unpublished, M.I.T., 1999.



      Leiderman, Leonardo and Lars E.O. Svensson, eds., Inflation

Targeting, London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1995.



      Ludvigson, Sydney and Charles Steindel, “How Important is the

Stock Market Effect on Consumption?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,

Economic Policy Review, 5(2), July 1999, 29-52.




                                                                          55
        Mishkin, Frederic S., “The Causes and Propagation of Financial

Instability: Lessons for Policymakers”, in Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City, Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy, 1997.



        Obstfeld, Maurice, “The Logic of Currency Crises”, Cahiers

Économiques et Monétaires, Banque de France, 43, 1994, 189-213.



        Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, “The Mirage of Fixed

Exchange Rates”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4), 1995, 73-96.



        Parker, Jonathan, “Spendthrift in America?   On Two Decades of

Decline in the U.S. Saving Rate”, in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, NBER

Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.



        Svensson, Lars E.O., “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing

and Monitoring Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review, 41, 1997,

1111-1146.



        ____________________, “Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy

Rule”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 43(3), June 1999, 607-54.



        Taylor, John B., “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts”,

Journal of Political Economy, 88, 1980, 1-24.



        ___________________, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice”,

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214,

1993.



                                                                           56
Appendix.        Equations of the simulation model



        The model used for simulations in section 3 is given and briefly

described below.          To conserve space we do not review the individual and

firm optimization problems that underlie the behavioral equations and

instead refer the reader to Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist

(forthcoming) for details.          What we present here is the log-linearized

versions of the model equations that were used in the simulations.

Except for the addition of an exogenous bubble in the asset price, the

model is essentially the same as in BGG.              The only other significant

differences are that we use Gali and Gertler’s (forthcoming) variant of

the new Keynesian Phillips curve and that we calibrate the wealth

effects on consumption to match the evidence presented by Ludvigson and

Steindel (1999).

        Throughout we follow the convention of writing steady-state levels

of the variables in upper case and log-deviations from the steady state

in lower case.         Greek letters and lower-case Roman letters without

subscripts denote fixed parameters, and subscripts denote time periods.

The expectation given information known as of period             s   of the value of

variable    x    in period r is written    E s xr .



Aggregate demand

                C      Ce e I      G
(A.1)   yt =      ct +   c t + it + g t
                Y      Y      Y    Y

(A.2)   c t = −σrt + Et c t+1




                                                                                   57
(A.3)   c te = s t + k t+1

(A.4) Et qt +1   = ϕ (it +1 − k t+1 )



        Equation (A.1) is the log-linearized version of the national

income identity.              We distinguish between consumption of households,          C,

and consumption of entrepreneurs/firm-owners,                      C e ; otherwise the

notation is standard.                   (A.2) is the usual Euler condition for household

consumption.          (A.3) embodies the assumption that changes in

entrepreneurial consumption are proportional to changes in stock values;

in the simulations we normalize entrepreneurs’ net worth so that the

elasticity of entrepreneurial consumption to stock market wealth is

about 0.04, as suggested by estimates in Ludvigson and Steindel (1999).

(A.4) relates investment to the fundamental value of capital, embodying

a one-period delay for planning new investment.



Returns to stocks and capital

                      (1 − δ )
(A.5)    st − qt =             Et ( s t +1 − qt +1 )
                       bR q

(A.6)   rtq = (1 − ϑ )( mct + y t − k t ) + ϑqt − qt −1

(A.7)   rts = (1 − ϑ )( mct + y t − kt ) + ϑs t − st −1

(A.8)    Et rts+1 = Et rtq+1 − (1 − b)( s t − q t )

(A.9)    Et rts+1 = rt − ψ (n t − s t − k t +1 )



        Equation (A.5) describes the expected evolution of the bubble, cf.

(2.4) and recall             a ≡ b (1 − δ ).       Note that the realized value of the




                                                                                          58
bubble, conditional on not bursting, is defined by

                    Rq
st +1 − q t+1 =             ( s t − q t ) . Equation (A.6) defines the fundamental return
                  p(1 − δ )

to capital as the sum of the current return to capital and the increase

in fundamental value, where                  mc    is the marginal cost of production

(equal to the inverse of the markup) and                     ϑ = (1 − δ ) ( αKY + 1 − δ ) where α is

capital’s share.            (A.7) defines the returns to stocks analogously.

(A.8) shows that the relationship between the stock return and the

fundamental return depends on the presence of the bubble; cf. (2.6).

Equation (A.9) links the spread between safe returns and stock returns

to firm leverage, where               n     is the log-deviation of firms’ internal

equity from its steady-state value.




Aggregate supply

(A.10)     y t = z t + αk t + (1 − α )l t

(A.11)     y t − l t + mct − ct = ( χ − 1) l t

(A.12)     Et −1π t = κ mct + θ f Et π t+1 + θ bπ t−1



         Equation (A.10) is a Cobb-Douglas production function, where z is

the log-deviation of total factor productivity from its steady-state

value and         l   is labor input.            (A.11) is the first-order condition for

households’ labor-leisure decision, where                     χ is a parameter of the

utility function (we assume log utility so that the coefficient on

consumption in (A.11) is one).                     (A.12) describes the evolution of

inflation when prices are changed stochastically as in Calvo (1983) and



                                                                                                 59
a subset of firms use rule-of-thumb pricing as in Gali and Gertler

(forthcoming).            If    θ f = 1 and θ b = 0 then (A.12) is the fully rational,

forward-looking version of the Phillips curve with exogenously sticky

prices.      Allowing          θ b > 1 introduces a backward-looking element and hence

additional inertia into the inflation process.



Evolution of state variables and shock processes

(A.13)    k t +1 = δit + (1 − δ ) k t

                       K s                 (1 − τR K )
(A.14)    nt = Rq [      (rt − Et−1rts ) +             y t + nt −1 ]
                       N                       τ

(A.15)    g t = ρ g g t −1 + ε tg

(A.16)    z t = ρ z z t −1 + ε tz



         Equations (A.13) and (A.14) describe the evolution of the two

state variables of the model, capital and internal equity respectively.

τ   is the probability that a given firm survives into the next period.

Equations (A.15) and (A.16) state that government spending and total

factor productivity follow first-order autoregressive processes.



Monetary policy rule and interest-rate determination

(A.17)    rtn = r n + βEtπ t +1

(A.18)    rt = rtn − Etπ t +1



         (A.17) is one example of an interest-rate rule for monetary

policy; cf. equation (3.1).                  (A.18) defines the real interest rate.




                                                                                      60
                                           G          N          Ce
       Key parameter values include          = 0 .2 ,   = 0 .5 ,    = 0.04 , σ = 1.0 ,
                                           Y          K          Y

δ = 0.025   per quarter,   a = 0.98 , β = 0.99 , b = 0.98(1 − 0.025) , α = 0.33 ,

ψ = 0.05 , ϕ = 0.25 , κ = 0.086 , θ f = 0.5 , θ b = 0.5 , τ = 0.95 , χ = 1.33 .

       Any parameters not reported are as in BGG.




                                                                                    61
TABLE 1.       VARIABILITY OF OUTPUT GAP AND INFLATION UNDER DIFFERENT POLICY
                                       RULES



                                         Bubble Shock           Technology Shock
          Policy Rule:              output gap   inflation   output gap   inflation


 rtn = 1.01 Et π t+1                  2.221        9.676       1.409       17.975



 rtn = 2.0 E tπ t +1                  1.471        0.119       0.103        0.231



 rtn = 1.01 E tπ t+1 + 0.1 s t −1     5.908       120.032      0.987       39.855



 rtn = 2.0 E tπ t +1 + 0.1 st −1      1.518        1.556       0.132        0.767




Notes: Shown are the unconditional variances of the output gap and
inflation under different policy rules, for bubble shocks and technology
shocks. A new bubble starts every period, and its size is randomly drawn
from a standard normal distribution. The probability that a bubble will
last one, two or three periods is respectively 0.5/0.875, 0.25/0.875,
and 0.25/0.875, reflecting the relative probabilities of each duration
when p = 0.5. Technology shocks are permanent and are randomly drawn
from a standard normal distribution.




                                                                                   62
                   TABLE 2:     FEDERAL RESERVE REACTION FUNCTIONS

                        β            γ         ρ1        ρ2          ξ         π*



Baseline1               1.60         0.14      1.27     -0.34         --      2.88
                       (0.15)       (0.04)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Adding stock            1.71         0.20      1.27      -0.33       -.0823   2.79
   returns2            (0.23)       (0.07)    (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.37)

Sample period: 79:10 – 97:12


Notes: The dependent variable is the federal funds rate. The output
gap is measured as the residuals from a regression of industrial
production on time and time squared for the period 1960:1-1998:12.
Estimates are by GMM with correction for MA(12) autocorrelation. The
optimal weighting matrix is obtained from first-step 2SLS parameter
estimates. χ tests for overidentifying restrictions are easily passed
               2

(p > 0.95) in all specifications.

1
  The instrument set includes a constant, plus lags 1-6, 9, and 12 of
log-differenced commodity prices (Dow-Jones), log-differenced CPI, log-
differenced output gap, and the federal funds rate.
2
  The instrument set is the same as above plus lags 1-6 of the log-
differenced change in stock prices.
3
  Sum of the coefficients on lags 0-5 inclusive of the log-differenced
change in stock prices. The reported standard error is for the sum of
the coefficients. The p-value for the hypothesis that all six
coefficients are equal to zero is 0.021.




                                                                                63
                 TABLE 3:   BANK OF JAPAN REACTION FUNCTIONS

                       β            γ           ρ1             ξ         π*



Baseline1              2.21         0.20        0.95           --       1.73
                      (0.23)       (0.05)     (0.006)

Adding stock           2.25         0.21        0.95       -0.0063      1.88
   returns2           (0.29)       (0.05)     (0.006)      (0.099)

Sample period:    79:04 – 97:12


Baseline1              2.00         0.33        0.95           --        2.12
                      (0.22)       (0.11)      (0.006)

Adding stock          1.85         0.39        0.96        -0.2863       1.59
   returns2          (0.21)       (0.11)      (0.004)       (0.111)

Sample period:    79:04 – 89:06


Baseline1              1.12         0.30       0.94                --   -3.39
                      (0.15)       (0.02)     (0.004)

Adding stock          1.24          0.30       0.95         0.1883      -1.56
   returns2          (0.13)        (0.02)     (0.003)      (0.035)

Sample period:    89:07 – 97:12




Notes: The dependent variable is the call rate. The output gap is
measured as the residuals (forecast errors, after 1989:6) from a
regression of industrial production on time and time squared for the
period 1968:1-1989:6. Estimates are by GMM with correction for MA(12)
autocorrelation. The optimal weighting matrix is obtained from first-
step 2SLS parameter estimates. χ tests for overidentifying restrictions
                                   2

are easily passed (p > 0.95) in all specifications.
1
  The instrument set includes a constant, plus lags 1-6, 9, and 12 of
log-differenced commodity prices (IMF), log differenced CPI, log-
differenced output gap, the log-differenced real yen-dollar exchange
rate, and the call rate.
2
  The instrument set is the same as above plus lags 1-6 of the log-
differenced change in stock prices.
3
  Sum of the coefficients on lags 0-5 inclusive of the log-differenced
change in stock prices. The reported standard error is for the sum of



                                                                           64
                     output gap                                 inflation
0.15                                          0.3

 0.1                                          0.2

0.05                                          0.1

   0                                            0

-0.05                                         -0.1
        0         5              10     15           0        5             10            15
                nominal interest rate                    external finance premium
 0.3                                          0.1

 0.2                                         0.05

 0.1                                            0

   0                                         -0.05

 -0.1                                         -0.1
        0         5             10      15           0       5           10               15
                 market asset price                      fundamental asset price
 0.6                                          0.3

 0.4                                          0.2

 0.2                                          0.1

   0                                            0

 -0.2                                         -0.1
        0         5            10       15           0      5          10                 15
                 SOLID: aggressive                       DASHED: accomodative


            the coefficients. The p-value for the hypothesis that all six
            coefficients are equal to zero is 0.020 for the full sample, 0.000 for
            both the 79:04 – 89:06 and 89:07-97:12 subsamples.




            Figure 1. Effects of an asset bubble when monetary policy responds only
            to expected inflation

            Notes: The panels of the figure show simulated responses of selected
            variables to a positive innovation to the bubble process in period zero
            equal to 1% of the steady-state fundamental price. The ex ante
            probability that the bubble will burst in any period is 0.5. We assume
            a realization in which the bubble bursts in period 5. The solid lines
            show responses under an aggressive monetary policy,             rtn = 2.0 E tπ t +1 .   The
            dashed lines show responses under an accommodative policy,
            rtn = 1.01 Et π t+1 .




                                                                                                      65
                    output gap                                           inflation
0.02                                                   0.5

   0                                                     0

-0.02                                                  -0.5

-0.04                                                    -1

-0.06                                                  -1.5
        0        5              10               15           0        5             10           15
               nominal interest rate                              external finance premium
 0.5                                                  0.01

   0                                                     0

 -0.5                                                 -0.01

   -1                                                 -0.02

 -1.5                                                 -0.03
        0        5            10                 15           0       5           10              15
                market asset price                                fundamental asset price
 0.3                                                   0.1

 0.2                                                  0.05

 0.1                                                     0

   0                                                  -0.05

 -0.1                                                  -0.1
        0        5            10                 15           0      5          10                15
                SOLID: aggressive                                 DASHED: accomodative




            Figure 2. Effects of an asset bubble when monetary policy responds to
            stock prices as well as to expected inflation

            Notes: The panels of the figure show simulated responses of selected
            variables to a positive innovation to the bubble process, under the same
            assumptions as in Figure 1. Monetary policy responds to the lagged log
            stock price as well as to expected inflation.   The solid lines show
            responses under an aggressive monetary policy,                     rtn = 2.0 E tπ t +1 + 0.1 st −1 .
            The dashed lines show responses under an accommodative policy,
            rtn = 1.01 E tπ t+1 + 0.1 s t −1 .




                                                                                                                   66
             output gap                                 inflation
0.4                                        0.4

0.2                                        0.2

  0                                         0

-0.2                                      -0.2

-0.4                                      -0.4
    0      5            10        15          0      5          10       15
          SOLID: aggressive                       DASHED: accomodative




        Figure 3.         Effects of an asset boom followed by an asset bust

        Notes: Same exercise as in Figure 1, except that the positive bubble
        shock is followed by a symmetric negative bubble shock that lasts from
        periods 6 through 10. Monetary policy responds only to expected
        inflation.




                                                                                 67
                  output gap                                   inflation
 0.1                                         0.01

0.05                                        0.005

   0                                            0

-0.05                                       -0.005

 -0.1                                        -0.01
        0       5             10     15              0      5           10      15
              SOLID: high leverage                       DASHED: low leverage




            Figure 4.     The effects of leverage on responses to an asset-price boom
            and bust

            Notes: Same exercise as Figure 3, comparison of high steady-state
            leverage (ratio of net worth to capital of 0.5, as in baseline
            simulations) and low steady-state leverage (net worth-capital ratio of
            0.75). Monetary policy is assumed to target expected inflation
            aggressively.




                                                                                        68
              output gap                                    inflation
0.01                                        0.05


   0                                           0


-0.01                                       -0.05
   0         5        10           15           0          5       10         15
DASHED: policy responds to inflation only     SOLID: policy responds to asset price




           Figure 5. Responses to stock-price increases based on a mixture of
           fundamental and non-fundamental forces

           Notes: The figure shows the simulated responses of selected variables
           to a permanent one percent increase in productivity followed by a five-
           period positive bubble. Monetary policy is aggressive in targeting
           inflation. The solid line shows responses when policy responds to the
           lagged stock prices as well as expected inflation, the dashed line shows
           responses when policy responds to expected inflation only.




                                                                                      69
             -3
      x 10              output gap                                 inflation
 5                                                0.15

 0                                                 0.1

 -5                                               0.05

-10                                                 0

-15                                              -0.05
      0               5            10     15             0      5          10       15
                     SOLID: aggressive                       DASHED: accomodative




                  Figure 6.     Effects of a rise in the external finance premium

                  Notes: Shown are responses to an exogenous 50-basis point rise in the
                  premium for external finance, with autoregressive coefficient 0.9.
                  Monetary policy responds only to expected inflation. The dashed lines
                  show variable responses under accommodative monetary policy, the solid
                  lines show responses under aggressive monetary policy.




                                                                                           70
Figure 7.                Actual and fitted values of the U.S. federal funds rate

Notes: The figure shows actual and fitted values of the U.S. federal
funds rate, with fitted values derived from a model that accommodates
lagged adjustment of the actual rate to the target rate.




                                                                         US Fed Funds Rate                                                                       ACTUAL
20                                                                                                                                                               FITTED



15




10




 5




 0
     Jan-79

              Jan-80

                       Jan-81

                                Jan-82

                                         Jan-83

                                                  Jan-84

                                                           Jan-85

                                                                    Jan-86

                                                                             Jan-87

                                                                                      Jan-88

                                                                                               Jan-89

                                                                                                        Jan-90

                                                                                                                 Jan-91

                                                                                                                          Jan-92

                                                                                                                                   Jan-93

                                                                                                                                            Jan-94

                                                                                                                                                     Jan-95

                                                                                                                                                              Jan-96

                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-97




                                                                                                                                                                                71
Figure 8.                Actual and target values of the U.S. federal funds rate

Notes: The figure shows actual and estimated target values of the U.S.
federal funds rate. Estimated target values make no allowance for the
lagged adjustment of the interest rate.



                                                     US Fed Funds Rate                                                          Actual
  12                                                                                                                            Target

  10

   8

   6

   4

   2

   0
       Jan-84

                Jan-85

                          Jan-86

                                   Jan-87

                                            Jan-88

                                                     Jan-89

                                                              Jan-90

                                                                       Jan-91

                                                                                Jan-92

                                                                                         Jan-93

                                                                                                  Jan-94

                                                                                                           Jan-95

                                                                                                                    Jan-96

                                                                                                                             Jan-97




                                                                                                                                         72
Figure 9.            Actual and fitted values of the Japanese call money rate

Notes: Comparison of the actual and fitted values of the Japanese call
money rate, analogous to Figure 7.




                                                               JAPAN Call Money Rate                                                                               ACTUAL
    14                                                                                                                                                             FITTED

    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0
         Jan-79

                  Jan-80

                           Jan-81

                                    Jan-82

                                             Jan-83

                                                      Jan-84

                                                               Jan-85

                                                                        Jan-86

                                                                                 Jan-87

                                                                                          Jan-88

                                                                                                   Jan-89

                                                                                                            Jan-90

                                                                                                                     Jan-91

                                                                                                                              Jan-92

                                                                                                                                       Jan-93

                                                                                                                                                Jan-94

                                                                                                                                                         Jan-95

                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-96

                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-97




                                                                                                                                                                                    73
Figure 10.             Actual and target values of the Japanese call money rate

Notes: Comparison of the actual and estimated target values of the
Japanese call money rate, analogous to Figure 8.




                                                                                                                                 Actual
                                                      Japan Call Money Rate
    12                                                                                                                           Target

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0

    -2

    -4
         Jan-84


                  Jan-85

                           Jan-86

                                    Jan-87

                                             Jan-88


                                                         Jan-89

                                                                  Jan-90

                                                                           Jan-91


                                                                                    Jan-92

                                                                                             Jan-93

                                                                                                      Jan-94

                                                                                                               Jan-95


                                                                                                                        Jan-96

                                                                                                                                 Jan-97




                                                                                                                                          74
