NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DAILY MOMENTUM AND CONTRARIAN BEHAVIOR
OF INDEX FUND INVESTORS
William N. Goetzmann
Massimo Massa
Working Paper 7567
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7567
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000

We thank Fidelity for providing us with the data for this study. We thank the International Center for Finance
at the Yale School of Management for providing research support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by William N. Goetzmann and Massimo Massa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Daily Momentum and Contrarian Behavior
of Index Fund Investors
William N. Goetzmann and Massimo Massa
NBER Working Paper No. 7567
February 2000
ABSTRACT
We use a two-year panel of individual accounts in an S&P 500 index mutual fund to examine
the trading and investment behavior of more than 91 thousand investors who have chosen a low-cost,
passively managed vehicle for savings. This allows us to characterize investors’ heterogeneity in
terms of their investment patterns. In particular, we identify positive feedback traders as well as
contrarians whose activities are conditional upon preceding day stock market moves. We test the
consistency and
profitability of these conditional strategies over time. We find that more frequent traders are typically
contrarians, while infrequent traders are more typically momentum investors. The dynamics of these
investor classes help us to partially examine the question of the marginal investor over the period
of our study. We find that the behavior of momentum investors is typically more correlated to
changes in the S&P 500 and we trace its dynamics over time. We build up “behavioral factors” based
on contrarian and momentum flows and show that they perform well against a benchmark of
loadings on latent factors extracted from returns. We also use the behavior of momentum and
contrarian investors to build a measure of “market polarization”. This captures the dispersion of
beliefs among the investors and helps to account for asset pricing better than standard measures of
dispersion of beliefs.
William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of Management

Massimo Massa
INSEAD

Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
Cedex France
massimo.massa@insead.fr

I.

Introduction
A number of recent models show that both momentum and contrarian investor behavior may

arise and be sustained in a financial market. Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer
and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Hong and Stein (1999) each develop models of investor behavior that
show how common psychological heuristics, if used by market participants, may lead to both meanreverting and persistent patterns in asset prices.
Psychological heuristics are in fact not necessary to motivate momentum and contrarian
behavior. Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch (1992) have a model of asymmetric information that
induces market participants to ignore private information and herd. Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam and
Titman (1994) argue that information asymmetry in a market may lead to both momentum and
contrarian investing.

Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1992) show how differential investor horizons and

information asymmetries may correlate investor behavior and induce agents to trade on trends.
Grossman (1995) shows that incomplete markets may induce dynamic portfolio choice that is
conditional upon past price changes. DeLong, Shleifer, Summers and Waldman (1990) find that
positive feedback trading may arise in a market and exacerbate economic shocks despite the presence
of rational, informed investors. Balduzzi, Bertola and Foresi (1996) contrast destabilizing feedback
traders with contrarians who effectively reduce market volatility. More recently, Orosel (1998)
develops a theory of rational trend-chasing that implies time-varying market participation and volatility.
In all of these models, momentum investors not only exist, but in most, they play a key role in the priceformation process.
Conditioning trades on past price dynamics makes sense in these models and empirical evidence
suggests that both momentum and contrarian investing may also be profitable, depending upon the
horizon of the strategy. Levy (1967), Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Chan, Jegadeesh and Lakonishok
(1996) and Rouwenhorst (1997) document profits to trading on past winning stocks both in the U.S.
and abroad.

Rosenberg, Reid and Lanstein (1984), DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and Lakonishok,

Shleifer and Vishny (1994) show that cross-sectional contrarian investment is profitable. Lo and
MacKinlay (1990) suggest that not all of this is due to behavioral heuristics.

2

While many of the theoretical models cited above have been motivated in part by the compelling
empirical evidence of temporal regularities in asset price patterns, direct evidence on investor behavior
has been illusive.
Studies by Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995) and Lakonishok, Shleifer, Thaler and Vishny
(1991) focus on the behavior of institutional managers, as opposed to individuals. Gompers and
Metrick (1998) study the equity holdings of large institutions for its implications for liquidity and
shareholder activism. Keim and Madhavan (1995) analyze the motives for trade using a large sample of
transactions by institutional managers. They find both momentum and contrarian managers in their
sample, as well as a curious asymmetry in conditional purchase vs. sale decisions.
Information about individual investor behavior has been more difficult to obtain. Schlarbaum,
Lewellen and Lease (1978), Lakonishok and Maberly (1990) and more recently Odean (1998) and
Grinblatt and Kellaharin (1999) use individual investor account data that allows analysis about how
investors (or investment groups) trade in individual securities. Odean (1998) and Grinblatt and
Kellaharin (1999), for example, both document a tendency towards "loss aversion." Both also find
evidence that trade decisions about individual securities in general may depend upon past individual
security price paths.
In this paper we use a panel of more than 91,000 investor accounts in an S&P 500 Index fund
over a two year horizon to document daily momentum and contrarian investment with respect to a
broad equity index as a whole. This is of particular interest because of the question of whether
speculative trading has potential to destabilize the market. Our work differs from previous research on
individual investor accounts to date in that our dataset allows us to focus entirely on investor beliefs
about the stock market as a whole, rather than the relative investment prospects for individual securities.
Within the dataset, we identify sub-groups of index fund investors according to their reaction to
past daily price changes. We focus on short-term momentum and contrarian behavior for two reasons.
First, the limited length of our sample period limits longer-horizon analysis despite research that suggests
reversion in the market over multiple-year horizons. Second, newspapers have historically attributed
market drops on days following rises to "profit-taking." By examining behavior conditional upon daily
market moves, our hope is to document evidence of profit-taking if such evidence exists. We find
evidence for both daily momentum and daily contrarian behavior in our sample. In addition, these

3

investor classes exhibit consistency through time. An investor identified as a trend-chaser or profit-taker
in the first half of our sample is likely to be identified as such in the second half as well.
We find that momentum and contrarian investors differ in some key dimensions. Relatively
active traders are more likely to be contrarians while infrequent traders are more likely exhibit
momentum. We also find that more active investors Granger-cause less active investors -- a result that
lends support to some asymmetric herding models. We find some evidence that the typical daily
contrarian investor is more profitable than the typical daily momentum investor in the sample.
A key question posed by DeLong, Shleifer, Summers and Waldman (1990) is the extent to
which rational momentum trading may destabilize the market.

Empirical evidence suggests that

mechanisms for such destabilization exists at the daily horizon. Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (1998),
Stulz (1998), Edelen and Warner (1999) and our own study, Goetzmann and Massa (1998) find that
short-term fluctuations in aggregate investor demand for stocks is correlated to contemporaneous price
changes and thus may move security prices. Grinblatt and Kelloharin (1999) report that the actions of
foreign investors alone significantly correlate to price changes in the most active stocks in Finland. In
the Finnish data, their evidence is consistent with foreign investors being the salient group, although they
cannot reject the hypothesis that the correlation is solely due to same-day momentum.
We use our panel data to investigate the possible salience of different investor classes over the
two-year period of our study. We use a procedure to identify which sub-groups of our data are
correlates of the price-formation process through time. While we are obviously restricted to index fund
investors, we find that daily momentum investors typically dominate, although at certain times in our
sample, the trades of contrarians are the more salient.
Also, we use our dataset to construct “behavioral factors” based on investors’ flows and to see
if they span asset returns. In particular, we show that, not only do they always perform at least as well
as the factors based on stock market returns, but also that it is possible to build behavioral factors
based on the flows of a sub-set of investors which significantly outperform the factors based on market
returns. In particular, we identify such investors in the ones who act as contrarians with respect to
market volatility. This group can be thought of as "active" mean-variance optimizers who increase
holdings in the risky asset when variance is low and decrease holdings when variance is high.

4

Finally, we use our dataset to shed some light on the role played in asset pricing by the
dispersion of beliefs. The theoretical literature has always considered the dispersion of beliefs among
the investors as one of the main determinants of both asset prices and of trading volume. Williams
(1977) shows how, by incorporating the effects of the heterogeneity of beliefs in the standard CAPM
framework, different beliefs affect the market equilibrium returns. Detemple and Murthy (1994) prove
that the market equilibrium interest rate itself is a function of agents’ beliefs, weighted according to the
fraction of total wealth held by the agents. Kraus and Smith (1989) argue that, even in the absence of
new information about security payoffs, change in beliefs may move prices. Even if investors’ probability
beliefs about the assets’ ultimate payoffs were correct, there would still be uncertainty due to the fact
that investors have imperfect information about the endowments of the other investors. The fact itself
that investors are imperfectly informed about each other creates and reinforces uncertainty and preserve
heterogeneity of beliefs at equilibrium. This “market created risk” affects prices and equilibrium levels of
returns. Furthermore, a burgeoning literature (Kim and Verrecchia (1991), Grundy and McNichols
(1989) and Shalen (1993), Biais and Bossaerts (1998)) explicitly links heterogeneity of beliefs to
trading volume and volatility. In general it finds a positive direct relationship between dispersion of
beliefs and both volume and price volatility.
To date, however, the empirical findings to support such theories have been scarce in terms of
the effects of heterogeneity of beliefs on either asset levels of returns or volume and volatility. The main
reason is the lack of a good proxy for the dispersion of beliefs. Trading volume itself and open interest
have been identified with dispersion of beliefs, but no direct evidence has been derived based on microlevel data.
With our dataset we can use the behavior of momentum and contrarian investors to directly
construct a proxy for “market polarization” that gauges the dispersion of beliefs. This allows us to
explicitly test how asset prices returns and trading volume and volatility are affected by the dispersion of
beliefs. We find that dispersion of beliefs explains part of the variance in returns not accounted for by
the standard asset pricing models. We also show that, while our measure of market polarization is
directly related to trading volume and open interest, it has additional power to explain asset return
variance.

5

Our paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data and our definitions of
momentum and contrarian investing. Section III reports summary evidence about these key sub-groups.
Section IV examines the cross-correlations and potential causality among different investor classes.
Section V considers the contemporaneous relationship between flows and returns and describes our
analysis of the inter-temporal variation on relative salience. Section VI concerns the dispersion of
beliefs and the relation to the asset pricing model. Section VII concludes.

II. Index Fund Data
Despite the increasing importance of index fund investing in the U.S. over the past two decades,
there is relatively little information about the scale, activity and type of investor accounts that comprise
an index fund.

This sample is particularly interesting, however, because investors in the fund have

explicitly chosen an index fund as opposed to a managed fund

II.1 Fund Description
Fidelity provided us with anonymous individual account activity in their Spartan Market Index
Fund over the years 1997 and 1998. The objective of the fund is to closely match the returns to the
S&P 500 Index while keeping management fees, transactions costs and other expenses to a minimum.
Over the past five years, the fund has returned 27.51% per year compared to the S&P 500's return
over the period of 27.87%. The fund has a short-term trading fee of 1/2 % for redemptions that occur
within 90 days, a minimum initial investment of $10,000 and a minimum required balance of $5,000.
These minimums are less for a retirement account. The two years of our study were both banner years
for the S&P 500. It grew by 33% in 1997 and by 28.5% in 1998. The fund also grew dramatically
over the two-year period -- from $1,597.5 million at the end of 1996 to $7,149.9 at the end of 1998
growing by a factor of two, after the effect of the growth in share prices is taken into account.

II.2 Data
We have daily activity records for all accounts that existed or were formed in the two-year
sample period. All individual identifying characteristics of these accounts were removed. We have
absolutely no data on personal characteristics of the investors other than the account balances and

6

trades. The accounts are only identified by type which we sorted into four general categories:
Individual, Tax-Benefited, Fiduciary and Trust or Group. Table 1 describes our sample.

After

screening for various data errors (such as accounts with withdrawals that exceed balances) we have a
total of 90,768 accounts. We have 259,616 transactions of which 83% are purchases of shares and
17% are share redemptions. The largest category of investor (66,903) is the Tax-Benefited account -principally IRA and Keogh plans. Next is individual account (16,185). We have a small number of
Fiduciary accounts (5,493) which include Executors, Guardianships and Trusts. The Group category
(2,179) includes Investment Clubs, Partnerships and other accounts that are held in the name of an
association of some sort.

II.3 Summary Measures
Our data clearly suggest that investors in passively managed funds are themselves passive -they trade very little. The median fund investor trades once a year in our sample and the average
number of transactions per account over the 505-day period is 2.86. The number of transactions is
slightly higher for taxable as opposed to tax exempt accounts. In our previous paper we examined
evidence for seasonality in S&P 500 fund flows and found very little. Despite the fact that the typical
account has a single contribution per year, the date of that contribution varies across all months. In
particular, there is no “turn-of-the-year” effect in our sample, no day of the week effect and no end of
the month effect.1
How big are the investor accounts? Because accounts begin and end within the sample,
determining an appropriate scale measure for the typical account is not trivial. We calculate the average
running balance [RB] by taking the average number of shares held by an investor over the period for
which the account is open.2 The average individual RB is 400 shares, or about $28,000 to $36,000,

1

This result was surprising enough that we checked with Fidelity to determine whether this was consistent with their
own experience -- it was.
2
We construct H by weighting the number of shares (N) an investor holds between the purchase date (b) of the
s

shares and the sales date (s) of the shares, that is:

H i = ∑ N i ,t ( s − b) . We then divide this by the number of
t =b

days the account is open in the period to calculate running balance. That is, the difference between first and last

7

with the median individual account at less than half that. As a measure of activity in the account, we
calculate turnover ratio [T] as the absolute sum of the number of share purchases and sales divided by
the running balance. Thus, a perfectly passive investor who had 100 shares at the beginning of the
period and held them through the end would have a turnover ratio of one. In Table 1, the median
turnover ratio for all accounts is slightly greater than one. The mean is dramatically higher suggesting
that some accounts have a lot of activity.
Table 1 also reports an Investor Profit Ratio. This is a measure of investor profits due to the
timing of their flows in and out of the fund. It is not the standard time-weighted rate of return typically
used to measure portfolio performance. The time-weighted rate of return would simply equal the return
to the index fund over the period of the investor account’s existence and would be unaffected by how
much money was in the account at different times. As such, it would not provide a measure of timing
skill relative to a meaningful alternative.3

Instead, we use a standard accrual method for profit

calculation. The capital appreciation of each share purchased is tracked separately for the investor, and
profits are defined as the accumulated growth in all share values at the termination of the account or the
end of the sample period. This profit is scaled by the capitalization of the net value of share purchases
and sales invested at the beginning of the sample period. In effect, we report timing profits by
comparison to a benchmark buy and hold strategy, where we assume the investor could have placed all
of his or her money in the fund at the beginning of the two-year period, as opposed to distributing the
contributions throughout the period.
This is an imperfect measure, since it relies on certain assumptions that may be unrealistic.
Among these assumptions is that the investor has the money to buy shares at the beginning of the sample
period, rather than when shares were actually purchased. What we attribute to strategic delay in
investment may simply be investor illiquidity. Because of this issue, we also considered scaling terminal
share values by the gains to a dollar-cost-averaging strategy that effectively distributed net share

holding dates for investor i:

RBi =

Hi
.
max( t i ) − min( t i )

3

An alternative we considered as a measure of profitability is the internal rate of return on each account. This has
been constructed by taking initial balance and contributions as negative flows and withdrawals and ending balance
as positive flows, and then by scaling the IRR by the growth of the index over the period of the account’s existence.
Unfortunately, the negative intermediate cash flows led to many multiple solutions to the IRR, and thus we chose not

8

purchases equally through the sample period. This however would not change the relative rankings of
investors, but only the absolute value of the Profit Ratio. The second major limitation of the investor
profit ratio is that many of the accounts in our database opened after the beginning of our sample period.
Incoming investors may simply have switched from another S&P index fund rather than cash. Given the
high return to the S&P in 1997, latecomers to the fund will typically have a low profit ratio.
Because the profit patio measure has limitations, we make no claim that it perfectly measures
relative investment skill. Later in the paper we explicitly employ timing measures to capture relative
timing skill, for example. Where we use it in the paper to measure relative skill, we attempt to control
for the potential biases discussed above. It is reported in Table I simply to describe its distributional
characteristics and not as an indication of skill across account type.

III.

Daily Momentum and Contrarian Strategies
We use individual account activity to classify investors according to their conditional pattern of

share purchases and redemptions. Our positive feedback traders (momentum investors) are reacting on
a daily, as opposed to a weekly, monthly or annual basis by purchasing when the market rose and
selling when the market fell in the previous trading session. Our negative feedback traders (contrarian
investors) are characterized in exactly opposite fashion. They buy after a drop in the market and sell
after a rise. In this respect, they behave like “profit-takers” -- a term used frequently in the financial
press to characterize investors who sell after a market rise. Of course it is possible to define positive
and negative feedback trading over much longer horizons. Indeed, for studies of momentum investing,
for example, it would be useful to condition behavior on the market performance over previous weeks,
months or years. Our definition of momentum investing is different from the way Grinblatt and
Kellaharin (1998) apply the term in that profitable momentum strategies as documented empirically are
cross-sectional and are based upon the past several months as opposed to days. In this paper, our
choice of the daily horizon is based upon our analysis of aggregate index fund flows in Goetzmann and
Massa (1998), where we found some evidence that, on average, index fund investors reacted negatively
to the previous day’s market drop. In addition, index fund daily flows are correlated to the movement

to use it.

9

of the market in a manner suggesting that S&P 500 index fund investors may at times be salient to stock
price formation.
In addition to classifying investors in terms of their strategies conditional upon preceding day
returns, we also classify them in terms of their response to changes in the implied volatility of the S&P
500. In our previous paper, we found some evidence for volatility timing behavior. In particular, both
aggregate inflows and aggregate outflows were correlated to increase in implied volatility. We found
this surprising, since it appeared inconsistent with mean-variance optimizing behavior. Our goal with the
current data is to identify different classes of investors who react differently to risk. Risk-timing in
general may be an interesting aspect of investor behavior that has yet only been examined in a limited
manner. Bussey (1998) for example, finds that mutual fund managers may engage in successful volatility
timing. Graham and Harvey (1996) find that market-timing newsletters have some ability to forecast
market volatility. Market-timers conditioned their asset-allocation recommendations on what appear to
be successful forecasts of market volatility. These results suggest that individual investor behavior may
be conditioned upon risk.

III.1 Methodology and Investor Types
Our classification of investors as positive and negative feedback traders is based on a binomial
test of the differences in proportions applied to daily investor inflows (and outflows) and the daily
market return. We define a momentum investor as one whose frequency of share purchases following
days after a market rise greater than one would expect given a random distribution of share purchases
of the same number within the sample period. A contrarian investor is defined analogously as an
investor who sells shares conditional upon an increase in the market on the previous day, and buys
conditional on a market downturn. The null hypothesis for both types is that the ratio of purchase-days
to non-purchase-days, conditional upon previous day's market direction, is equal to the unconditional
ratio of up (or down) days for the market. Since investors trade relatively infrequently in our sample,
we cannot employ the normal approximation to the binomial and thus, critical values for rejection of the
null are given by summation of the binomial frequencies up to a probability level less than the critical
value of 10% for a one-sided test. We apply this test to each investor’s inflows and outflows
separately.

10

The same procedure is used to classify investors according to the change in implied volatility in
the preceeding trading day. We obtain the implied volatility for S&P 500 option contracts from the
CBOT, calculated by inverting the Black-Scholes formula. We code days in terms of the percentage
change in the implied volatility from the previous trading session. Thus we identify investors in terms of
their reactions to changes in expectations about market risk. For both market return and volatility, we
identify investors in terms of their associations with contemporaneous reactions as well. Both contrarians
and momentum traders are therefore defined in terms of the reaction to the previous day
returns/volatility.
Table 2 reports the classification of accounts according to whether they have positive or
negative feedback tendencies. The top panel reports results for all accounts and the bottom panel
restricts the analysis to accounts with eight or more transactions in the period. The distribution for
inflows and outflows into individual accounts suggests that contrarian investors are slightly more
common than momentum ones. Almost 25% of the accounts display a negative-feedback trading
tendency, while only 12% display positive feedback characteristics. This is true across all four
categories of accounts. This is consistent with Grinblatt and Kelaharin's findings that contrarians are
more common in their sample than momentum investors. Notice that the proportion of undefined
accounts is greater for outflows than for inflows. This is because outflows are relatively infrequent in our
sample.
Accounts with more than eight transactions show a different tendency from the general
population. While individual accounts with more than eight transactions have some tendency towards
negative feedback, the other three groups appear to strongly favor positive feedback -- on balance
more than 50% of the frequent traders appear to be positive feedback investors, vs. 37%.
Table 2 also indicates that the individual accounts classified as significant volatility chasers is
higher (10.76%) than those classified as significant volatility avoiders (6.78%) although the proportion
who display positive and negative volatility-chasing in general is about equal.

III.2 Consistency
To test for the inter-temporal consistency of this timing behavior we again use an odds-ratio test
based on a two by two table. We consider all accounts that existed over two sub-periods: 1/1/1997 to

11

31/12/1997 and 1/1/1998 to 31/12/1998. For each period we use the proportion statistic described in
the preceding section to identify investors as having either momentum or contrarian tendencies, where
the median proportion measure is the dividing line between the two. We further restricted ourselves to
accounts for which the probability level defined by the binomial test above exceeded 50% i.e. we only
looks at those who were more likely than not to be a momentum or a contrarian investor. Because of
the infrequency of sales in the sample, there are relatively few "sales contrarians" -- not enough to
perform the test.
To test for consistency of behavior, we examine whether investors identified as momentum in
the first period are more likely to be momentum investors in the second period.

4

The values of the

statistics (B) for the odds ratio test are significant for all classes except volatility momentum in sales and
sales return and volatility contrarians.5 The results indicate that investor groups we identify typically
display consistency over time. In particular, they show that daily return momentum investors repeat
both when they are defined in terms of purchases and when they are defined in terms of sales. In
contrast, volatility-conditioned activity does not seem consistent. Volatility momentum investors repeat
only when defined in terms of purchases and not when defined in terms of sales. Contrarian investors
always repeat, but only when defined in terms of purchases, while the number of observation is not
sufficient to draw any statistically significant conclusion when they are defined in terms of sales.
4

An odds ratio test is then applied to see if the accounts which have a behavior higher than median in the first period

repeat themselves in the second period. In particular, the odds ratio statistic is

B = ln

MM * CC
MC * CM

where M is the

number of investors classified as momentum in both periods. CC is the number of investors classified as contrarian in
both periods, MC is the number classified as momentum in the first and contrarian in the second and CM is the
number of investors classified as contrarian in the first and momentum in the second. The null that the behavior does
not repeat in the two periods corresponds to an odds ratio equal to 1 and the statistic is distributed normally as

1
1
1 
 1
N 1,
+
+
+
.
 MM CM MC CC 
5

The test statistic values are:
Purch. Momentum

Sales Momentum

Purch. Contrarians

Sales Contrarians

Investors reacting to returns

6.4338

2.0048

11.2731

*

Investors reacting to volatility

4.0556

1.6110

4.7423

*

12

III.3 Profitability
One feature of models with rational momentum investors is that positive feedback trading is
potentially profitable. Our data allow us to provide some evidence on this, using the measure of
profitability described above. That is, profits are calculated as the terminal value of the sum of the
inflows and outflows each accrued at the return on the index fund divided by the terminal value of a buy
and hold strategy. This assumes the investor had all investable funds at the beginning of the sample
period. We estimate profits for all the purchase and sale contrarian and momentum investors, and also
define an additional class of investor -- thus who are "full momentum" or "full contrarian," i.e. investors
who have greater than 50% probability of being both purchase and sale momentum investors and
analogously, those who have greater than 50% probability of being both purchase and sale contrarians.
We also calculate profits for the rest of the market, that is the profits for all those who are
neither contrarian nor momentum investors i.e. they have less than 50% chance of rejecting the null in
favor of either typology. Table 4 reports the profitability for different classes. The profitability measure is
problematic since longer investor "life" in the sample is likely to be correlated both with profitability as
well as with momentum and contrarian significance.6 There is no obvious bias when comparing
profitability of momentum investors versus contrarian investors, since they are both likely to be subject
to the same selection criteria. Looking at the means, it appears that purchase contrarians, full contrarian
and sales momentum contrarians earn significantly higher profits than the rest of the market. Purchase
contrarians appear marginally profitable than purchase momentum investors.7

The most apparent

differences are between purchase and sales momentum trades -- traders who tend to sell after a market
drop appear to be more profitable than those who buy after a market rise. On balance, full contrarian
traders seem more profitable that full momentum traders, although the latter category contains far too
few observations for reliable inference.

6

Our definition of momentum and contrarian depends upon being able to identify such behavior form a pattern of
trades. For investors who trade only one or two times, we cannot identify them as either. The shorter the time period
that the investor has been in the sample, the less the expected number of trades. This is likely to induce a positive
correlation between momentum or cotrarian and profitability.
7
Significance is calculated using a two-sample t-test assuming unequal variances and differing sample lengths.

13

When the feed-back strategy is defined in terms of volatility, both sales and purchase
momentum and contrarian variance-conditional strategies apparently deliver profits higher than the rest
of the market. Also sales variance-momentum strategies deliver significantly higher payoffs than
purchase variance-contrarians. However direct comparison of purchase variance-contrarians vs.
purchase variance-momentum as well as comparison of sale variance-contrarians vs. sale variancemomentum do not deliver statistically significant results.
One problem with inferences based upon means in Table 4 is that mean and median values
differ significantly. The skewness of the distributions violates the assumptions required for the t-test. In
fact, the medians tell a different story than the means. The median values suggest that the typical
contrarian, whether defined in terms of purchase, sales or both, is more profitable than the typical
momentum trader.8 A Mann-Whitney test about differences in medians allows us to test whether the
median investor profits for each category differs.

9

Contrarians beat momentum investors for the

categories of purchases, sales and full, however the latter is not significant. A direct comparison
between full contrarians and full momentum investors is hampered by low sample size.
The medians test applied to variance strategies does not provide a clear ranking. Full variancecontrarians enjoy a statistically significant higher payoff than sales contrarians and sales contrarians
have a return higher than purchase contrarians. Within the class of the variance-momentum investors,
both

sales momentum investors and full momentum investors have higher profits than purchase

momentum investors. A comparison between classes shows that purchase variance-contrarian investors

8

We implemented a test of whether any of the strategies repeat in terms of profitability. Using the same odds ratio
test as above, we found no evidence that successful conditional strategies in the first half of the sample were
successful in the second half. Given the high correlation induced by clustering accounts that behave similarly, and
our evidence that strategies repeat, even evidence of consistent profitability through time would be difficult to prove
without econometric controls for cross-sectional correlation.
9
The tests are based on a pairwise comparison of the medians of the profitability of the alternative strategies
implemented by using a Mann-Whitney Test. The test is based on the statistics: U = Min{T1, T2 } where:
n1 * ( n1 + 1)
− R1 and T2 = n1 * n 2 − T1 . Here n1 and n2 are the size of the two samples which are
2
compared and R1 is the sum of the ranks for the sample corresponding to n1 . The ranks are calculated on the pooled
T1 = n1 * n2 +

samples. We report the values of the statistics z defined as: z =
approximation, µu =

n1 * n2
and σ u =
2

n1 * n2 * ( n1 + n2 + 1)
.
12

14

U − µu
, where, by applying the normal
σu

are more profitable than purchase variance-momentum investors and that sales variance-momentum
investors are more profitable than

sales variance-contrarians. Also full momentum investors are

significantly more profitable than full contrarian investors.
This last result may explain our earlier results (Goetzmann and Massa 1999), which suggested
the presence of volatility timing in the aggregate flows of index funds. If such strategies are profitable,
this may motivate their use. To correctly evaluate the attractiveness of such strategies, however, a riskadjustment -- at least a Sharpe ratio -- is clearly necessary. Given the limited information provided by
profitability measures, we have not implemented such a risk adjustment.

IV.

Internal Dynamics Among Investor Classes
One way of assessing the role played by the different classes of investors is to explicitly test for

causality among them. If some investor classes are prone to herding and others are "first-movers," we
might expect the latter to Granger-cause the former. On the other hand, no Granger causation does not
imply the complete lack of causality. We found in previous work that most of the effects between flows
and S&P returns are contemporaneous (Goetzmann and Massa 1999). The contemporaneous
relationship between classes of investors and market returns will be explicitly addressed in the next
section.
To test for causality, we estimate a standard Granger tests applied to the following VAR
specification:

Flows t = α + γFlows t −1 + ε t
where Flows is the vector of investor class flows in and out the index fund (purchases and sales). The
flows are defined in terms of number of shares purchased/sold and are aggregated into different groups
depending on the momentum and contrarian identification of the investors. Table 5 reports the
probability values of the joint significance of the lagged values of the variables whose ability to Grangercause the dependent variable is to be tested. The VAR is estimated with 2 and 5 lags.
Note that there is virtually no evidence of causality across share purchases of investor classes,
although there appears to be some inertia for the main investor class and for momentum investors. In
contrast, causality goes both directions for all three groups for share sales. If there is any cross-group
feedback it appears to be only in selling activity -- herd behavior appears to be related to sales more
15

than purchases and it is not clear that division into three classes makes much difference to this analysis.
In the second panel of the table, volatility strategies are examined. Note that Granger-causality appears
to go both ways when investors are grouped on the basis of sales. Selling appears to be correlated
across investors groups both at both forward and backwards lags. There is, however, some evidence
in the second panel of Table 5 that differentiating by volatility strategies might be useful.

Volatility

momentum investors appear to strongly cause volatility contrarians -- thus risk-chases lead risk-averters
in our sample.

V.

Estimating the Investor Class Relationship to Returns
A key issue in behavioral finance is the extent to which systematic behavior -- rational or

otherwise -- affects prices. We will consider the role played by different classes of investors by looking
at it from three different perspectives. From previous evidence (Goetzmann and Massa 1999) we know
that flows affects returns and that there is a strong contemporaneous relationship between flows and
returns. Therefore, we first consider the relationship between contemporaneous returns and flows,
disaggregated by classes of investors, to see whether all the different classes are significant in terms of
returns. Then we quantify the impact of each single class relative to the other classes.

V.1 Contemporaneous Regressions of Returns on Flows
In this section, we consider the effect on asset prices of the purchase and sales flows of different
index fund classes on asset prices. First, we estimate regressions of market returns on the flows by the
portfolios of the different classes. The functional specification estimated is:

Rt = α + βFlows t + ε t
where Rt are the returns on the SP500 index, while Flowst are the flows (inflows and outflows) of
portfolios made of the purchases (inflows) and sales (outflows) of the fund units by specified categories
of investors (momentum and contrarians). A separate regression is estimated for each category. Given
that market trends are endogeneous to the procedure for identifying investor class, we identify classes
and test the effects over two separate periods. Contrarians and momentum investors are identified in the
period 01/01/1997-31/12/1997 and then regressions of S&P 500 returns on investor-class flow

16

portfolios over the second period, 01/01/1998-31/12/1998.

We also report results using the same

period for indentification and estimation to get an idea of the magnitude of the endogeneity problem.
The results are reported in Table 5. They show that S&P returns may be correlated to the decisions by
active timers. While we might expect momentum investor decisions to be correlated to S&P 500
returns (especially when classes are defined over the same period when the regressions are performed)
we also find that sales contrarian flows are positively related to the market. In other words, timer
activity -- both momentum and contrarian -- correlates to positive market moves in our sample. With
regard to strategies defined in terms of volatility, it appears that purchases by investors who tend to
sell on higher variance have a positive relation to the market, and sales by "risk-chasers" are negatively
correlated to the market. One limitation of the regressions is that the coefficients are fixed over the timeperiod of study. If the decisions of contrarians were salient at different times, we would not pick this up
in the current specification.

V.2 Sharpe Regressions
In order to examine the inter-temporal behavior of the correlation between timer decisions and
the S&P 500, we allow coefficients to vary over 90-day intervals. To simplify the interpretation of
these coefficients and to be able to quantify the impact of each class of investors relative to the others,
we use a technique similar to Sharpe (1992), Lo and MacKinlay (1995), Fung and Hsieh (1997) and
Brown, Goetzmann and Park (1998) to identify a maximally correlated portfolio. The intuition is that
there exist weights on the class flows that allow the construction of a portfolio that is maximally
correlated to S&P 500 returns, and the composition of that portfolio is allowed to change through time.
Portfolios are thus constructed by minimizing the squared residual error of the vector of returns of the
S&P500 index by using investors’ purchases and sales as explanatory variables, subject to the
constraint that the weights in the portfolios are positive and add up to one. In particular, we estimate:

Minwt [ Rt − w t Flowt ]2
s.t. : wt * e = 1
wit ≥ 0 ∀ i

17

where w t is a vector of weights of size equal to the number of components of the portfolio of flows,

Flowt is vector of length i comprised of flows for day t for class purchase or sale i (purchases or
sales of shares by contrarians on day t, purchases or sales by the rest of the market, or purchases or
sales by momentum investors) and e is a vector of ones.10
The normal interpretation of the coefficients in the Sharpe estimation procedure is that they are
positive portfolio weights applied to investable assets. In this case, however, the flows are not assets.
They instead are weights on the dollar flows, and thus weights on investor classes. The weights are
reported for the purchases and sales separately as well as for the net purchases. Furthermore, the
impact of the different strategies are separately estimated for momentum and contrarian investors
defined in terms of reaction to returns as opposed to reaction to volatility. To avoid endogeneity
problems, classification is done in the period 01/01/1997-31/12/1998 and the estimation is performed
over 01/01/1998-31/12/1998.
Considering the static results (Table 6), we see that, in terms of net purchases, momentum
investors play the major role. Because momentum investors have the highest weights, we cannot
necessarily interpret this evidence about which investor class most strongly influence returns. Either
momentum investor decisions influence stock returns or vice-versa or both. Since we know momentum
investors by definition chase flows, we may simply be identifying intra-day momentum investing. Indeed,
even if we have defined the strategies in terms of reaction to previous day either return or volatility, still it
is possible that previous-day trend chasers are also same-day trend chasers. Therefore the correlation
with today returns would only be due to trend-chasing behavior.
To address the question of whether the momentum investor correlation to contemporaneous
return is largely due to trend-chasers, we test whether the set of momentum investors overlaps
significantly with the set of investors who display contemporaneous positive correlation in returns in the
initial identification period. To do this, we calculate the ratio between the number of investors in the first
period who react both to past and contemporaneous returns and the total number of investors who
either react to past or contemporaneous return. The results do not favor the hypothesis of trend chasing
behavior. There is not a big overlap in the sample of momentum investors defined alternately on
10

Due to the large difference in magnitude between returns and flows, a constant scaling factor is also used to

18

contemporaneous or lagged returns. If we select the momentum investors as the ones who react to
returns by selling, there are only 7.3% who are reacting to both past and contemporaneous returns. If,
on the other hand, we define the momentum investors in terms of purchases, there are only 7.9% who
react to both past and contemporaneous returns. Analogously, if we define the contrarians in terms of
sales, there are 19.92% who are reacting to both past and contemporaneous returns, while if we define
the contrarians in terms of purchases there are 14.45% who are reacting to both past and
contemporaneous returns.
Also, a more detailed look at the different components, in terms of purchases and sales (Table
6, III Specification), shows that the single most important class of agents are the “volatility contrarian
purchasers”.
The dynamic estimation is a series of rolling regressions with overlapping 90-day windows.
Figures 1 and 2 plot the values of the weights for the different classes. Weights are reported for net
purchases (Figure 1) as well as for sales and purchases separately considered (Figure 2). The net flows
suggest that both return momentum and volatility momentum investors represent the greatest weight in
the maximally correlated portfolio. It is, however, interesting to note how the weight on contrarian
investors increases through the sample. It is reasonable to expect that macro-economic factors or even
market price levels could play a role in the changing salience of various groups. The financial press
often reports that drops in a bull market are regarded as buying opportunities by investors. Over our
period of study, the steady rise in the market may have provided just such opportunities. If we have
data from a bear market period, the weights may have differed dramatically. The important message of
both graphs is that the marginal investor, if that is indeed who we are identifying econometrically -- may
vary substantially through time. While momentum investor decisions seem to predominate in terms of
explanatory power, contrarian behavior is important at times as well.
Regardless of which of the two groups has the highest weight at any given time, weights are
highest on the two systematic classes , volatility momentum and volatility contrarian are higher than on
the undefined group. For fixed weights over the period variance avoiders have a higher weight than
risk-chasers, however when weights are allowed to vary, volatility momentum traders weights are

facilitate convergence of the optimization.

19

generally above those of the risk-avoiders. If we interpret the volatility momentum investors as those
more likely to be speculating on market dynamics, they appear to be more salient.

V.3 Identifying behavioral factors
The next question is: if investors’ strategies are correlated to asset returns, is it possible to use
investor flows to construct “behavioral factors” that span asset returns? To do this we resort to the
standard Fama-MacBeth [FM] two-stage time-series cross-section test, applied to daily return timeseries. We estimate two sets of factors: the standard market factors derived from market returns and
some “behavioral” factors estimated from the flows of the investors in the index fund. We then compare
the explanatory power of the two types of factors. We test two hypotheses. First, if flows affect
returns, we would expect that the behavioral factors have an explanatory power at least as high as the
one based on market factors. Second, the behavioral factors based on the class of marginal investors
should have the highest explanatory power, beating the market factors. We will use the time-series of R2
from the daily cross-sectional FM regressions derived from the different factor specifications as a basis
for our comparison.
First, we estimate factor loadings for a set of portfolios formed from both stock returns and
investors’ flows (behavioral factors) using a four-factor latent variable model. In the former case, we
consider the regularly-traded individual securities in the U.S. market. The factors are extracted and
loadings estimated using leading rolling windows. In particular, we take the 560 stocks in the CRSP
database that have been consecutively traded in the two-year period 1997-1998 with no missing
observations. We then create 20 portfolios each containing 28 stocks, ranked by market capitalization.
This allows us to cover virtually all the stocks contained in the S&P500 which are also regularly traded.
In the case of the behavioral factors, we consider the daily flows into the fund (purchases and
sales). The construction of the flows is particularly tricky, as aggregation of all the flows from all the
investors would yield very low explanatory power. The goal of our exercise is to identify the class of
investors whose behavior provides the best way to explain predict future differences in returns. We
therefore consider various combinations of investors, aggregated in terms of either their investment
characteristics or trading behavior. The trading behavior is defined in terms of the class of investors we
identified before: momentum and contrarian investors. In particular, we consider two specifications: one

20

where strategies are broken down in terms of their definition as reaction to returns and volatility
(contrarian and momentum) and another where strategies are broken down in terms of the type of
action undertaken (purchases, sales, net purchases).
In the first specification we use four “portfolios of flows”: return contrarians, return momentum
investors, volatility contrarians and volatility momentum investors. Each single portfolio is composed of
the purchases and sales of the investors belonging to the specific category, one factor for each way of
identifying them. For example, the portfolio of return contrarians is made of four components: the vector
of the purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the vector
of the purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the
vector of the sales of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales and the
vector of the purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their
purchases.
In a second specification each one of the portfolios is composed of the transactions (either
purchases, or sales or net purchases) of the investors who strategically react to either return or volatility.
They are purchases of return investors, purchases of volatility investors, sales of return investors, sales
of volatility investors, net purchases (purchases minus sales) of return investors and net purchases of
volatility investors.
For example the portfolio of the purchases of return investors is made of four factors: the
purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the
purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the purchases of
the return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their purchases, the
purchases of the return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their sales.
We consider two alternative specifications, one with four factors and one with eight factors. In
the first, we directly compare the explanatory power of the four factors extracted from past returns to
the ones extracted from investor flows. In the second, we consider the four factors extracted from past
returns plus the four factors based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing them on the first
four factors. In this case, we test whether the factors derived from investors’ flows have an additional
incremental explanatory power to the one already latent in the market returns.

21

We estimate loadings for each portfolio and portfolio weights via a principal component analysis
performed on over-lapping 90 days windows through the sample period. Given that we are dealing with
daily data with potential lead-lag effects due to asynchronous trading, we apply the Dimson-Marsh
correction using two days of leads and lags.
The factor extraction and the estimation of the betas is updated each day in the sample,
following the initial 90-day estimation period. Thus, betas are allowed to vary through time. Given that
we need a 90-day rolling window to estimate the factors, our sample consists of 412 observations
(March 1997-December 1998). This generates sets of betas that are then used as explanatory
variables in the second step of the procedure. Presumably, the latent-variable model will capture the
relevant factors driving the cross-section of returns in the preceding 90-day window. If, for example,
these true factors were a rotation of the Fama-French factors they should be captured in the first stage.
If they are well estimated, they we would expect their loadings to explain cross-sectional dispersion in
returns in the following period.
The standard Fama-MacBeth analysis only focuses on the regression of the day following the
estimation period. But with daily data there can be some problem of stability of the estimated beta and
additional measurement error induced by the Dimson-Marsh correction. Furthermore, given that we
found evidence that flows affect returns mostly through contemporaneous correlation (Goetzmann and
Massa 1999), it is plausible to think that behavioral factors based on flows should have explanatory
power only in the very short run (same day, following day). Therefore, for a robustness check, we
repeat the same experiment for several different time horizons: that is the next 5, 10, 15, 20 and 40 days
following the estimation period11. Given that all the results agree, we will report only the standard one
based on time t.
In stage 2, we regress portfolio returns on betas each day following the estimation period and
save the resulting R2. We report the mean R2 and the P-values of the test that the means of the R2 of the
regressions based on behavioral factors are statistically different from the means of the R2 estimated
using only past market factors.

11

The results are available upon request from the authors.

22

The results, reported in Table 7, suggest that flows explain returns at least as well as past
return-derived factors . In all the different specifications, the results holds for both the case when
strategies are broken down in terms of reaction to return/volatility and the case when strategies are
defined in terms of the type of action undertaken. In most cases, there is no statistical difference
between market-based factors and flow-based factors.
Second it is possible to identify portfolios of flows which have the highest explanatory power. In
particular, among the different behavioral components, it seems that the portfolios of flows originated by
the investors who react to volatility through purchases are the ones which have the greatest explanatory
power. In particular, among them, volatility contrarians play a prominent role.
These results have several important implications. First, they provide evidence that non-price
related factors are as good as predictors of future returns as the standard return based factors. Here, it
is worth stressing that we are dealing with flows expressed in units of the index funds and not in
monetary value. Therefore, they are completely devoid of any price-related informational content.
Second, in terms of asset pricing, this implies that a new reformulation of pricing, based on
different models where flows play a role may be desirable. Standard asset pricing models assume away
any influence of flows postulating an infinitely elastic demand function. Maybe some of the assumptions
behind the equilibrium models have to be reconsidered.
Also, these results provide a justification for the rising industry of sellers of datasets based on
flows. But, if it is possible to improve the predictability of future returns on the basis of past flows, there
must be room for speculation. In this case, it is not clear why this has not yet been arbitraged away and
if we are facing a new market “irregularity” or if the improvements in forecasting ability are within the
transaction costs.
Our results are also consistent with the possibility that there is an omitted variable from the asset
pricing model that is correlated to investors’ flows. Had we used pre-specified factors, for example,
we might have simply failed to include the relevant ones. Although designed to maximize explanatory
power in-sample, the latent variable model itself could fail if the factor realizations occurred at a low
frequency and 90 day windows are of insufficient length for identification of relevant systematic
variables. In fact, the omitted variable could be correlated to the instrument based on flows. In the next
section, we consider a candidate for a key omitted variable -- dispersion of beliefs.

23

VI.

Factor Model Performance and Dispersion of Investor Beliefs
Dispersion of beliefs plays an important role in a number of asset pricing models.

Classic

single-period pricing models typically either require common expectations about the first and second
moments of asset returns, or the existence of a single risk-averse investor without credit contraints who
sets prices higher than those disagreed upon by other investors in the economy.

We expect an

equilibrium model to be associated with a parsimonious set of priced factors and common expectations
about risk premia. When the necessary conditions of common expectations are not satisfied, we might
then expect the pricing model to perform poorly. In fact, Williams (1977) formalizes this in a model.
He shows that, if we relax the assumption of homogeneity of beliefs, the standard CAPM can be written
as:
N

Rt = β (rmt − r ft ) + ∑ Ω nt + ε t + η t
n=1

where N is the number of assets, Rt is the excess return over the riskless asset at time t, rmt is the return
on the market portfolio and rft is the return on the riskless asset, still at time t. Ω nt is a factor that
accounts for average investors’ preferences (indirect utility functions) and the residual covariances
between returns on the risky securities and changes in investors’ average subjective mean for security n
at time t. ηt is an additional source of uncertainty in the residual due to heterogeneity of beliefs which
exhibit serial correlation. The main difference with respect to the standard asset pricing models lies in the
N

additional terms: ∑ Ω nt + ηt . In particular the role played by investors’ beliefs is captured by the Ω nt
n =1

that represents the “correlation between residual returns and adjustments in investors’ subjective
expectations of the unknown mean return for each nth risky security”. A direct way to test this model is
to determine whether instruments for subjective expectations affect the fit of the standard asset pricing
model. If momentum and contrarian investors have different expectations about future market returns
they may provide an econometric basis for estimating the magnitude of dispersion in beliefs and in turn
provide an instrument to test the pricing model.
In Goetzmann and Massa (1998), we use as an instrument for belief dispersion the sum of the
absolute value of inflows and outflows from three Fidelity index funds. The logic of this measure was

24

that when both inflows and outflows of the funds are high this indicates disagreement among investors
about the prospects of the market. Our problem with the aggregated flows was that we could not
identify them with different investor classes. With the current data we can now separate the inflows and
outflows by investor classes.

In this section, we construct measures of belief dispersion across

momentum and contrarian investor classes and then relate this empirically to the relative performance of
the asset pricing model.

We examine the relationship between belief dispersion and the ability of a

standard factor model to explain cross-sectional differences in equity returns. We find some evidence
to suggest that periods of high dispersion in beliefs are associated with poor performance in the pricing
model. We conjecture that this may be due to either periods of "breakdown" in the asset pricing
model, or to a common correlation of both beliefs and residual risk to an unspecified variable.

VI.1 Dispersion variables
While actual beliefs are difficult to observe empirically, two variables have been used in the
literature as proxies, among them are open interest in options (indicative of agents possibly agreeing to
disagree about the prospects of the underlying security) and volume of trade (since every trade is by
definition two-sided). Our dataset allows us to define a different measure. We proxy for dispersion of
beliefs about the S&P 500 by the absolute value of the difference between contrarian and momentum
investor flows. In our earlier paper, we found that a measure of belief dispersion correlated well to the
two proxies above, as well as to a measure of analyst disagreements, taken from timing newsletter
forecasts. The current data allow us another potentially useful metric of belief dispersion.
Given that contrarian and momentum investors are in some sense “polar” we define the
difference in their flows as measure of "market polarization." We regard this as a measure of dispersion
in beliefs across traders we know to have systematic differences in their return-conditional behavior.
One natural question is whether our measure of market polarization correlates with the standard
measures of market uncertainty (implied volatility) and dispersion of beliefs (open interest and trading
volume). To test this, we regress the market polarization on implied volatility, trading volume and open
interest on the futures contracts written on the S&P500 index. The results show a strong correlation
between market polarization and the standard proxies for dispersion of beliefs (open interest and trading

25

volume), with t statistics greater than 3.

12

No correlation, however, is found between market

polarization and implied volatility. This fits with Prabhala (1998) who pins down open interest as a
measure of dispersion of beliefs and implied volatility as a measure of market uncertainty, orthogonal
one to the other.
The next step is to see test if there is a correlation between the explanatory power of standard
asset pricing models our measure of market polarization. In particular, we expect that the explanatory
power of pricing models that do not account for dispersion of beliefs should be the lower when the
market is more polarized. That is, the explanatory power of the standard asset pricing framework
should drop on days when the dispersion of beliefs is greater. In short a model that does not account
for dispersion of beliefs is misspecified. We can therefore directly test whether our measure of market
polarization increases the explanatory power of the standard asset pricing model and whether it has any
explanatory power additional to the one of the contained in the standard factors.

VI.2 Methodology
In order to test this conjecture, we carry out two types of tests. First, we directly test whether
adding our measures of market polarization increases the explanatory power of the cross sectional
second stage previously of the before specified Fama-MacBeth [FM] estimation. Also we add a third
stage to the FM procedure in which we regress our measure of belief dispersion on the time-series of
the residuals from the daily cross-sectional FM regressions. Then we see if the dispersion of beliefs
explain the residuals. If the beliefs condition the explanatory power of the standard asset pricing model,
we expect to find that our measure of market polarization adds significant explanatory power.
In particular, in the first case we estimate a model based on 12 factors: four extracted from past
returns, four based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing them on the first four factors
(behavioral factors) and four factors based on the dispersion of beliefs. We report the adjusted R2 as
well as P-values of the test whether the means of the R2 of the regressions without the factors based on
dispersion of beliefs are statistically different from the means of the adjusted R2 estimated using only the
factors based on past returns and behavioral factors. Dispersion of beliefs are constructed as the

12

Not reported but available upon request from the authors.

26

absolute differences between purchases of contrarian and momentum investors, both defined in terms of
return and volatility (return-based polarization of purchases and volatility-based polarization of
purchases), as well as the absolute differences between sales of contrarian and momentum investors,
both defined in terms of return and volatility (return-based polarization of sales and volatility-based
polarization of sales).
The second approach, is based on the direct regression of our measure of belief dispersion on
the time-series of the residuals from the daily cross-sectional FM regressions. In particular, we estimate:
K

Re st = α + ∑ β k DBkt + ε t
k =1

where Rest is the residual from the second stage of the Fama-MacBeth procedure computed using 8
factors: four extracted from past returns (standard market factors), four based on the investors’ flows
orthogonalized by regressing them on the first four factors (behavioral factors) and DBkt are our
measures of market polarization as defined before.
Dispersion of beliefs should explain the residuals on days when there is little is cross-sectional
dispersion in returns on the size portfolios that is correlated to factor loadings. These are the cases
where price fluctuations more diverge from the fundamentals and are subject to changes in market
sentiment. On the other hand, dispersion of beliefs will have a low explanatory power in the days when
all the security portfolios tend to move together on a given day, or when the cross-sectional variation is
not well-explained by the factor model. In the latter case, this might be interpreted as a case in which
either non-systematic factors spread returns -- something not expected if the pricing model is well
specified and estimated -- or when idiosyncratic shocks spread returns.

VI.3 Results of the FM Test
The results, reported in Table 8 for the first type of test, show a strong and significant increase in
the explanatory power of the regression due to the addition of the factors based on dispersion of beliefs.
Furthermore, we find that the measure of dispersion of beliefs with the highest explanatory power is the
one based on the different purchasing behavior of the investors whose strategies are defined in terms of
reaction to market volatility (Tables 9 and 10). This holds for all specifications. One interpretation is

27

that the factor constructed from flows of groups with polar attitudes towards market risk appears
salient.
Finally we examine the correlation between the explanatory power of the standard FM model
and dispersion of beliefs. In particular we estimate:

Rt2 = α + γMPI t + δMPO t + ε t
where R2t is the average adjusted R2 of the cross-section regression of the stock returns on the on the
pre-estimated betas. MPIt and MPOt represent our measures of market dispersion of beliefs or
“market polarization.”

In particular, MPIt is the absolute difference between the purchases of

momentum and contrarian investors, while MPOt is the absolute difference between the sales of the
momentum and contrarian investors13.
The estimation is carried out using GMM, with Newey-West correction on the variancecovariance matrix based on a five lag autocorrelation structure. This is done in order to capture weekly
effects. Instruments are used to correct for errors-in-variables and measurement problems14. Three
different specifications are considered: where the measures of dispersion of beliefs based on purchases
and sales are jointly considered and the cases where they are separately used.
The results, reported in Table 11, for the whole period, show a strong and significant negative
relationship between explanatory power in the FM regression and measures of dispersion of beliefs.
This fits with our earlier results suggesting that not only does dispersion of belief significantly increase the
explanatory power of the FM regressions and spread returns, but also it does this exactly at the times
where the standard factors provide a worse fit.
All these results seem to suggest that it is possible to use the trading behavior of contrarian and
momentum investors to create indexes of market polarization. These indexes are related to the standard
measures of dispersion of beliefs and help to explain variation in asset returns otherwise unaccounted for
by the standard factor pricing models. They also suggest that they capture additional information not
contained in the standard measures of dispersion of beliefs.

13

Both measures are standardized by dividing them, respectively, by the sum of purchases or the sum of sales.
The choice of the instruments has been based on Hansen’s over-identification criterion. The instruments are: time
dummies, a constant, dividend yield and yields on corporate bonds (based on Merril Lynch Index).
14

28

VII. Conclusion
We used a two-year panel of individual accounts in an S&P 500 index mutual fund to examine
the trading and investment behavior of more than 130,000 investors who have chosen a low-cost,
passively managed vehicle for savings. This allows us to characterize investors’ heterogeneity in terms
of momentum and contrarian investment patterns. In particular, we have found positive feedback
traders or momentum investors, as well as profit-takers or contrarians and tested the consistency and
profitability of their strategies over time. We find evidence for behavioral consistency within our sample,
despite the fact that most investors in the index fund trade very little. We also find some evidence of
differences in profitability between momentum vs. contrarian investors with the typical daily contrarian
investor profiting more from trades that the typical daily momentum investor.
The flows of different classes of investors allow us to examine which group displays the highest
correlation between fund flows and market moves. Momentum investors are most highly correlated
with the S&P 500 returns. This is consistent with the hypothesis that they are the salient investors in the
price-formation process of the S&P 500. We cannot categorically reject the hypothesis that they are
chasing returns intra-day, however we do not find evidence in favor of that explanation.
We develop a framework for examining behavioral factors in terms of classic empirical asset
pricing models. Although we have insufficient time-series data to determine whether behavioral factors
command positive risk premia, loadings on behavioral factors appear to spread returns out of sample.
In fact, behavioral factors loadings perform well against a benchmark of loadings on latent variables
extracted from the covariance matrix of stock returns themselves.
Finally, we examine the empirical relation between the dispersion of investor beliefs about the
market and the explanatory power of the asset pricing model. We find that the model performs poorly
when beliefs are most dispersed. This is consistent with the existence of an omitted factor correlated to
belief dispersion and also with homogeneous beliefs being necessary to sustain the pricing model.

29

References
Balduzzi P., G. Bertola, S. Foresi,1995, " Asset Price Dynamics and Infrequent Feedback Trades"
Journal of Finance, Vol. 50, No. 5. (Dec.), pp. 1747-1766.
Barber B. and T. Odean, 1999, “Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence and common stock
investment”, W.P. University of California at Davis
Barberis N., A. Shleifer and R.Visny, 1998, " A model of Investor Sentiment," Working Paper, Havard
Economics Department, 1998.
Biais B. and P. Bossaerts, 1999, “ Asset prices and trading volume in a beauty contest”, The Review of
Economic Studies, 65, 307-340.
Bussey J. 1998, “ Volatility Timing in mutual funds: evidence from daily returns”, N.Y.U. Stern Business
School, Mimeo.
Bikhchandani S., D. Hirshleifer, I. Welch, "A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change
as Informational Cascades," The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 5. (Oct.), pp. 992-1026.
Brown S. J., W. N. Goetzmann and J. Park, 1998,"Hedge funds and the Asian Currency Crisis of
1997," NBER Working Paper.
Campbell J., Grossman S. and J. Wang., 1992 “Trading volume and serial correlations in stock
returns”, NBER Working Paper #4193
Chan L. and J. Lakonishok, 1995, “The Behavior of Stock Prices Around Institutional Trades”,
Journal of Finance, 1147-74.
Chan L. and J. Lakonishok, 1993, “Institutional Trades and Intraday Stock Price Behavior”, Journal
of Financial Economics, 33(2), 173-99.
Chan L., Jegadeesh N. and J. Lakonishok, 1996, “Momentum strategies”, Journal of Finance, 51(5),
1681-1711.
Chevalier J. and G. Ellison, August 1995, “Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives”,
NBER Working Paper #5234.
Conrad J. and G. Kaul, 1998, “An anatomy of trading strategies”, The Review of Financial Studies,
11(3), 489-519.

30

Daniel K., D. Hirshleifer and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, "A theory of Over-confidence, self-Attribution
and Security Market Over and Under reactions," working paper, UCLA.
De Bondt W. F. M. and R. Thaler, 1985, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?" Journal of Finance,
Vol. 40, No. 3, (Jul), pp. 793-805.
De-Long J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers and R. J. Waldmann, 1990, “Positive Feedback Investment
Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation”, Journal of Finance, 45(2), 379-395.
Detemple J. and S. Murthy, 1994, “Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs”, Journal of
Economic Theory, 62, 294-320.
Ferson W. and R. Schadt, 1995, “Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in Changing Economic
Conditions”, Journal of Finance
Ferson W. and V. A. Warther, 1995, “Evaluating Fund Performance in a Dynamic Market”, Financial
Analysts Journal.
Froot K.A., O’Connell P.G.J. and M. Seasholes, (1998), “The portfolio flows of international
investors, I”, NBER Working Paper, # 6687.
Fung, W. and D. Hsieh, 1998, "Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading strategies: The case of
hedge funds," Review of Financial Studies 10: (2) 275-302 .
Garry M. and W. Goetzmann, 1986, “Does de-listing from the S&P500 affect stock price?”,
Financial Analysts Journal, 42(2) 64-69.
Goetzmann W. and M. Massa (1999) “Index funds and stock market growth”, Mimeo, Yale
University.
Gompers P. and A. Metric, 1998, "How re Large Institutions Different From Other Investors? Why do
These Differences Matter?" NBER Working Paper.
Graham J.R and C., R.Harvey (1996) “Market Timing Ability and Volatility Implied in Investment
Newsletters' Asset Allocation Recommendations “ Journal of Financial Economics, 42(3), 397-421.
Graham J. R. (1998) “Herding among Investment Newsletters: Theory and Evidence”, Journal of
Finance 54(1), 237-268.
Grinblatt M., Titman, S. and R. Wermers, 1995, “ Momentum Investment Strategies, Portfolio
Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior”, American-Economic-Review; 85(5),
1088-1105.

31

Grinblatt M. and M. Keloharju, 1999, “ Distance bias, language bias and investors sophistication:
results from Finland”, Mimeo UCLA
Grinblatt M. and M. Keloharju, 1999, “What makes investors trade?”, Mimeo UCLA
Grinblatt M. and M. Keloharju, 1998, “ The investment behavior and performances of various investortypes: A study of Finland’s unique data set” , Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming
Grossman S., 1995, “Dynamic asset allocation and the informational efficiency of the markets”, Journal
of Finance, 50, 773-787.
Grundy B.D. and M. McNichols, 1989, “ Trade and the revelation of information through prices and
direct disclosure”, The Review of Financial Studies, 2, 495-526.
Hirshleifer D., A. Subrahmanyam, S. Titman, 1994, "Security Analysis and Trading Patterns when
Some Investors Receive Information Before Others," Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, No. 5. (Dec), pp.
1665-1698.
Holthausen R.W., Leftwich R.W. and Mayers D., 1990, “Large Block Transactions, the Speed of
Response, and Temprary and Permanent Stock Price Effects”, Journal of Financial Economics,
26(1), 71-95.
Hong H. and J. Stein, 1999, "A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading and
Overreaction in Asset Markets," Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Jeegadesh N. and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and losers, implications for stock
market efficiency”, Journal of Finance, 48, 65-92
Jeegadesh N. and S. Titman, 1995, “Overreaction, delayed reaction and contrarian profits”, The
Review of Financial Studies, 8(4), 973-993.
Keim D. and A. Madhavan, 1995, "Anatomy of the trading process. Empirical evidence on the
behavior of institutional traders," Journal of Financial Economics 37(3) p. 371-398.
Kim O. and R. Verrecchia, 1991, “Trading volume and price reactions to public announcements”,
Journal of accounting research, 29, 302-321.
Kraus A. and M. Smith, 1989, “Market created risk”, The Journal of Finance, 44, 557-569.
Lakonishok J. and E. Maberly (1990), “The Weekend Effect: Trading Patterns of Individual and
Institutional Investors”, Journal-of-Finance; 45(1), 231-43

32

Lakonishok J. and A. Shleifer, 1992, “The Impact of Institutional Trading on Stock Prices”, Journal of
Financial Economics, 32(l), 23-43.
Lakonishok J., 1991, “Window Dressing by Pension Fund Managers”, American Economic
Review, 81(2), 227-31.
Lakonishok J., Shleifer A. and R. W. Vishny, 1993, “Contrarian Investment, Extrapolation, and Risk”
University of Chicago Center for the Study of the Economy and the State Working Paper: 84.
Lakonishok J., A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny, 1991, “Do Institutional Investors Destabilize
Stock Prices? Evidence on Herding and Feedback Trading” , NBER Working Paper: 3846.
Lewellen W.G., Lease R.C. and G.C. Schlarbaum, 1979, “Investment performance and investor
behavior”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis”, 14(1), 29-57.
Levy R. L., 1967, "Relative Strength as a Criterion for Investment Selection," Journal of Finance, Vol.
22, No. 4. (Dec.), pp. 595-610.
Lo A.W. and A.C. MacKinlay, 1990, "When are Contrarian Profits Due to Stock Market
Overreaction?" Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 3, No. 2. , pp. 175-205.
Lynch A. W. and R.R Mendenhall, 1997, "New evidence on stock price effects associated with
changes in the S&P500 index", Journal of Business 70: (3) 351-383.
Knez P. J. and M. J. Ready, 1996, “ Estimating the profits from trading strategies”, the Review of
Financial Studies, 9(4), 1121-1163
Miller M. H., Muthuswamy J, and R.E. Whaley, 1994, “Mean reversion of Standard and Poor’s 500
Index Basis Changes: Arbitrage Induced or Statistical Illusion?” , Journal of Finance 49: (2) 479-513.
Musto D. K., 1997 “Portfolio Disclosures and Year-End Price Shifts”, Journal-of-Finance; 52(4),
1563-88.
Odean T. 1998 “Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?”, Journal-of-Finance; 53(5), 17751798.
Orosel G., 1998, "Participation costs, Trend-Chasing, and Volatiilty of Stock Prices," The Review of
Financial Studies 11(3), p. 521-558.
Rosenberg B., K. Reid and R. Lanstein, 1984, "Persuasive Evidence of Market Inefficiency," Jounral
of Portfolio Management, 11(3) 9-17.

33

Shalen C. T., 1993, “Volume, volatility and the dispersion of beliefs”, The review of Financial Studies,
6, 405-434.
Sharpe W. 1992, "Asset allocation,: Management Style and Performance Measurement," Journal of
Portfolio Management , 7-19.
Shiller R, 1998 “ Comment on Vincent Warther, "Has the Rise of Mutual Funds Increased Market
Instability?" “ Brooking-Wharton Papers
Shleifer A., July 1986, Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?, Journal of Finance, 41(3),
579-590.
Sias R.W. and L.T. Starks, (1996) “Return Autocorrelation and Institutional Investors”, Journal of
Financial Economics, 46, 103-31.
Sirri E. R. and P. Tufano (1993), “Buying and selling mutual funds: flows, performance, fees and
service”, Working Paper, Harvard Business School.
Stulz R. M., 1997, “Do foreign investors destabilize stock markets? The Korean experience in 1997”,
Mimeo, Charles A. Dice Center for Research in Financial Economics.
Stulz R. M., 1999, “International portfolio flows and security markets”, Mimeo, The Ohio State
University.
Whaley R. E. and D. Messod, 1996, “An Anatomy of the "S&P Game": The Effects of Changing the
Rules”, Journal of Finance; 51(5), 1909-30.
Williams J., 1977, “ Capital asset prices with heterogeneous beliefs”, Journal of Financial Economics,
219-277.
Zheng, L. 1997, "Stock Prices and Investment Cash Flows," Yale School of Management
Working Paper, 1997.
Zheng, L. 1998, "Who Moves the Market," Working paper, University of Michigan Business School.

34

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Investors are grouped into 4 categories, on the basis of some institutional differences. The Individuals
Accounts include: Administrator, Individual, Non-Prototype Individual, Sole Proprietorship, and Personal
Representative. The Tax-benefited Accounts include Traditional IRA, UTMA, Rollover IRA, Sep-IRA,
Joint-WROs, Money Purchase Keogh, Non-Prototype IRA, ROTH IRA, Simple IRA and PS Voluntary
Keogh. The Fiduciary and Trusts Accounts include the Conservator, Executor, Fiduciary, Guardian,
Transfer on Death-Individual, Trust: under Agreement, Trust under Indenture, Trust under Will. The
Groups Accounts include the Bank, Religious Organisation, Joint CP, Corporation, Investment Club,
Professional Corp., Partnership, Joint TIC, Joint TBE, Unincorporated Association, UGMA, Professional
Association. Running Balance is constructed as the average holdings standardised by the amount of time
they are held. Turnover is calculated as the absolute sum of purchases and sales (expressed in terms of
number of shares) in the fund divided by the average running balance. Investor Profit Ratio is calculated as
the ratio between the terminal value of the sum of the inflows and outflows each accrued at the return on the
index fund and the terminal value of a buy and hold strategy.

Number of Accounts
Number of Transactions
Percentage of Purchases
Percentage of Sales

Individuals
16,185
51,864
0.82
0.18

Tax-benefited
Accounts
66,903
185,059
0.82
0.17

Fiduciary
and Trust
5,493
15,558
0.83
0.16

Groups
2,179
7,119
0.81
0.18

Total
90,768
259,614
0.82
0.17

Running Balance
(in number of shares)

Mean
Median
S. dev

400
170
1,106

254
116
665

584
244
2,061

1341
195
2,259

327
134
3,617

Turnover Ratio

Mean
Median
S. dev

30.18
1.12
997.19

16.55
1.02
608.69

202.35
1.03
12,556.5

15.68
1.11
1,250

30.23
1.03
3,160

Investor Profit Ratio

Mean
Median
S. dev

1.17
0.85
6.14

1.19
0.88
13.14

1.97
0.85
68.41

1.21
0.84
5.05

1.23
0.87
20.44

3.20
2.00
4.30

2.76
2.00
3.82

2.83
2.00
4.79

3.26
2.00
5.09

2.86
2.00
4.01

Number of Transactions

Mean
Median
S. dev

35

Table 2: Typology of Contrarians and Momentum Investors
Return contrarians are defined as the investors who invest in the fund when the daily return of the index of the
previous day is negative and return momentum are defined as the investors who invest in the fund when the daily
return of the index of the previous day is positive. Volatility contrarians are defined as the investors who invest in the
fund when the volatility of the day before the investment is increasing with respect to the previous day. Volatility is
the implied volatility on the option on the SP500 as defined using the Black-Sholes pricing formula. Contrarians and
momentum are defined as the agents who systematically play a strategy. A small sample test of equality between the
distribution of investors’ behavior and market returns based on the binomial distribution is applied and the investors
with a statistic greater than 10% have been identified as contrarians or momentum investors. All the cases where the
test is equal to zero or is not defined are called “undefined”. Only accounts with at least 3 transactions are considered.

All Accounts
Individuals
(%)

Return
Mom.
Undef.
Return
Contr.
Vol.
Mom.
Undef.
Vol.
Contr

α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
α>0.1
α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
α>0.1

Purch.
1.19
11.16
63.89
20.87
2.90
1.84
12.65
66.76
17.71
1.05

Tax-benefited
Accounts
(%)

Sales
0.10
2.26
85.32
11.99
0.34
0.14
2.37
87.00
10.41
0.08

Purch.
1.04
9.97
69.46
17.38
2.15
1.28
10.47
71.46
15.94
0.85

Fiduciary and
Trust
(%)

Sales
0.12
1.77
87.11
10.76
0.24
0.08
1.72
88.42
9.70
0.08

Purch.
1.06
9.72
66.76
19.55
2.91
1.20
12.12
68.60
17.29
0.78

Sales
0.11
1.80
88.26
9.58
0.25
0.15
1.67
89.50
8.54
0.15

Groups
(%)

Total
(%)

Purch.
1.51
13.35
61.22
20.70
3.21
1.42
13.45
65.08
19.00
1.06

Sales
0.14
2.34
85.87
11.11
0.55
0.18
1.97
86.97
10.83
0.05

Purch.
1.08
10.25
68.10
18.22
2.36
1.38
11.03
70.29
16.41
0.88

Sales
0.11
1.87
86.83
10.91
0.27
0.09
1.84
88.20
9.79
0.08

Purch.
17.16
39.55
7.46
21.64
14.18
12.69
29.10
11.19
37.31
9.70

Sales
1.49
10.45
73.13
11.19
3.73
2.99
8.21
79.10
8.96
0.75

Purch.
11.99
38.21
11.68
24.40
13.71
15.21
30.13
13.61
30.21
10.83

Sales
1.24
8.44
73.77
14.60
1.94
1.11
8.75
76.18
12.82
1.13

Accounts with more than 8 transactions

Return
Mom.
Undef.
Return
Contr.
Vol.
Mom.
Undef.
Vol.
Contr.

α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
α>0.1
α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
0.5>α>0.1
α>0.1

Purch.
10.40
35.38
11.11
27.11
16.00
16.44
28.98
15.56
28.62
10.40

Sales
0.89
9.33
74.40
13.78
1.60
1.42
8.62
76.62
12.36
0.98

Purch.
12.38
38.92
11.94
23.85
12.91
14.93
30.55
12.91
30.49
11.12

Sales
1.26
7.96
73.51
15.28
1.99
0.88
8.87
75.83
13.37
1.05

36

Purch.
11.07
40.46
12.98
21.37
14.12
14.89
30.15
15.65
29.77
9.54

Sales
2.29
9.92
74.81
11.07
1.91
1.91
8.02
77.48
9.54
3.05

Table 3: Profitability of Contrarians and Momentum Traders
Profits are calculated as the terminal value of the sum of the inflows and outflows each accrued at the return on the index fund
divided by the terminal value of a buy and hold strategy, assuming the investor had all investable funds at the beginning of the
sample period. Profits are estimated for all the different classes of rational ivvestors as defined in Table 3 (purchase and sale
contrarian and momentum investors). We also define an additional class of investor "full momentum" or "full contrarian," i.e.
investors who have greater than 50% probability of being both purchase and sale momentum investors and analogously,
those who have greater than 50% probability of being both purchase and sale contrarians. For each class the mean, median,
standard deviation and the class size are reported. The tests on the differences of the means are tests based on the

differences of means of normal distributions, with unknown variance. The tests on the differences of the medians
are based on a pairwise comparison of the medians of the profitability of the alternative strategies implemented by
using a Mann-Whitney Test.
The test is based on the statistics: U = Min{T1, T2 } where:
n1 * ( n1 + 1)
− R1 and T2 = n1 * n 2 − T1 . Here n1 and n2 are the size of the two samples which are
2
compared and R1 is the sum of the ranks for the sample corresponding to n1 . The ranks are calculated on the
T1 = n1 * n2 +

pooled samples. We report the values of the statistics z defined as: z =
approximation, µu =

n1 * n2
and
2

σu =

U − µu
, where, by applying the normal
σu

n1 * n2 * (n1 + n2 + 1)
. Both tests are two-sided. For both tests the
12

probability values are reported.

Return-Conditioned Strategies

Contrarian Investors

Purchases
Sales
Full

Mean

Median

1.92
1.19
1.59

0.86
1.03
1.13

Std

Momentum Investors

N

40.83
11.20
8.97

16,410
9,782
3,137

Mean
1.12
2.03
0.63

Median
0.80
0.87
0.34

Std
1.53
3.13
2.37

Test of Difference
(P-values)
N
976
103
6

Mean
0.01
0.01
0.32

Median
0.0001
0.21
0.13

Volatility-Conditioned Strategies
Contrarian Investors

Purchases
Sales
Full

Mean

Median

1.32
2.54
1.20

0.88
1.19
1.41

Std
10.49
52.13
15.15

Momentum Investors

N
11,887
9,974
2,518

Mean
1.81
2.22
1.82

37

Median
0.86
1.82
2.21

Std
44.99
30.73
48.00

Test of Difference
(P-values)
N
17,273
8,288
3,137

Mean
0.17
0.60
0.49

Median
0.004
0.0001
0.0001

Table 4: Causality among investors:
Contrarians vs. momentum investors
The causality tests are Granger tests applied to the following VAR specification: Flows t = α + γFlows t-1+ εt, where
Flows t is the vector of investors' flows in and out the index fund (purchases and sales). The flows are defined in
terms of number of shares purchased/sold and are aggregated into different groups depending on the characteristics
of the investors. Investors are divided into momentum and contrarians. The momentum investors are defined as the
investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of the fund is increasing (return momentum investors) or when
the volatility of returns is increasing (volatility momentum investors). The contrarian investors are defined as the
investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of the fund is decreasing (return contrarian investors) or when
the volatility of returns is decreasing (volatility contrarian investors). Both contrarians and momentum are defined
in terms of the reaction to the previous day returns/change in volatility. Volatility is the implied volatility on the
option on the SP500 as defined using the Black-Sholes pricing formula. Contrarians and momentum are defined as the
agents who systematically play a strategy. A small sample test of equality between the distribution of investors’
behavior and market returns based on the binomial distribution is applied and the investors with a statistic greater
than 10% have been identified as contrarians or momentum investors. The class Rest of the Market is defined as the
residual investors who do not fall in the other two classes (i.e. are not either contrarians or momentum investors).
The observations are daily for the period 1/1/1997-31/12/1998. The table contains the Probability values of the joint
significance of the lagged values of the variables whose ability to Granger-cause the dependent varaible is to be
tested. This value is bounded between 0 and 1. It is 1 when the exogenous variables does not cause the endogenous
one, while it is 0 when the exogenous variable causes the endogenous one. The VAR is estimated with 2 and 5 lags.
The values for the 2 lags are reported within brackets.
Exogenous variables

Return Contrarians
Rest of the Investors
Return Momentum

Endogenous Variables
Purchases
Return Contrarians
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.9971
0.9997
0.7203
0.5660
0.6682
0.7246

Rest of the Investors
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.6972
0.8719
0.0001
0.0001
0.2702
0.1443

Return Momentum
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.8843
0.9855
0.3197
0.4522
0.0114
0.0410

2 Lags
0.0001
0.3448
0.0012

2 Lags
0.0001
0.0088
0.0317

Sales

Return Contrarians
Rest of the Investors
Return Momentum

2 Lags
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

5 Lags
0.0001
0.0001
0.0269

5 Lags
0.0001
0.0012
0.0001

5 Lags
0.0001
0.1134
0.0073

Purchases

VolatilityContrarians
Rest of the Investors
Volatility.Momentum

VolatilityContrarians
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.0001
0.0001
0.9993
0.6735
0.0001
0.0003

Rest of the Investors
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.8659
0.8902
0.0001
0.0001
0.0015
0.0052

Volatility.Momentum
2 Lags
5 Lags
0.7739
0.6348
0.3736
0.8231
0.9569
0.9548

2 Lags
0.0057
0.0001
0.0034

2 Lags
0.0001
0.5228
0.0001

Sales

VolatilityContrarians
Rest of the Investors
Volatility.Momentum

2 Lags
0.0001
0.0003
0.0001

5 Lags
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

38

5 Lags
0.0001
0.0001
0.0077

5 Lags
0.0001
0.6706
0.0005

Table 5: Regressions of S&P500 Returns on Flows of Contrarians and Momentum Investors
The functional specification estimated is Rt = α + ßFlowst + εt, where Rt is the return on the SP500 index, while Flowst are the flows
represent the purchases (inflows) and sales (outflows) of fund units by specified categories of investors (momentum and contrarians).
Investors are divided into momentum and contrarians. The momentum investors are defined as the investors who buy shares in the fund
when the value of the fund is increasing (return momentum investors) or when the volatility of returns is increasing (volatility
momentum investors). The contrarian investors are defined as the investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of the fund is
decreasing (return contrarian investors) or when the volatility of returns is decreasing (volatility contrarian investors). Both contrarians
and momentum are defined in terms of the reaction to the previous day returns/change in volatility. Volatility is the implied volatility
on the option on the SP500 as defined using the Black-Sholes pricing formula. Contrarians and momentum are the agents who
systematically enact a strategy. A small sample test of equality between the distribution of investors’ behavior and market returns based
on the binomial distribution is applied and the investors with a statistic greater than 10% have been identified as contrarians or
momentum investors. The estimation uses a consistent variance-covariance matrix based on the Newey-West correction. The value of
the coefficient and the t-statistic are reported. Two samples are used: the whole period (01/01/1997-31/12/1998) and the subperiod
01/01/1998-31/12/1998. In the latter case, contrarians and momentum investors are identified in the first period (01/01/199731/12/1997) and then the estimations are based on portfolios made of their flows during the second period (01/01/1998-31/12/1998).
The flows are divided by 10,000,000.

Constant
Inflowt
R Squared

Constant
Outflowt
R Squared

Constant
Inflowt
R Squared

Constant
Outflowt
R Squared

Full Sample (01/01/1997-31/12/1998)
Strategies defined on returms
Strategies defined on volatility
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Contrarian
Contrarian Momentum
Momentum
Contrarian
Contrarian Momentum Momentum
0.001
0.006
-0.0004
0.001
0.001
0.0008
0.0009
0.0007
(2.15)
(0.99)
(-0.55)
(2.58)
(2.22)
(1.54)
(1.84)
(1.24)
0.014
0.41
5.54
-5.85
-0.26
0.16
0.086
0.40
(0.36)
(1.28)
(3.34)
(-1.45)
(-0.81)
2.70
(1.24)
(1.26)
0.001
0.004
0.386
0.001
0.001
0.003
0.003
0.002
Purchases
Contrarian
0.002
(1.65)
-0.83
(-0.68)
0.001

Sales
Contrarian
0.002
(3.66)
-0.83
(-2.15)
0.014

Purchases
Momentum
0.002
(3.97)
-6.29
(-12.31)
0.07

Sales
Momentum
0.001
(2.02)
-1.07
(-0.67)
0.001

Purchases
Contrarian
0.003
(3.44)
-2.82
(-2.03)
0.024

Sales
Contrarian
0.001
(2.50)
-0.28
(-0.65)
0.001

Purchases
Momentum
0.003
(4.53)
-2.27
(-3.17)
0.048

Sales
Momentum
0.002
(3.37)
-1.13
(-2.05)
0.011

Out-of-sample (01/01/1998-31/12/1998)
Strategies defined on returms
Strategies defined on volatility
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Purchases
Sales
Contrarian
Contrarian Momentum
Momentum
Contrarian
Contrarian Momentum Momentum
0.001
0.003
0.0005
0.001
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.001
(2.15)
(0.55)
(0.95)
(2.08)
(1.88)
(0.83)
(2.29)
(2.38)
0.046
7.72
18.31
25.04
-0.21
5.63
-3.75
-216.94
(0.40)
(3.02)
(2.51)
(0.60)
(-0.55)
(2.63)
(-0.27)
(1.96)
0.001
0.015
0.013
0.001
0.001
0.017
0.001
0.004
Purchases
Contrarian
0.001
(2.31)
-1.47
(-0.89)
0.005

Sales
Contrarian
0.001
(3.85)
-6.01
(-2.71)
0.029

Purchases
M omentum
0.002
(3.48)
-25.80
(-2.33)
0.026

Sales
Momentum
0.001
(2.67)
-65.33
(-1.39)
0.009

39

Purchases
Contrarian
0.003
(3.44)
-0.0001
(-2.29)
0.024

Sales
Contrarian
0.001
(2.50)
-0.0001
(-0.65)
0.001

Purchases
Momentum
0.003
(4.53)
-0.0001
(-3.17)
0.048

Sales
Momentum
0.002
(3.37)
-0.0001
(-2.05)
0.013

Table 6: Time-Varying Sharpe Coefficients
Portfolios are constructed by minimizing the squared residual error of the vector of returns of the S&P500 index by using
investors’ purchases and sales as explanatory variables, subject to the constraint that the weights in the portfolios are
positive and add up to one. In particular, we estimate:

Minw t [ Rt − w tFlow t ]2 s.t . : w t * e = 1 and wit ≥ 0 ∀ i .

Here w t is a vector of weights of size equal to the number of components of the portfolio of flows,

Flow t is vector of

length i comprised of flows for day t for class purchase or sale i (purchases or sales of shares by contrarians on day t,
purchases or sales by the rest of the market, or purchases or sales by momentum investors) and e is a vector of ones. The
weights ( w t ) are reported for the different specifications. Three specifications are estimated: in the first one we assume
that only net purchases (purchases minus sales) affect returns. We therefore consider the net flows of the 4 classes of
strategic investors (return contrarian, return momentum, volatility contrarian and volatility momentum). In the second
specifications we consider separately purchases and sales for the 4 classes of strategic investors. The assumption is that
purchases and sales make up the whole portfolio separately. In the third specification we consider the breakdown in
purchases and sales for the 4 classes of strategic investors under the assumption that purchases and sales jointly make up
the whole portfolio. For all the three specifications the values reported in each row add up one. Investors are divided into
momentum and contrarians. The momentum investors are defined as the investors who buy shares in the fund when the
value of the fund is increasing (return momentum investors) or when the volatility of returns is increasing (volatility
momentum investors). The contrarian investors are defined as the investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of
the fund is decreasing (return contrarian investors) or when the volatility of returns is decreasing (volatility contrarian
investors). Both contrarians and momentum are defined in terms of the reaction to the previous day returns/change in
volatility. The different classes of investors have been identified in the period 01/01/1997-31/12/1997 and then the portfolios
have been constructed “out-of-sample” for the period 01/01/1998-31/12/1998.

Return Contr.Net Purch.

I Specification
Return.Mom.Net Purch.
Volat.Contr.Net Purch.

0.00

0.381

Return Contr.Purch.

Volat.Mom.Net Purch.

0.00

0.618

II Specification
Return.Mom.Purch.
Return.Contr.Sales

Return Mom.Sales

0.118

0.247

0.634

0.00

Volat.Contr.Purch.

Volat.Mom.Purch.

Volat.Contr.Sales

Volat Mom.Sales

0.593

0.229

0.119

0.058

Return
Contr.Purch

Return.
Mom.Purch

Return.
Contr.Sales

0.069

0.058

0.0337

III Specification
Return
Volat.
Mom.Sales
Contr.Purch
0.00

40

0.355

Volat.
Mom.Purch

Volat.
Contr.Sales

Volat
Mom.Sales

0.152

0.00

0.027

Table 7: Stock returns and behavioral factors
The table reports the means of the R2 from the daily cross-sectional of the second stage of a Fama-MacBeth procedure with
either 4 or 8 factors: four extracted from past returns and four based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing them
on the first four factors. The table also reports the P-values of the test that the means of the R2 of the regressions based on
behavioral factors are statistically different from the means of the R2 estimated using only past market factors. The factor
loadings are estimated for a set of portfolios formed from both stock returns and investors’ flows using a four-factor latent
variable model. In the former case, we consider the regularly-traded individual securities in the U.S. market. The factors are
extracted and loadings estimated using leading rolling windows. For the returns, we take the 560 stocks in the CRSP database
that have been consecutively traded in the two-year period 1997-1998 with no missing observations. We then create 20
portfolios each containing 28 stocks, ranked by market capitalization. For the flows, we consider the daily flows into the fund
(purchases and sales) of various combinations of investors, aggregated in terms of their trading behavior. This is defined in terms
of the class of investors we identified before: momentum and contrarian investors. Strategies are broken down in terms of their
definition as reaction to returns and volatility (contrarian and momentum). We consider three specifications. In the first one
there are only the four factors which have been extracted from previous stock returns. In the second specification, we use
“portfolios of flows”. These are based on the flows of the return contrarians, return momentum investors, volatility contrarians
and volatility momentum investors. Each single portfolio is composed of both the purchases and sales of the investors belonging
to the specific category, one factor for each way of identifying them. For example, the portfolio of return contrarians is made of
four components: the vector of the purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the
vector of the purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the vector of the
sales of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales and the vector of the purchases of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases. In the third specification, we consider portfolios
made by purchases and sales separately considered. We therefore have purchases of return investors, purchases of volatility
investors, sales of return investors, sales of volatility investors, net purchases (purchases minus sales) of return investors and
net purchases of volatility investors. For example the portfolio of the purchases of return investors is made of four factors: the
purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the purchases of the return
contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the purchases of the return momentum investors identified as
momentum investors on the basis of their purchases, the purchases of the return momentum investors identified as momentum
investors on the basis of their sales. Loadings for each portfolio and portfolio weights are estimated via a principal component
analysis performed on over-lapping 90 days windows through the sample period. A Dimson-Marsh correction using two days
of leads and lags is applied to control for potential lead-lag effects due to asynchronous trading. The factor extraction and the
estimation of the betas are updated each day in the sample, following the initial 90-day estimation period. Thus, betas are
allowed to vary through time. In stage 2, we regress portfolio returns on betas for each day following the estimation period. For
the second and the third specification there are two different sets of estimations: one based only on the four factors derived from
portfolio flows and one estimated with eight factors: the four based on portfolio flows and the four based on the factors derived
using only past stock returns.

4 Factors
Mean
Ret

0.090

Ret Contr.
Ret Mom.
Volat.Contr
Volat.Mom

0.114
0.087
0.131
0.108

Ret Inv. Purchases
Volat.Inv. Purchases
Ret.Inv. Sales
Volat Inv. Sales
Ret. Inv. Net.Purch.
Volat. Inv. Purchases

0.103
0.142
0.092
0.105
0.078
0.087

8 Factors

P
I Specification
II Specification
0.22
0.85
0.06
0.63
III Specification
0.52
0.01
0.93
0.46
0.56
0.90

41

Mean

P

0.090

-

0.1662
0.1496
0.2006
0.1597

0.00001
0.00001
0.00001
0.00001

0.1387
0.1659
0.1949
0.1825
0.1324
0.1582

0.004
0.00001
0.00001
0.00001
0.02
0.0001

Table 8: Stock returns and dispersion of beliefs
The table reports the means of the R2 from the daily cross-sectional of the second stage of a Fama-MacBeth procedure
with 12 factors: four extracted from past returns, four based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing
them on the first four factors (behavioral factors) and four factors based on the dispersion of beliefs. The table also
reports the P-values of the tests wheteher the means of the R2 of the regressions without the factors based on
dispersion of beliefs are statistically different from the means of the R2 estimated using only the factors based on past
returns and behavioral factors. Dispersion of beliefs generate four factors, constructed as the absolute differences
between purchases of contrarian and moementum investors, both defined in terms of return and volatility (Return
based Polarization of purchases and Volatility based Polarization of purchases), as well as the absolute differences
between sales of contrarian and moementum investors, both defined in terms of return and volatility (Return based
Polarization of sales and Volatility based Polarization of sales). The factor loadings are estimated for a set of
portfolios formed from both stock returns and investors’ flows using a four-factor latent variable model. In the former
case, we consider the regularly-traded individual securities in the U.S. market. The factors are extracted and loadings
estimated using leading rolling windows. For the returns, we take the 560 stocks in the CRSP database that have been
consecutively traded in the two-year period 1997-1998 with no missing observations. We then create 20 portfolios
each containing 28 stocks, ranked by market capitalization. For the flows, we consider the daily flows into the fund
(purchases and sales) of various combinations of investors, aggregated in terms of their trading behavior. This is
defined in terms of the class of investors we identified before: momentum and contrarian investors. Strategies are
broken down in terms of their definition as reaction to returns and volatility (contrarian and momentum). We consider
two specifications. In the first one, the behavioral factors are based on the “portfolios of flows” of: return contrarians,
return momentum investors, volatility contrarians and volatility momentum investors. Each single portfolio is
composed of both the purchases and sales of the investors belonging to the specific category, one factor for each way
of identifying them. For example, the portfolio of return contrarians is made of four components: the vector of the
purchases of the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the vector of the purchases of
the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the vector of the sales of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales and the vector of the purchases of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases. In the second specification, the four
behavioral factors are made of purchases and sales separately considered. We therefore have purchases of return
investors, purchases of volatility investors, sales of return investors, sales of volatility investors, net purchases
(purchases minus sales) of return investors and net purchases of volatility investors. For example the portfolio of the
purchases of return investors is made of four factors: the purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians
on the basis of their purchases, the purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their
sales, the purchases of the return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their
purchases, the purchases of the return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their
sales. Loadings for each portfolio and portfolio weights are estimated via a principal component analysis performed
on over-lapping 90 days windows through the sample period. A Dimson-Marsh correction using two days of leads
and lags is applied to control for potential lead-lag effects due to asynchronous trading. The factor extraction and the
estimation of the betas are updated each day in the sample, following the initial 90-day estimation period. Thus, betas
are allowed to vary through time. In stage 2, we regress portfolio returns on betas for each day following the
estimation period.

Ret. Contr.
Ret .Mom.
Volat. Contr
Volat. Mom
Ret Inv. Purchases
Volat. Inv. Purchases
Ret. Inv. Sales
Volat. Inv. Sales
Ret. Inv. Net. Purch.
Volat. Inv. Net. Purch.

Mean
I Specification
0.2459
0.2214
0.2169
0.2489
II Specification
0.2133
0.2113
0.2225
0.2061
0.2289
0.2094

42

P
0.004
0.007
0.53
0.001
0.01
0.08
0.40
0.37
0.003
0.04

Table 9: Stock returns and dispersion of beliefs
The functional specification estimated is Res t = α +åß kDBkt + εt, where Res t is the residual of the second
stage of the Fama-MacBeth procedure computed using 8 factors: four extracted from past returns (standard
market factors), four based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing them on the first four
factors (behavioral factors). DBkt are the dispersion of beliefs, calculated as the absolute differences between
purchases of contrarian and moementum investors, both defined in terms of return and volatility (Return
based Polarization of purchases and Volatility based Polarization of purchases), as well as the absolute
differences between sales of contrarian and moementum investors, both defined in terms of return and
volatility (Return based Polarization of sales and Volatility based Polarization of sales). Investors are divided
into momentum and contrarians. The factor loadings are estimated for a set of portfolios formed from both
stock returns and investors’ flows using a four-factor latent variable model. In the former case, we consider
the regularly-traded individual securities in the U.S. market. The factors are extracted and loadings estimated
using leading rolling windows. For the returns, we take the 560 stocks in the CRSP database that have been
consecutively traded in the two-year period 1997-1998 with no missing observations. We then create 20
portfolios each containing 28 stocks, ranked by market capitalization. In the case of flows, we extract the
factors from transactions (either purchases, or sales or net purchases) of the investors who strategically
react to either return or volatility. We consider 5 specifications which differ, depending on the composition
of the factors used in the first two steps of the Fama-MacBeth procedure. In the first specification only
factors based on past return are used, in the other four we use factors exctracted from different “portfolios of
flows” of the investors. These are the flows of return contrarians, return momentum investors, volatility
contrarians and volatility momentum investors. Each single portfolio is composed of both the purchases and
sales of the investors belonging to the specific category, one factor for each way of identifying them. For
example, the portfolio of return contrarians is made of four components: the vector of the purchases of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the vector of the purchases of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases, the vector of the sales of the
contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales and the vector of the purchases of
the contrarian investors identified as contrarians on the basis of their purchases. Loadings for each portfolio
and portfolio weights are estimated via a principal component analysis performed on over-lapping 90 days
windows through the sample period. A Dimson-Marsh correction using two days of leads and lags is
applied to control for potential lead-lag effects due to asynchronous trading. The factor extraction and the
estimation of the betas are updated each day in the sample, following the initial 90-day estimation period.
Thus, betas are allowed to vary through time In stage 2, we regress portfolio returns on betas for each day
following the estimation period. The slope coefficients are multiplied by a factor of 107.
Specifications
Return
Return Contr.
Return Mom.
Volat. Contr.
Volat. Mom.
Value
TSta
Value
Tsta
Value TSta Value
TSta Value TSta
Constant
Return based
Polarizat. of
purch.
Return based
Polarizat.of
sales
Volatility
based Polarizat
of purch.
Volatility
based Polarizat
of sales
R Square

0.002

25.98

0.002

16.13

0.002

22.08

0.002

22.01

0.002

17.51

-0.034

-2.90

-0.02

-0.36

-0.010

-0.11

-0.059

-0.68

-0.040

-0.54

0.045

0.38

0.27

1.50

0.277

2.11

0.286

2.13

0.262

1.64

0.229

2.12

0.37

3.05

0.347

3.19

0.384

3.80

0.307

2.32

0.121

1.27

-0.19

-1.02

-0.063

-0.65

-0.080

-1.06

-0.016

-0.13

0.124

0.190

0.241

43

0.199

0.177

Table 10: Stock returns and behavioral factors
The functional specification estimated is Res t = α +åß kDBkt + εt, where Res t is the residual of the second stage of the
Fama-MacBeth procedure computed using 8 factors: four extracted from past returns (standard market factors), four
based on the investors’ flows orthogonalized by regressing them on the first four factors (behavioral factors). DBkt are the
dispersion of beliefs, calculated as the absolute differences between purchases of contrarian and moementum investors,
both defined in terms of return and volatility (Return based Polarization of purchases and Volatility based Polarization of
purchases), as well as the absolute differences between sales of contrarian and moementum investors, both defined in
terms of return and volatility (Return based Polarization of sales and Volatility based Polarization of sales). Investors are
divided into momentum and contrarians. The factor loadings are estimated for a set of portfolios formed from both stock
returns and investors’ flows using a four-factor latent variable model. In the former case, we consider the regularlytraded individual securities in the U.S. market. The factors are extracted and loadings estimated using leading rolling
windows. For the returns, we take the 560 stocks in the CRSP database that have been consecutively traded in the twoyear period 1997-1998 with no missing observations. We then create 20 portfolios each containing 28 stocks, ranked by
market capitalization. In the case of flows, we extract the factors from transactions (either purchases, or sales or net
purchases) of the investors who strategically react to either return or volatility. We consider 4 specifications which differ,
depending on the composition of the factors used in the first two steps of the Fama-MacBeth procedure. We consider
portfolios made by purchases and sales separately considered. We therefore have purchases of return investors,
purchases of volatility investors, sales of return investors, sales of volatility investors, net purchases (purchases minus
sales) of return investors and net purchases of volatility investors. For exa mple the portfolio of the purchases of return
investors is made of four factors: the purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their
purchases, the purchases of the return contrarians identified as contrarians on the basis of their sales, the purchases of
the return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their purchases, the purchases of the
return momentum investors identified as momentum investors on the basis of their sales.Loadings for each portfolio and
portfolio weights are estimated via a principal component analysis performed on over-lapping 90 days windows through
the sample period. A Dimson-Marsh correction using two days of leads and lags is applied to control for potential leadlag effects due to asynchronous trading. The factor extraction and the estimation of the betas are updated each day in the
sample, following the initial 90-day estimation period. Thus, betas are allowed to vary through time In stage 2, we regress
portfolio returns on betas for each day following the estimation period. The slope coefficients are multiplied by a factor of
107.
Specifications
Ret.Invest.
Volat.Invest.
Ret.Invest.
Volat. Invest.
Ret.Invest.
Volat. Invest.
Purchases.
Purchases
Sales
Sales
Net
Net
Purchases
Purchases
Value TSta Value
Tsta Value Tsta
Value
TSta
Value TSta Value TSta
Constant
Return based
Polarizat. of
purch.
Return based
Polarizat.of
sales
Volatility
based Polarizat
of purch.
Volatility
based Polarizat
of sales
R Square

0.002

24.48

0.002

23.97

0.002

20.32

0.002

20.20

0.002

22.17

0.002

-0.04

0.005

0.06

-0.056

-0.72

-0.048

-0.54

-0.034

-0.40

-0.03

-0.45

-0.115

0.23

0.123

0.91

0.170

1.33

0.231

1.50

0.307

2.16

0.35

2.12

0.270

0.15

0.216

2.48

0.311

3.41

0.154

1.34

0.367

3.83

0.32

2.95

0.224

0.08

0.028

0.37

-0.079

-0.97

0.088

0.89

-0.043

-0.50

-0.06

-0.66

0.049

-0.04

0.144

0.149

0.107

0.246

44

0.210

0.146

Table 11: Market Impact of Contrarians and Momentum Investors
Dispersion of beliefs and market returns: Market Polarization
The functional specification estimated is r2t = α + γMPIt + δMPOt +εt, where R2t is the average corrected R square of the
cross-section regression of the stock returns on the on the pre-estimated betas. MPIt and MPOt represent our measures of
market polarization. In particular, MPIt is the absolute difference between the purchases of the momentum and the
purchases of the contrarian investors and MPOt is the absolute difference between the sales of the momentum and the
sales of the contrarian investors. .Contrarians and momentum are the agents who systematically play a strategy. A small
sample test of equality between the distribution of investors’ behavior and market returns is applied. The statistic is
distributed as a Binomial one. The betas have been constructed using a Fama-MacBeth methodology. In particular, we
created 20 portfolios each containing 28 stocks, ranked according to market capitalization. This accounted, among the
biggest stocks, for the 560 that have been consecutively traded in the 2 year period 1997-1998. This allows us to cover all
the stocks contained in the S&P500 who also have been consecutively traded. For each portfolio the betas have
estimated regressing the average portfolio return on the four factors extracted using a principal component technique in
the previous 90 days. In order to estimate the betas, a Dimson’s correction is applied, by using 2 days of lags and 2 days
of leads. The factor extraction and the estimation of the betas are carried out on overlapping windows every day. This
generates 412 cross-sections of betas that are used as explanatory variables in the second step of the procedure, where
portfolio returns are regressed on betas. The resulting times-series of 412 R2t s has been regressed on our measures of
market polarization. The estimation has been carried out using instrumental GMM, with Newey-West correction on the
variance-covariance matrix based on 5 lags autocorrelation structure. The choice of the instruments has been based on
Hansen’s over-identification criterion. The instruments are: time dummies, a constant, dividend yield and yield on
corporate bonds have been used. The flows are divided by 10,000.
Total

Constant
Mkt.Polariz.t
(Purchases)
Mkt.Polariz.t
(Sales)
Chi-Squared
(p value)

Purchases

Sales

Value

t-stat

Value

t-stat

Value

t-stat

1.01
0.29

1.64
0.69

0.12
1.96

4.39
1.42

0.13
-

8.62
-

-1.32

-2.19

-

-

-.135

-2.12

1.51
(0.22)

1.26
(0.27)

45

1.85
(0.39)

Figures 1-2
The following graphs report the weights of the portfolios constructed by minimizing the squared
residual error of the vector of returns of the S&P500 index by using investors’ purchases and sales
as explanatory variables, subject to the constraint that the weights in the portfolios are positive and
add up to one. In particular, we estimate:

Minw t [ Rt − w tFlow t ]2

s..t . : w t * e = 1

wit ≥ 0 ∀ i . Here w t is a vector of weights of size equal to the number of components of the
portfolio of flows, Flow t is vector of length i comprised of flows for day t for class purchase or sale
and

i (purchases or sales of shares by contrarians on day t, purchases or sales by the rest of the market,
or purchases or sales by momentum investors) and e is a vector of ones. The weights have been
identified through a rolling regression procedure with a 90 days estimation window. The contrarians
and the momentum investors have been identified in the first period (01/01/1997-31/12/1997) and then
their behavior has been tracked in the second period (01/01/1998-31/12/1998). Two different
specifications are reported. In the first one we assume that only net purchases (purchases minus
sales) affect returns (Figure 1). We therefore consider the net flows of the 4 classes of strategic
investors (return contrarian, return momentum, volatility contrarian and volatility momentum). In the
third specification we consider the breakdown in purchases and sales for the 4 classes of strategic
investors under the assumption that purchases and sales jointly make up the whole portfolio. (Figure
2). In each Figure the weights (w t ) are represented by the size of the area. Five days moving
averages are used. For both specifications the percentage values of all the weights add up to one.
Investors are divided into momentum and contrarians. The momentum investors are defined as the
investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of the fund is increasing (return momentum
investors) or when the volatility of returns is increasing (volatility momentum investors). The
contrarian investors are defined as the investors who buy shares in the fund when the value of the
fund is decreasing (return contrarian investors) or when the volatility of returns is decreasing
(volatility contrarian investors). Both contrarians and momentum are defined in terms of the reaction
to the previous day returns/change in volatility. The different classes of investors have been
identified in the period 01/01/1997-31/12/1997 and then the portfolios have been constructed “out-ofsample” for the period 01/01/1998-31/12/1998.

46

Figure 1
Percentage impact of different strategies on market return

100%

90%
4
80%
3
70%

2

60%

50%

40%
1
30%

20%

10%

1 Return Contrarian Net Purchases

2 Return Momentum Net Purchases

3 Volatility Contrarian Net Purchases

4 Volatility Momentum Net Purchases

47

12/22/98

12/8/98

12/15/98

12/1/98

11/24/98

11/17/98

11/3/98

11/10/98

10/27/98

10/20/98

10/6/98

10/13/98

9/29/98

9/22/98

9/8/98

9/15/98

9/1/98

8/25/98

8/18/98

8/4/98

8/11/98

7/28/98

7/21/98

7/7/98

7/14/98

6/30/98

6/23/98

6/9/98

6/16/98

6/2/98

5/26/98

5/19/98

0%

Figure 2

Percentage impact of different strategies on market return: breakdown by components

100%

8
7

90%

6

80%

70%
5
60%

50%

40%

4

3

30%

20%
1
10%

2

2 Return Momentum Purchases
5 Volatility Contrarian Purchases

7 Volatility Contrarian Sales

8 Volatility Momentum Sales

48

12/22/98

12/8/98

3 Return Contrarian Sales
6 Volatility Momentum Purchases

12/15/98

12/1/98

11/24/98

11/17/98

11/3/98

11/10/98

10/27/98

10/20/98

10/6/98

1 Return Contrarian Purchases
4 Return Momentum Sales

10/13/98

9/29/98

9/22/98

9/8/98

9/15/98

9/1/98

8/25/98

8/18/98

8/4/98

8/11/98

7/28/98

7/21/98

7/7/98

7/14/98

6/30/98

6/23/98

6/9/98

6/16/98

6/2/98

5/26/98

5/19/98

0%

