                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LONG RUN EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM
                      PROPOSALS ON LIFETIME PROGRESSIVITY


                                         Julia Lynn Coronado
                                             Don Fullerton
                                             Thomas Glass


                                         Working Paper 7568
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7568

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2000




This paper was presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) conference on “The
Distributional Effects of Social Security Reform,” Woodstock, VT, October 22, 1999. The model used in
this paper reflects helpful comments from Henry Aaron, Charles Blahous, Angus Deaton, Martin Feldstein,
Steve Goss, Jeff Liebman, Gib Metcalf, Jim Poterba, and Jon Skinner. We are grateful for support from the
NBER. This paper is part of the NBER program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Board or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Julia Lynn Coronado, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Long Run Effects of Social Security Reform Proposals on
Lifetime Progressivity
Julia Lynn Coronado, Don Fullerton, and Thomas Glass
NBER Working Paper No. 7568
February 2000
JEL No. H22, H55

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper uses a lifetime framework to address questions about the progressivity of social
security and proposed reforms. We use a large sample of diverse individuals from the PSID to
calculate lifetime income, to classify individuals into income quintiles, and then to calculate the
present value of taxes minus benefits for each person in each group. In our basic calculations, the
current system is slightly progressive, overall, on a lifetime basis. Social Security would become
slightly more progressive in one of the reform plans, and it would become slightly regressive in each
of the other plans. The pattern of progressivity is affected by alternative assumptions, but it is
affected in similar ways for the current system and proposed reforms. None of these reforms greatly
alters the current degree of progressivity on a lifetime basis.


Julia Lynn Coronado                                    Don Fullerton
Federal Reserve Board of Governors                     Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20551                                   University of Texas at Austin
jcoronado@frb.gov                                      Austin, TX 78712
                                                       and NBER
                                                       dfullert@eco.utexas.edu
Thomas Glass
Glass & Company, CPAs
515 Congress Ave., Suite 1900
Austin, TX 78701
tglass@glasscpa.com
