                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE SHAPE OF TWENTIETH CENTURY
                                    ECONOMIC HISTORY


                                           J. Bradford DeLong


                                           Working Paper 7569
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7569

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




I would like to thank the NSF for financial support during the writing of this essay. This essay is a draft of
the first chapter of a book tentatively entitled the History of the Twentieth Century Economy: Slouching
Towards Utopia? My intellectual debts are vast, but my ten most weighty are to Lawrence Summers, Andrei
Shleifer, Robert Barsky, David Cutler, Barry Eichengreen, Claudia Goldin, Lars Jonung, Larry Katz, Paul
Krugman, David Landes, Peter Lindert, Christina Romer, Paul Romer, Richard Sutch, Peter Temin, Jan de
Vries, Robert Waldmann, Jeffrey Weintraub, and Jeffrey Williamson (yes, I know that’s twenty). The views
expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2000 by J. Bradford DeLong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Shape of Twentieth Century Economic History
J. Bradford DeLong
NBER Working Paper No. 7569
February 2000

                                           ABSTRACT

       The history of the twentieth century can be summarized–excessively briefly–in five
propositions: First, that the history of the twentieth century was overwhelmingly economic history.
Second, that the twentieth century saw the material wealth of humankind explode beyond all
previous imagining. Third, that because of advances technology, productivity, and organization–and
the feelings of social dislocation and disquiet that these advances generated–the twentieth century’s
tyrannies were the most brutal and barbaric in history. Fourth, that the twentieth century saw the
relative economic gulf between different economies grow at a rapid pace. Fifth and last, the
economic policy– the management of their economies by governments– in the twentieth century was
at best inept. Little was known or learned about how to manage a market or mixed economy.


J. Bradford DeLong
Department of Economics
U.S. Berkeley, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
phone: (510) 643-4027 fax: (510) 642-6615
delong@econ.berkeley.edu
http://econ161.berkeley.edu/
