                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SOCIAL SECURITY AND INEQUALITY OVER THE LIFE CYCLE


                                             Angus Deaton
                                       Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                            Christina Paxson


                                          Working Paper 7570
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7570

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2000




Prepared for NBER Conference on the Distributional Effects of Social Security Reform, Woodstock.
Vermont, October 22–23, 1999. Deaton and Paxson acknowledge support from the National Institute of
Aging through a grant to NBER, and from the John D. and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation within their
network on inequality and poverty in broader perspectives. We are grateful to Martin Feldstein, Laurence
Kotlikoff, Jeffrey Liebman, and James Poterba for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Angus Deaton, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security and Inequality over the Life Cycle
Angus Deaton, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 7570
February 2000
JEL No. H2, H5, E2, E6

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the consequences of social security reform for the inequality of
consumption across individuals. The idea is that inequality is at least in part the result of individual
risk in earnings or asset returns, the effects of which accumulate over time to increase inequality
within groups of people as they age. Institutions such as social security, that share risk across
individuals, will moderate the transmission of individual risk into inequality. We examine how
different social security systems, with different degrees of risk sharing, affect consumption
inequality. We do so within the framework of the permanent income hypothesis, and also using
richer models of consumption that incorporate precautionary saving motives and borrowing
restrictions. Our results indicate that systems in which there is less sharing of earnings risk–such as
systems of individual accounts– produce higher consumption inequality both before and after
retirement. However, differences across individuals in the rate of return on assets (including social
security assets held in individual accounts) produce only modest additional effects on inequality.


Angus Deaton                                           Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
221 Bendheim Hall                                      311 Fisher Hall
Princeton University                                   Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                    Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                               and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu                                   pog@princeton.edu

Christina Paxson
219 Bendheim Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
cpaxson@princeton.edu
0. Introduction

This paper explores the consequences of social security reform for the inequality of consumption

across individuals. The basic idea is that (at least part of) inequality is the consequence of

individual risk in earnings or asset returns. In each period, each person gets a different draw, of

earnings or of asset returns, so that whenever differences cumulate over time, the members of

any group will draw further apart from one another, and inequality will grow. Inequality at a

moment of time is the fossilized record of the history of personal differences in risky outcomes.

Any institution that shares risk across individuals, the social security system being the case in

point, will moderate the transmission of individual risk into inequality, and it is this process that

we study in the paper. Note that we are not concerned here with what has been one of the central

issues in social security reform, the distribution between different generations over the transition.

Instead, we are concerned with the equilibrium effects of different social security arrangements

on inequality among members of any given generation.

   A concrete and readily analyzed example is when the economy is composed of autarkic

permanent income consumers, each of whom has an uncertain flow of earnings. Each agent’s

consumption follows a martingale (i.e. consumption today equals expected consumption

tomorrow), and is therefore the cumulated sum of martingale differences, so that if shocks to

earnings are independent over agents, consumption inequality grows with time for any group

with fixed membership. The same is true of asset and income inequality, though not necessarily

of earnings inequality, see Deaton and Paxson (1994), who also document the actual growth of

income, earnings, and consumption inequality over the life-cycle in the United States and

elsewhere. An insurance arrangement that taxes earnings and redistributes the proceeds equally,


                                                  1
either in the present or the future, reduces the rate at which consumption inequality evolves.

With complete insurance, marginal utilities of different agents move in lockstep, and

consumption inequality remains constant. Social security pools risks, and thus limits the growth

of life-cycle inequality. Reducing the share of income that is pooled through the social security

system, as envisaged by some reform proposals—such as the establishment of individual

accounts with different portfolios or different management costs—but not by others— such as

setting up a provident fund with a common portfolio and common management costs— increases

the rate at which consumption and income inequality evolve over life in a world of permanent

income consumers. Even if inequality is not inherited from one generation to the next, and each

generation starts afresh, partial privatization of social security will increase average inequality.

While much of the discussion about limiting portfolio choice in new social security arrangements

has (rightly) focused on limiting risk, such restrictions will also have effects on inequality.

    Provided the reform is structured so that the poor are made no worse off, it can be argued that

the increase in inequality is of no concern, see for example Feldstein (1998), so that our analysis

would be of purely academic interest. Nevertheless, the fact remains that many people—perhaps

mistaking inequality for poverty—find inequality objectionable, so that it is as well to be aware

of the fact if it is the case that an increase in inequality is likely to be an outcome of social

security reform. There are also instrumental reasons for being concerned about inequality; there

are both theoretical and empirical studies implicating inequality in other socially undesirable

outcomes, such as low investment in public goods, lower economic growth, and even poor

health, Wilkinson (1996).

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 works entirely within the framework of the


                                                   2
permanent income hypothesis (PIH). We derive the formulas that govern the spread of

consumption inequality, and show how inequality is modified by the introduction of a stylized

social security scheme. The baseline analysis and preliminary results come from Deaton and

Paxson (1994), which should be consulted for more details, refinements, and reservations, as

well as for documentation that consumption inequality grows over the life-cycle, not only in the

US, but at much the same rate in Britain and Taiwan. The PIH is convenient because it permits

closed-form solutions which show explicitly how social security is related to inequality.

However, it is not a very realistic model of actual consumption in the US, and it embodies

assumptions that are far from obviously appropriate for social security analysis, for example that

consumers have unlimited access to credit, and that intertemporal transfers that leave the present

value of lifetime resources unchanged have no effect on consumption. In consequence, in

Section 2, we consider richer models of consumption and saving that incorporate both

precautionary motives for saving and borrowing restrictions. These models help replicate what

we see in the data, which is consumers endogenously switching from buffer-stock behavior early

in life to life-cycle saving behavior in middle age. The presence of the precautionary motive and

the borrowing constraints breaks the link between consumption and the present value of lifetime

resources, which both complicates and enriches the analysis of social security. Legal restrictions

prevent the use of social security as a collateral for loans, and for at least some people, such

restrictions are likely to be binding.

   Solutions to models with precautionary motives and borrowing constraints are used to

document the how social security systems with differing degrees of risk-sharing affect

inequality. We first consider the case in which all consumers receive the same rate of return on


                                                  3
their assets. Our results indicate that systems in which there is less sharing of earnings

risk—such as systems of individual accounts—produce higher consumption inequality both

before and after retirement. An important related issue is whether differences across consumers

in rates of return will contribute to even greater inequality. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that

allowing for fairly substantial differences in rates of return across consumers has only modest

additional effects on inequality. The bulk of saving, in the form of both social security and non-

social security assets, is done late enough in life so that differences in rates of return do not

contribute much to consumption inequality.



1. Social security and inequality under the permanent income hypothesis

Section 1.0 introduces the notation and basic algebra of the permanent income hypothesis, while

Section 1.1 reproduces from Deaton and Paxson (1994) the basic result on the spread of

consumption and income inequality over the life-cycle. Both subsections are preliminary to the

main analysis. Section 1.2 introduces a simplified social security system in an infinite horizon

model with PIH consumers and shows how a social security tax at rate reduces the rate of

spread of consumption inequality by the factor (1 & ) 2. Sections 1.3 discusses what happens

when there is a maximum to the social security tax, and Section 1.4 extends the model to deal

with finite lives and retirement and shows that the basic result is unaffected.



1.0 Preliminaries: notation and the permanent income hypothesis

It is useful to start with the algebra of the PIH; the notation is taken from Deaton (1992). Real

earnings at time t are denoted yt. Individual consumption is ct and assets At ; when it is


                                                   4
necessary to do so we shall introduce an i suffix to denote individuals. There is a constant real

rate of interest r. These magnitudes are linked by the accumulation identity

                                    At ' (1%r) ( At&1 % yt&1 & ct&1 )                               (1)

Under certainty equivalence, with rate of time preference equal to r, and an infinite horizon,

consumption satisfies the PIH rule, and is equal to the return on the discounted present value of

earnings and assets:

                                      r         r 4        1
                             ct '        At %       '            E (y )                             (2)
                                     1%r      1 % r k'0 (1 % r) k t t%k


for expectation operator Et conditional on information available at time t. It is convenient to start

with the infinite horizon case; the finite horizon case is dealt with in Section 1.4 below.

   That consumption follows a martingale follows from manipulation of (2);

                                                r 4       1
                             ct '     t   /         '          ( E & Et&1) yt%k                     (3)
                                              1 % r k'0 (1%r) k t

                        d
“Disposable” income yt is defined as earnings plus income from capital

                                               d        r
                                              yt '        A % yt                                    (4)
                                                       1%r t


Saving is the difference between disposable income and consumption

                                                          d
                                                   st ' yt & ct                                     (5)

which, enables us to rewrite the PIH rule (2) in the equivalent form, see Campbell (1987),

                                                   4
                                                          1
                                      st ' & '                   Et yt%k                            (6)
                                                   k'1 (1 % r) k



Assets are linked to saving through the identity (implied by (1) and (5))


                                                          5
                                           At ' ( 1 % r) st&1                                      (7)

Finally, it is convenient to specify a stochastic process for earnings yt. It is convenient to do this

by assuming that

                                       ( L ) ( yt & µ ) ' ( L )        t                           (8)

for lag operator L and polynomials (L) and (L) and white noise t. As written, and under the

usual conditions on the roots, earnings is stationary (around µ) and invertible. In fact, we can

allow a unit root in (L) with essentially no modification. (In the more realistic models in

Section 2, we will work with a process with a unit root but specified in logarithms.)

   Given (8), we can derive explicit forms for the innovation to consumption, Flavin (1981):

                                                                  1
                                                         r       1%r
                                    ct '   t   '                           t                       (9)
                                                        1%r       1
                                                                 1%r

so that consumption is a random walk and the innovation variance of consumption is tied to the

innovation variance of earnings by the autocorrelation properties of the latter.



1.1 Spreading inequality

Start from the simplest illustrative case where earnings are white noise, and add an i suffix for an

individual

                                  yit ' µ i %      it   ' µ i % wt % zit                          (10)

where µ i is the individual-specific mean of earnings, wt is a common (macro) component, and zit

is an idiosyncratic component. The macro component wt is also i.i.d. over time. Given (10),

equation (3) implies


                                                          6
                                                       r
                                     cit ' cit&1 %       (w % z )                                 (11)
                                                      1%r t it


As a result, if the idiosyncratic components are orthogonal to lagged consumption in the cross-

section (which need not be true in each year but is true on the average by the martingale

property), the cross-sectional variance of consumption satisfies

                                                       2 2                          2 2
                                                       zr                       t   zr
                       vart ( c ) ' vart&1( c ) %                 ' var0(c) %                     (12)
                                                    (1 % r) 2                   (1 % r) 2

so that consumption inequality is increasing over time.

   Note that although (12) is derived for the variance of consumption, the increase in

consumption variance is general, not specific to a particular measure of inequality. According to

(11), the household distribution of consumption at t is the distribution of consumption at t & 1

plus uncorrelated white noise. Given that the mean is not changing, the addition of noise implies

that the distribution of consumption at t is second-order stochastically dominated by the

distribution of consumption at t & 1, so that any transfer-respecting measure of inequality, such

as the gini coefficient, the Theil inequality measure, or the coefficient of variation (but not

necessarily the variance in logarithms), will show an increase of inequality over time.

   In the i.i.d. case, saving is given by, see (6),


                                              sit '         it
                                                                                                  (13)
                                                       1%r


while assets satisfy

                                          Ait ' Ait&1 %          it&1 .                           (14)

Because disposable income is the sum of consumption and saving, the change in disposable


                                                        7
income satisfies

                               d       r
                              yit '        it
                                                %       it
                                                             &        it&1
                                                                             '            &       it&1
                                                                                                                      (15)
                                      1%r           1%r              1%r             it
                                                                                              1%r


which implies, after some manipulation, that

                                                             2                                               2
                                                             z   r2                                      t   z   r2
                   vart( y ) ' vart&1 ( y ) %
                          d                     d
                                                                        ' var0 ( y ) %        d
                                                                                                                      (16)
                                                        (1 % r )2                                        (1 % r )2

Because the consumption variance is spreading, and because saving is stationary by (13),

disposable income variance must spread at the same rate as the consumption variance. Note that

earnings variance is constant given the stationarity assumption (10), so that

                                                    2            2
                                   vart y '         µ   %        z   ' constant                                       (17)

From (14), the variance of assets satisfies

                                                                                 2
                                      vart( A) ' var0 ( A) % t                   z                                    (18)

The rate of spread of the variance of assets is the variance of the idiosyncratic component of the

innovation of earnings. At a real interest rate of 5 percent, this is 400 times faster than the rate of

spread of the variance of consumption and of disposable income. From any given starting point,

asset inequality among a group of individuals grows much faster than does consumption or

disposable income inequality.

   In the US, the data on consumption, earnings, and income are consistent with the predictions

of the theory. Deaton and Paxson (1994) use repeated cross-sections from the Consumer

Expenditure Survey to trace birth cohorts through the successive surveys, and find that cross-

sectional consumption inequality for any given birth cohort increases with the age of the cohort.

For example, the Gini coefficient for family consumption (family income) increases (on average


                                                                 8
over all cohorts) from 0.28 (0.42) at age 25 to about 0.38 (0.62) at age 55. We shall return to

these findings in Section 2 below.



1.2 Social security and the spread of inequality

Suppose that the government enacts a simple social security system. A proportionate tax on

earnings is levied at rate , and the revenues are divided equally and given to everyone. We think

about the (partial) reversal of this process as a stylized version of reform proposals that pays

some part of each individual’s social security tax into personal saving accounts; the precise

mechanisms will be presented in Section 2.1. We recognize that the establishment of personal

accounts has other effects, some of which are not captured under our simple assumptions. But

our concern here is with the reduction in the pooling or risk sharing that is implied by removing

part of social security tax proceeds from the common pool and placing it in individual accounts.

Such accounts provide smoothing benefits for autarkic agents who would not or cannot save on

their own accounts, but they reduce the risk-sharing elements of the current system.

    Because of the infinite horizon and certainty equivalence assumptions, dividing up the

revenues and returning them immediately is the same as giving them back later. The model
                                                                            b
assumes no deadweight loss. Denote before tax earnings as yit and retain the notation yit for
                           b
after tax income, (1 & ) yit . In the i.i.d. case we have

                                    yit ' (1 & ) (µ i %   it)   % µ̄                               (19)

where the last term is the average revenue of the tax, which is given back to everyone. Equation

(19) can also be written

                                  yit ' µ i & ( µ i & µ̄) % (1 & )     it                          (20)


                                                     9
Compared with the original earnings process (10), there is a shift toward the grand mean—the

redistributional effect of the social security system—together with a scaling of the innovation by

1 & , which is the risk-sharing component of the social security system. The redistribution will

change consumption levels for everyone not at the mean, but will not affect the innovation of

consumption equations (11), nor the saving equation (13), the asset equation (14), and the

disposable income equation (15), except that the original innovation must be rescaled by 1 & .

In consequence, the variances of consumption, disposable income, and assets all evolve as

before, but at rate that is (1 & ) 2 times the original rate. If the social security tax is 12.4 percent,

inequality (measured by the variance) will spread at 76.7 percent of the rate that it would in the

absence of the system. Imagine an economy in equilibrium, with no inheritance of inequality,

and no growth in lifetime resources, so that the cross-section profile of consumption by age is

identical to the lifetime profile of consumption for each cohort, and all consumption inequality is

within-cohort inequality. With a working life of 40 years, the imposition of a social security tax

at 12.4 percent will reduce the cross-sectional standard deviation of consumption by a factor of

3.16 (the square root of the 40 year average of 0.767 to the power of t from 0 to 40.)

    In (19) and (20), we have not explicitly distinguished the macro common component of the

innovation wt from the idiosyncratic component           it.   If we substitute to make the decomposition

explicit, (20) becomes

                               yit ' µ i & ( µ i & µ̄) % (1 & ) zit % wt                              (21)

which shows that the common component is not insured. The change in consumption warranted

by (21) is

                                              r
                                     cit '      w % (1 & ) zit                                        (22)
                                             1%r t

                                                    10
but only the second term in the bracket contributes to the spread in consumption variance, and

the results are as stated previously.



1.3 Social security with a maximum

The permanent income hypothesis is not well-suited to modeling a social security system where

taxes are paid only up to the social security maximum. The nonlinearity complicates the

forecasting equations for earnings and eliminates the analytical tractability that is the main

attraction of the formulation. However, in the spirit of a system with a maximum it is worth

noting what happens when there are two classes of people, one whose earnings never gets above

the social security maximum, and one whose earning never gets below the social security

maximum. Equation (20) still gives after tax income for the poor group, and inequality among

them spreads as in the previous section. For the rich group, after tax income is

                       yit ' (1 & ) (µ i % it) % ( µ i %   it & m) % (    µ̄ 1 % m) / 2          (23)

where m is the social security maximum, µ̄ 1 is mean earnings of the poorer group, and we have

assumed that there are equal numbers in the two groups. (The first term is what is left if tax was

paid on everything, the second term is the rebate of tax above the maximum, and the last term is

the shared benefit.) Equation (23) can be rewritten

                                    yit ' µ i & (m & µ̄ 1) /2 %      it                          (24)

which makes the straightforward point that those above the maximum no longer participate in

the risk-sharing, only in the redistribution. As a result, the social security system with the two

groups will limit the rate of spread of inequality among the poorer group, but not among the

richer group, though it will bring the two groups closer together than they would have been in


                                                     11
the absence of the system.



1.4 Finite lives with retirement.

With finitely lived consumers we can have a more realistic social security system, in which the

taxes are repaid in retirement rather than instantaneously. One point to note about retirement is

that it induces a fall in earnings at the time of retirement, a fall that enters into the determination

of saving, see (6). When there is a unit root in earnings, earnings immediately prior to retirement

has a unit root, and so does the drop in earnings at retirement. In consequence saving, which has

to cover this drop in earnings, is no longer stationary but integrated of order one, so that assets,

which are cumulated saving, are integrated of order two. The spread of inequality in assets is

therefore an order of integration faster than the spread of inequality in consumption and

disposable income. But this seems more a matter of degree than an essential difference.

    People work until age R and die at T. The consumption innovation formula is only slightly

different

                                                    r R&t 1
                           t       ct '   t   '         '          ( E & Et&1) yt%k                (25)
                                                  1 % r k'0 (1%r) k t


where the annuity factor       t   is given by

                                                    1
                                   t   / 1&                    ' (1 % r)   t&1   &r                (26)
                                              (1 % r ) (T&t%1)


From (25), we can write

                                                           t
                                                                &1
                                              ct ' c0 % '       s  t                               (27)
                                                          s'0




                                                          12
Hence in the i.i.d. case previously considered,

                                                                          t
                                                            r2       2         &2
                              vart(c) ' var0(c) %                    z   '     s                (28)
                                                         (1 % r) 2       s'0



With the social security scheme, after tax earnings while working is

                       yit ' (1 & ) (µ i %   it)   ' (1 & ) µ i % (1 & ) ( wt % zit) .          (29)

With a uniform distribution of ages, the benefits while retired in year R % s are

                                             R ( µ̄ % wR%s )
                                                                                                (30)
                                                    T&R


With certainty equivalence, only the expected present value of this matters, which is a constant

given the i.i.d. assumption so that, once again, although the levels of consumption are altered,

there is no change to the innovation of consumption, nor to the rate at which the various

inequalities spread.

   These results would clearly be different if either (a) the autocorrelation structure of the macro

component of earnings were such that current innovations had information about what will

happen in retirement; this seems like an issue that is hardly worth worrying about, or (b) with

precautionary motives or borrowing restrictions, where transactions that leave net present value

unaffected can have real effects on the level and profile of consumption. Without quadratic

preferences, and without the ability to borrow, we cannot even guarantee the basic result that

uncertainty in earnings causes consumption and income inequality to increase with age. In

consequence, we have little choice but to specify a model and to simulate the effects of

alternative social security policies, and this is the topic of Section 2. Of course, it might

reasonably be argued that the purpose of social security is not well-captured within any of these


                                                        13
models, and that present-value neutral “forced” savings has real effects, not because of

precautionary motives or borrowing restrictions, but because people are myopic or otherwise

unable to make sensible retirement plans on their own. We are sympathetic to the general

argument, but have nothing to say about such a case; without a more explicit model of behavior,

it is not possible to conclude anything about the effects of social security reform on inequality.

2. Social security with precautionary saving or borrowing constraints

2.1 Describing the social security system

When consumers cannot borrow, or when they have precautionary motives for saving, the timing

of income affects their behavior. In consequence, we need to be more precise about the

specification of the social security system and its financing. We assume that there is a constant

rate of social security tax on earnings during the working life, levied at rate , and that during

retirement, the system pays a two part benefit. The first part, G, is a guaranteed floor that is paid

to everyone, irrespective of their earnings or contribution record. The second part, Vi, is

individual-specific and depends on the present value of earnings (or contributions) over the

working life. We write Si for the annual payment to individual i after retirement, so that

                                       R&1                        R&1
                Si ' G % Vi ' G % ˜ ' yi j (1 % r ) R & j ' G %   ' yi j (1 % r ) R & j
                                             b
                                                                                                        (31)
                                       j'1                        j'1



where    ' ˜ / (1 & ). The size of the parameter    determines the extent of the link between

earnings in work and social security payments in retirement. When we consider the effects of

different social security systems on inequality, we shall consider variations in          and G while

holding the tax rate constant. As we shall see below, this is equivalent to devoting a larger or

smaller share of social security tax revenues to individual accounts. When            is high relative to G


                                                   14
(personal saving accounts,) the system is relatively autarkic and there is relatively little sharing

of risk. Conversely, when G is large and              small (the current system,) risk sharing is more

important and we expect inequality to be lower.

   The government finances the social security system in such a way as to balance the budget in

present value terms within each cohort. If we use the date of retirement as the base for

discounting, the present value of government revenues from the social security taxes levied on

the cohort about to retire is given by

                              R&1 N                                   R&1
                              ' ' yi j (1 % r) R & j '
                                             b
                                                                      ' Yt (1 % r) R&j                   (32)
                              j'1 i'1                                 j'1



where N is the number of people and Yt is aggregate before-tax earnings for the cohort in year t.

This must equal the present value at R of social security payments, which is

                             N   T                              R&1
                             ' ' (1 % r) R & j G % ˜ ' yij ( 1 % r)R&j .
                                                                         b
                                                                                                         (33)
                            i'1 j'R                             j'1



The budget constraint that revenues equal outlays, that (32) equal (33), gives a relationship

between the three parameters of the social security system, , G, and ˜ , namely

                                                                      ȳ (
                                      G % ˜ ȳ ( '                           .
                                                           T
                                                                                                         (34)
                                                           ' (1 % r) R & j
                                                          j'R
        (
where ȳ is the average over all consumers of the present value of lifetime earnings,

                                             (     1 R&1
                                        ȳ       '   ' Yj (1 % r) R & j .                                (35)
                                                   N j'1


Equation (34) tells us that we can choose any two of the three parameters, G,              (or ˜ ), and , and

what is implied for the third. It also makes clear that, after appropriate scaling, and holding the


                                                           15
guarantee fixed, increases in —the earnings-related or autarkic part of the system—are

equivalent to increases in the rate of the social security tax, given that the government is

maintaining within-cohort budget balance.

   The link between earnings-related social security payments and individual accounts can be

seen more clearly if we reparametrize the system. Suppose that Vi , the earnings related

component of the social security payment, is funded out of a fraction of social security taxes set

aside for the purpose, or equivalently, that a fraction             of the tax is used to build a personal

account, the value of which is used to buy an annuity at retirement. Equating the present value of

the each annuity Vi to the present value of contributions gives the relationship between                and ,

                                                      T
                                              ˜
                                         '         ' (1 % r) R & j .                                         (36)
                                                   j'R



Hence, any increase in the earnings related component of social security through an increase in

(or ˜ ) can be thought of as an increase in the fraction of social security taxes that is sequestered

into personal accounts. Equation (34), which constrains the parameters of the social security

system, can be rewritten in terms of     as

                                                  ȳ ( (1 & )
                                       G '                          .
                                                  T
                                                                                                             (37)
                                                  ' (1 % r) j & R
                                                  j'R

Note also that the individual social security payment (31) can be rewritten

                                                                    R&1
                                              (1& ) ȳ ( %
                                                                          b
                        Si '                                        ' yij (1 % r)R&j
                               T                                    j'1                                      (38)
                               ' (1 % r)R&j
                               j'R




so that each person’s social security benefits are related to a weighted average of their own


                                                          16
lifetime earnings and the average lifetime earnings of their entire cohort.

   If the above scheme were implemented for permanent income consumers who are allowed to

borrow and lend at will, the component of social security taxes that does goes into personal

accounts would have no effect on individual consumption nor therefore on its distribution across

individuals. Although the scheme forces people to save, it is fair in present value terms, and so

has no effect on the present value of each individuals lifetime resources. And although taxes are

paid now and benefits received later, such a transfer can be undone by appropriate borrowing

and lending. If the social security tax rate is , and a fraction   is invested in a personal account,

it is as if the tax rate were reduced to (1 & ), and the rate of increase in the consumption and

income variance will be higher. Of course, none of these results hold if consumers are not

allowed to borrow, or if preferences are other than quadratic.



2.2 Modeling consumption behavior

Although we shall also present results from the permanent income hypothesis, our preferred

model is one with precautionary motives based on that in Gourinchas and Parker (1999) and

Ludvigson and Paxson (1998), with the addition of retirement and a simple social security

system. The specification and parameters are chosen to provide a reasonable approximation to

actual behavior so that, even though it is not possible to derive closed-form solutions for the

results, we can use simulations to give us some idea of the effects of the reforms.

   Consumers have intertemporally additive isoelastic utility functions and, as before, they

work through years 1 through R & 1, retiring in period R and dying in period T. The real interest

rate is fixed, but the rate of time preference is (in general) different from r, so that consumers


                                                  17
satisfy the familiar Euler equation

                                       &                       &
                                      ct   '   (1 % r) Et ( ct%1 )                                 (39)

where is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and    ' (1 % )&1. After tax

earnings, where taxes include social security taxes, evolves according to the (also fairly

standard) non-stationary process

                                   ln yt ' ln yt&1 % %     t   &   t&1                             (40)

which derives from a specification in which log earnings is the sum of a random walk with drift

 and white noise transitory earnings. The quantity is the parameter of the moving average

process for the change in earnings, and is an increasing function of the ratio of the variances of

the transitory and random walk components respectively. Consumers are assumed not to be able

to borrow, which requires a modification of (39), see below. One reason is to mimic the US,

where it is illegal to borrow against prospective social security income. A second reason is to

rule out the possibility that people borrow very large sums early in life to finance a declining

consumption path over the life-cycle. This prohibition could be enforced in other ways, such as

the “voluntary” borrowing constraints in Carroll (1998) that result from isoelastic utility coupled

with a finite probability of zero earnings. We do not find Carroll’s income process empirically

plausible, and it seems simpler to rule out borrowing explicitly rather than to choose the form of

the earnings process to do so. Our calculations for the permanent income case are done with and

without borrowing constraints, which will give some idea of the effects of the borrowing

constraints in the other models.

   Our procedure is as follows. Given values for the real interest rate, the rate of time

preference, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, the moving average parameter in income


                                                    18
growth, and two out of three parameters of the social security system, we calculate a set of

policy functions for each year of a 40 year working life. After retirement, there is no further

uncertainty and consumption can be solved analytically for each of the 20 years remaining. We

assume that the social security system presented in Section 2.1 has been in place for a long time,

that its parameters are fixed, and that people understand how it works, including the

government’s intertemporal budget constraint. In particular, they understand the implications of

innovations to their earnings for the value of their annuities in retirement. We do not require

consumers to take into account the effects of successive macroeconomic shocks on the size of

the social security guarantee G. Instead, we assume that the government sets G to the value that

satisfies the budget constraint in expectation for each cohort, and that deficits and surpluses from

cumulated macro shocks are passed on to future generations. There are, however, no macro

shocks in the simulations reported below.

   In each period of the working life, the ratio of consumption to earnings can be written as

function of three state variables. These are defined as follows. Define cash on hand xt ' At % yt

which, by (1), evolves during the working life t < R according to

                                  xt ' (1 % r) (xt&1 & ct&1) % yt .                                 (41)

During retirement, for t $ R,

                                  xt ' (1 % r) (xt&1 & ct&1) % S .                                  (42)

If wt is the ratio of cash on hand to earnings, and     t   the ratio of consumption to earnings, then

(34) becomes, for t < R,

                                         (1 % r) (wt&1 &    t&1)
                                  wt '                             %1                               (43)
                                                   gt



                                                   19
where gt is the ratio of current to lagged income, yt / yt&1. To derive corresponding equations for

the dynamics of social security, define St as the current present value of the annual social

security payment to which the consumer would be entitled if he or she earned no more income

between year t and retirement. Hence, for t < R,

                                                                         t
                                     St ' G (1 % r)&(R&t ) %            ' yj (1 % r) t&j                                    (44)
                                                                        j'1



while for t $ R, St is constant and given by (31). Noting that earnings in year R is zero, (44)

satisfies, for t # R,

                                                  St ' (1 % r) St&1 % Yt                                                    (45)

and is constant thereafter. If we define               t,    the ratio of St to current earnings and thus the “social

security replacement rate” so that, the corresponding evolution equation is

                                                      St
                                              t   '         ' (1 % r)        t&1
                                                                                   % .                                      (46)
                                                      yt                 gt


    With borrowing constraints, which imply that consumption cannot be greater than cash on

hand, or that the consumption ratio be no larger than the cash on hand ratio, the Euler equation

(39) is modified to

                                    &                                    &         &          &
                                    t   ' max              (1 % r) Et ( gt%1       t%1 ) , w t    .                         (47)

We write the consumption ratio            t       as a function of the cash on hand ratio wt , the social security

replacement rate        t,   and the current innovation to earnings                       t   (which is required because, with

positive , high earnings growth in one period predicts low earnings growth in the next) and then

use (47) to solve backwards for the policy function in each period, starting from the closed-form

solution for consumption in the first year of retirement.


                                                                   20
   Armed with the policy functions, we simulate lifetime stochastic earnings profiles for each of

1,000 people. The logarithm of initial earnings is drawn from a normal distribution with mean

ln(20,000) and a standard deviation of 0.65, the latter chosen to give an initial gini coefficient

that roughly corresponds to what we see in the data from the CPS. The drift (expected rate of

growth) of earnings is set at 2 percent a year. For any given value of the replacement parameter

and the social security tax rate , the corresponding value of the social security guarantee G is set

from (34) using actual realized earnings, which as we have already noted, is potentially

problematic if macro shocks are important. The value of G also gives the initial value of       t   at the

beginning of life. The calculated policy functions are then used to simulate life-cycle

consumption for each of the 1,000 people, and these trajectories are used to assess lifetime

inequality as a function of the design of the social security system. Different simulations use the

same 1,000 sets of earnings realizations, so that comparisons across social security regimes

reflect the regime parameters and not the specific draws.



2.3 Social security design and inequality: results with constant interest rates

The model is solved under the following assumptions. The interest rate r is set at 3 percent, and

the rate of time preference at either 3 or 5 percent. The drift of the earnings process is set at 2

percent a year, the moving average parameter to 0.4, and the standard deviation of the

innovation (in logs) to be 0.25. The coefficient of relative risk aversion is set to 3, so that the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution is one-third. We also include a certainty equivalent case,

with and without borrowing restrictions, in which the rate of interest is set equal to the rate of

time preference at 3 percent. There are four cases carried through the analysis: (1) isoelastic


                                                  21
preferences, no borrowing, r ' 0.03 ,    ' 0.05 ; (2) isoelastic preferences, no borrowing,

r ' 0.03 ,   ' 0.03 ; (3) quadratic preferences, no borrowing, r ' 0.03 ,   ' 0.03 ; (4), quadratic

preferences, borrowing allowed, r ' 0.03 ,    ' 0.03 . The social security tax rate is set at its

current value of 12.4 percent of before-tax earnings and there are no other taxes or benefits. The

social security systems we consider are indexed on the level of the social security guarantee G,

which takes the values (0, $5,000, $10,000, $15,000, $20,000); given the tax rate, these values

translate into corresponding values for , or perhaps more revealingly, into values for , the

share of the tax devoted to personal accounts (1, 0.811, 0.623, 0.434, 0.245). These different sets

of parameters have quite different implications for the dispersion in social security payments

among retirees. For example, our simulation results indicate that with a guarantee of 0, the

person at the 10th percentile (ranked by the present value of lifetime earnings) receives an annual

social security payment of $6,405, in contrast to a payment of $52,639 for the person at the 90th

percentile. When the guarantee is increased to $20,000, this spread declines to $21,569 for the

10th percentile, and $32,896 for the 90th.

   Figure 1 shows the averages over the 1,000 consumers of the simulated trajectories of

income (earnings prior to retirement and receipts from social security after retirement),

consumption, and cash on hand (earnings plus assets excluding social security assets) for the

four models all with G set at $5,000. These graphs are shown to demonstrate that the various

models do indeed generate standard life-cycle profiles. Earnings are the same in each of the three

graphs. Consumption is flat over the life-cycle in the certainty equivalent case when borrowing

is allowed, but rises in the models with precautionary motives and borrowing constraints, and in

the quadratic case with borrowing constraints. Indeed the quadratic case with no borrowing (on


                                                 22
the bottom left) and the isoelastic “impatient” case with no borrowing (top left) generate similar

profiles. With more patient (lower ) consumers in the top right panel, there is more

accumulation during the working life, and assets prior to retirement are higher. The certainty

equivalent consumers in the bottom right panel have expectations of earnings growth and so

engage in substantial borrowing early in life but even so, have some net assets prior to

retirement.

   Figure 2 shows the average consumption profiles for the four different models (in the four

panels, as before) and for the five different social security schemes (in each panel). To a first

approximation, and with the tax rate held fixed, the choice of system has no effect on the lifetime

profile of consumption. Figure 2 also shows more clearly than Figure 1 the lifetime shape of

consumption in the four models; precautionary motives or borrowing restrictions drive the

increase in consumption over the working period; in the top left panel, where impatience is

greater than the interest rate, consumption declines after retirement once all uncertainty is

resolved. For the cases with precautionary motives and/or borrowing restrictions, average

consumption during retirement is somewhat higher in the regimes with the higher minimum

guarantee. This appears to be a consequence of the borrowing constraints. Those consumers who

have poor earnings draws throughout their lives, and who would like to borrow against their

social security but cannot, have higher consumption in retirement when the guarantee becomes

available. In effect, such consumers are being forced to save for higher consumption in

retirement than they would choose if left to themselves. Such effects are absent in the pure

certainty equivalent case where borrowing is allowed.

   Figure 3 plots the gini coefficients of consumption by age and shows how consumption


                                                 23
inequality evolves in the various models and for the different social security systems. The gini

coefficients, together with interquartile ranges of the logarithm of consumption, are given in

numerical form in Table 1. In all of the models, consumption inequality is higher at all ages the

lower the social security guarantee (the higher the fraction of taxes invested in personal

accounts) and the more autarkic the system. A higher guarantee with its associated lower limit to

lifetime earnings causes consumption inequality to be lower from the start of the life-cycle,

though the early effects are strongest in the pure certainty equivalence case, and manifest

themselves only later in life in the models with borrowing constraints. With a higher guarantee,

and less in individual accounts, the system has more sharing, so that individual earnings

innovations have less effect on consumption because the good (or ill) fortune will be shared with

others. Although this sharing is implemented only after retirement, because consumption is

smoothed over the life-cycle, the effect on inequality works at all ages to an extent determined

by the assumptions about preferences, growth, and borrowing constraints. When borrowing

constraints are imposed in an environment with earnings growth, consumption smoothing is

inhibited, and the effects of risk sharing on inequality are more apparent in the later than in the

earlier phases of the life-cycle. These results are not sensitive to the choice of inequality

measure. The interquartile ranges, although somewhat jumpier, display patterns that are similar

to the gini coefficients.

    Figure 3 also shows a sharp drop in consumption inequality after retirement, particularly

when the guarantee in the social security system is relatively large. Once again, this comes from

the borrowing constraints and the inability of life-time unlucky consumers to borrow against the

social security system. These people have very low consumption immediately prior to


                                                  24
retirement, which exaggerates inequality. The effect vanishes as social security becomes

available and their consumption rises. In the cases where the guarantee is large, there is also

some decline in inequality prior to retirement. While there is no theoretical reason that prohibits

this, we have not so far developed a convincing explanation of why it should occur. Panel 1 of

Figure 3 also shows a small decline in consumption inequality during retirement. This is due to

the combination of borrowing constraints and impatience (r< ). Unconstrained consumers

choose declining consumption paths during retirement (at a constant and common rate of about

0.64 percent per year), while those who are constrained simply consume their constant social

security income. The result is a compression of the distribution of consumption.

   Overall, the results in Figure 3 and Table 1 show that as we move from one extreme to the

other, from putting everything into individual accounts and giving no guarantee (a social security

system than confines itself to compulsory saving) to a guaranteed floor of $20,000 with only a

quarter of social security taxes going to personal accounts, the gini coefficient of consumption

increase by between 5 and 6 percentage points on average over the life-cycle, less among the

young, and more among the old. This is a large increase, exceeding the increase in consumption

inequality in the US during the inequality “boom” from the early to the mid-1980s. For example,

the gini coefficient of total consumption for urban households from the U.S. Consumer

Expenditure rose from 0.37 in 1981 to 0.41 in 1986.

   Table 2 shows “poverty rates” by age for the different models and social security systems.

An individual is defined to be in poverty if annual consumption is less than $10,000. This

poverty threshold was arbitrarily chosen, but it delivers total poverty rates are not too different

from those in the United States. For example, with G equal to $5,000, the total poverty rate is


                                                 25
12.5% for the first model. We are more concerned with how poverty varies with age than with its

level. The age profiles of poverty are similar for the first three models, in which there are

borrowing constraints. Poverty rates decline up to retirement age: constrained consumers are

more likely to be poor when they are young, and earnings are low. Poverty in retirement depends

on the value of the social security guarantee. When the guarantee is greater than or equal to the

poverty threshold, poverty in retirement must equal zero. For smaller values of the guarantee, the

poverty rate in retirement is generally less than during working years. However, in one

case—that of isoelastic preferences and r< —the poverty rate grows during retirement. In this

case, impatient consumers reduce consumption over time, and increasingly fall below the

threshold.

   The fourth model, with quadratic preferences and no borrowing constraints, yields very

different results. Poverty rates increase with age up to retirement. Average consumption is

constant over the life-cycle, and the increasing dispersion in consumption with age implies that

consumers will increasingly fall below the threshold. Increases in the poverty rate cease at

retirement. However, social security guarantees in excess of the poverty threshold do not

eliminate poverty, since (in this model) individuals are free to borrow against the guarantee

during working years. Higher social security guarantees do, in fact, reduce poverty, but they do

so at all ages, by making life-time wealth more equal across individuals.

   Figure 4 compares our simulated patterns of inequality over the life-cycle with those

calculated from the data in the Consumer Expenditure Survey and reported in Deaton and

Paxson (1994). By construction, the life-cycle profile of simulated earnings inequality is similar

to the actual profile. Simulated consumption inequality (from the “impatient” isoelastic case) is


                                                 26
too high relative to the actuals; perhaps the borrowing restrictions are preventing consumption

from being sufficiently smoothed. Nevertheless, the upward drift of consumption inequality is

very much the same in the data as in the simulations, which also show the effects on inequality

of the different social security designs.

   In Figures 5 and 6 we turn to the life-cycle pattern of inequality in assets, in Figure 5 for

assets excluding social security wealth, and in Figure 6 including social security wealth. The

permanent income model is excluded from these comparisons since average wealth is negative

for much of the life-cycle. Total wealth at any given age is defined as the sum of non social-

security assets At and the present discounted value at t of receiving G from retirement R to death

T, plus the accumulated balance in the personal saving account, if any. Making the social

security system more autarkic by holding the social security tax constant and devoting more of

the revenue to personal accounts and less to a universal guarantee has the opposite effect on

inequality of non-social security wealth than it does on the inequality of consumption. This is

because of the substitutability between saving for retirement inside and outside the social

security system. If we examine the profiles of asset accumulation by age (not shown here)

average non-social security accumulations are larger the smaller is the fraction of the social

security tax invested in individual accounts. There is a similar substitutability in asset inequality;

when there is a large social security floor for everyone, the resulting equality is partially offset

by inequality in private accumulation.

   The different patterns of asset inequality for the quadratic case in the bottom left panel, as

opposed to the isoelastic cases in the top panels, are associated with the fact that a substantial

fraction of the quadratic consumers are credit constrained up until around age 40, so that


                                                  27
inequality is high at early ages, because so many consumers have exactly nothing. The offsetting

of private wealth against social security wealth only shows up once the majority of consumers

are accumulating private assets, at which point they are no longer credit constrained. In the cases

with isoelastic preferences, the borrowing constraints are binding for only a small fraction of

young consumers; the variability of earnings and the convexity of marginal utility is enough to

overcome impatience and the expected growth of earnings.

   When we come Figure 6, which shows the inequality of all assets, we see the “standard”

pattern restored; the more autarkic the system and the larger the fraction of social security taxes

devoted to private accounts, the larger is the inequality of assets. Note that the gini coefficients

for all assets are much lower than those for private assets; even with personal accounts, the

addition of social security to private wealth makes the distribution of wealth much more equal.

As with consumption, asset inequality rises with age, but does so most rapidly in the cases where

insurance is greatest, so that the differences in asset inequalities across the various schemes

diminishes with age. Even so, the most autarkic systems are the most unequal at all ages.

2.4 Social security design and inequality: results with variable interest rates

The results on asset inequality, and to a lesser extent those on consumption inequality, are likely

to be seriously affected by our assumption that everyone earns the same rate of return on their

assets. Under some of the early proposals for reform, for example those from the largest group in

the Gramlich report, one of the great virtues of personal accounts was seen as the freedom given

to individual consumers to choose their own portfolios. More recent proposals have tended to

favor severe restrictions on portfolio choice, perhaps restricting consumers to a limited menu of

approved funds which themselves must adhere to strict portfolio rules. Clearly, allowing


                                                 28
different people to obtain different returns adds a new source of inequality, in both assets and in

consumption. If, for example, the funds for the minimum guarantee G were invested in a

common fund at rate r, as above, but the personal accounts obtained different rates of return for

different individuals, either because of their individual portfolio choice or because of differential

management fees, then a move to personal accounts can be expected to increase inequality by

more than in the analysis so far.

   It is not obvious how to construct a model with differential asset returns that is both realistic

and computationally tractable. We have so far considered only one simple case. Personal

accounts are invested in one of eleven mutual funds, and consumers must choose between them

at the outset of their working life. The eleven mutual funds have rates of return from 2.5 to 3.5

percent a year. One can think of the funds as having identical (S&P 500) portfolios, but

management fees range from zero to 1 percentage point; the equilibrium is maintained by

differential advertising and reporting services. We allocate our 1,000 consumers randomly to the

eleven mutual funds, with equal probability of receiving any one interest rate; this is a

conservative procedure and inequality would presumably be higher if those with higher earnings

were more financially sophisticated and systematically chose the no load funds. We assume that

consumers are forced to convert their retirement accounts into annuities at retirement (using the

interest rate to which they have been assigned), and also that the social security system gives

each consumer a guaranteed amount of $5,000 per year after retirement in addition to the

annuity.

   The results indicate that there is virtually no increase in consumption inequality before

retirement, and very little after retirement, associated with assigning different consumers to


                                                 29
different fixed interest rates. The top panel of Figure 7 shows the gini coefficient for

consumption for the cases described above, with dispersion in interest rates, and the case in

which all consumers receive the same interest rate of 3.0 percent. This result may not be not

surprising, considering that most saving (whether private or through the social security system)

is done late in life, when income is high, so that those that receive lower interest rates do not

have wealth at retirement that is much lower than those with higher interest rates. Consider, for

example, a group of 1,000 consumers whose incomes follow the process described above, each

of whom pays 12.4 percent in taxes, 81 percent of which is allocated to private social security

accounts (thereby generating enough government revenue to fund a $5,000 guaranteed payment

to each during retirement.) If each member of the group receives an interest rate of 2.5 percent,

the average private social security account balance upon retirement will equal $278,597. This

number will be 22.4 percent higher, or $341,014, with an interest rate of 3.5 percent. The

percentage difference in total retirement wealth, including the equalizing guarantee of $5,000 per

year, is even smaller, and the difference in average consumption in the first year of retirement for

the two interest rates is less than $5,000. This difference is for a spread of a full 1 percentage

point; in the exercise conducted above, most consumers have interest rates between the

extremes, so there is even less of an effect on overall inequality.

   Even with a much wider spread of returns, there is only a modest effect on inequality. The

bottom panel of Figure 7 shows the case where consumers are distributed over (fixed) rates of

return from 1 percent to 7 percent, compared with the case when all get 3 percent. This can be

thought of as the case where consumers make a choice between equities and bonds at the

beginning of their working careers, and may never change thereafter. Because the spread is


                                                  30
wider, there is more inequality than before, but the effects are modest compared with the other

issues examined in this paper.

    It is important to note that assigning consumers to different but fixed rates of interest will not

necessarily have the same affects as allowing the interest rate to vary randomly over time for

individual consumers. In future work, we plan to examine how interest rate risk, as opposed to

interest rate dispersion, affects inequality.



3. List of works cited:–

Campbell, John Y., 1987, “Does saving anticipate declining labor income? An alternative test of

    the permanent income hypothesis” Econometrica, 55, 1249–73.

Carroll, Christopher, 1997, “Buffer-stock saving and the life-cycle permanent income

    hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1–55

Deaton, Angus, 1992, Understanding consumption, Oxford. Clarendon Press.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, 1994, “Intertemporal choice and inequality,” Journal of

    Political Economy, 102, 437–67.

Feldstein, Martin S., 1998, “Is income inequality really a problem?” in Income inequality: issues

    and policy options: a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,

    357–67.

Flavin, Marjorie, 1981, “The adjustment of consumption to changing expectations about future

    income,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 974–1009.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker, 1999, “Consumption over the life-cycle,”

    NBER Working Paper No.7271, Cambridge, MA. (Jul.)


                                                 31
Ludvigson, Sydney and Christina H. Paxson, 1998, “Approximation bias in linearized Euler

   equations,” NBER Technical Paper 236, Cambridge, MA. (Mar.)

Wilkinson, Richard, 1996, Unhealthy societies: the afflictions of inequality, London, Routledge.




                                               32
Table 1a Gini coefficients for consumption and interquartile ranges for logarithm of
consumption, with different social security plans. Isoelastic preferences

           G=0                   G=$5000               G=$10,000             G=$15,000             $G=20,000

 “Age”     gini       iqr        gini       iqr        gini       iqr        gini       iqr        gini       iqr

                              Isoelastic preferences, r=.03, =.05, borrowing constraints

 25        0.37       0.910      0.37       0.905      0.37       0.903      0.37       0.900      0.37       0.894
 29        0.41       1.034      0.40       1.024      0.40       1.020      0.40       1.018      0.40       1.011
 34        0.44       1.024      0.43       1.011      0.43       1.011      0.43       1.009      0.43       0.998
 39        0.46       1.098      0.46       1.079      0.46       1.082      0.45       1.079      0.45       1.064
 44        0.48       1.190      0.47       1.177      0.47       1.175      0.47       1.173      0.46       1.154
 49        0.50       1.283      0.50       1.249      0.49       1.243      0.49       1.236      0.48       1.230
 54        0.52       1.304      0.51       1.240      0.51       1.194      0.50       1.180      0.49       1.176
 59        0.52       1.287      0.51       1.199      0.50       1.122      0.49       1.056      0.48       1.035
 64        0.52       1.292      0.50       1.204      0.47       1.098      0.44       0.993      0.41       0.896
 69        0.52       1.292      0.50       1.204      0.47       1.093      0.44       0.986      0.41       0.876
 74        0.52       1.292      0.50       1.201      0.47       1.089      0.44       0.976      0.40       0.859
 79        0.52       1.292      0.50       1.191      0.46       1.086      0.43       0.956      0.40       0.835
 84        0.52       1.288      0.49       1.189      0.46       1.066      0.43       0.934      0.39       0.812

                              Isoelastic preferences, r=.03, =.03, borrowing constraints

 25        0.37        0.899      0.37        0.888    0.37       0.880        0.36       0.876      0.36      0.872
 29        0.40        1.033      0.40        1.016    0.40       1.010        0.40       1.007      0.39      1.000
 34        0.43        1.011      0.43        0.992    0.43       0.984        0.42       0.982      0.42      0.970
 39        0.46        1.092      0.45        1.068    0.45       1.054        0.44       1.049      0.44      1.039
 44        0.47        1.164      0.46        1.136    0.46       1.123        0.46       1.118      0.45      1.104
 49        0.50        1.238      0.49        1.205    0.48       1.181        0.48       1.173      0.47      1.168
 54        0.52        1.283      0.51        1.216    0.50       1.161        0.49       1.127      0.48      1.113
 59        0.52        1.275      0.51        1.191    0.49       1.115        0.48       1.039      0.48      0.985
 64        0.52        1.284      0.50        1.207    0.47       1.130        0.45       1.033      0.42      0.931
 69        0.52        1.284      0.50        1.207    0.47       1.130        0.45       1.033      0.42      0.931
 74        0.52        1.284      0.50        1.207    0.47       1.130        0.45       1.033      0.42      0.931
 79        0.52        1.284      0.50        1.207    0.47       1.130        0.45       1.033      0.42      0.931
 84        0.52        1.284      0.50        1.207    0.47       1.130        0.45       1.033      0.42      0.931
Notes: “Gini” refers to the gini coefficient for consumption. “Iqr” is the interquartile range of the logarithm of
consumption.




                                                          33
Table 1b Gini coefficients for consumption, with different social security plans
Quadratic preferences

         G=0                G=$5,000             G=$10,000            G=$15,000         G=$20,000

 “Age”   gini    iqr        gini       iqr       gini      iqr        gini      iqr     gini    iqr

                         Quadratic preferences, r=.03, =.03, borrowing constraints

 25      0.38    0.918      0.38       0.918     0.38      0.918      0.38      0.918   0.38    0.918
 29      0.41    1.050      0.41       1.050     0.41      1.050      0.41      1.050   0.41    1.050
 34      0.44    1.067      0.44       1.067     0.44      1.067      0.44      1.067   0.44    1.067
 39      0.47    1.167      0.47       1.167     0.47      1.167      0.47      1.166   0.47    1.165
 44      0.49    1.231      0.49       1.229     0.48      1.227      0.48      1.224   0.48    1.218
 49      0.51    1.327      0.51       1.296     0.50      1.291      0.49      1.283   0.49    1.276
 54      0.53    1.315      0.52       1.233     0.51      1.177      0.50      1.157   0.49    1.152
 59      0.53    1.287      0.51       1.184     0.50      1.093      0.49      1.045   0.48    1.009
 64      0.52    1.298      0.49       1.183     0.46      1.050      0.43      0.929   0.39    0.815
 69      0.52    1.298      0.49       1.183     0.46      1.050      0.43      0.929   0.39    0.815
 74      0.52    1.298      0.49       1.183     0.46      1.050      0.43      0.929   0.39    0.815
 79      0.52    1.298      0.49       1.183     0.46      1.050      0.43      0.929   0.39    0.815
 84      0.52    1.298      0.49       1.183     0.46      1.050      0.43      0.929   0.39    0.815

                   PIH: Quadratic Preferences, r=.03, =.03, no borrowing constraints

 25      0.37    0.899      0.36       0.872     0.36      0.845      0.35      0.818   0.34    0.792
 29      0.41    1.029      0.40       0.996     0.39      0.965      0.38      0.934   0.37    0.903
 34      0.45    1.061      0.44       1.025     0.43      0.990      0.42      0.955   0.41    0.922
 39      0.48    1.193      0.47       1.149     0.46      1.107      0.45      1.066   0.44    1.026
 44      0.51    1.333      0.50       1.280     0.48      1.229      0.47      1.180   0.46    1.133
 49      0.55    1.455      0.54       1.389     0.52      1.328      0.51      1.270   0.50    1.215
 54      0.58    1.515      0.57       1.442     0.55      1.377      0.54      1.316   0.53    1.258
 59      0.58    1.526      0.57       1.457     0.55      1.388      0.54      1.323   0.53    1.262
 64      0.58    1.560      0.57       1.493     0.55      1.422      0.54      1.356   0.53    1.294
 69      0.58    1.560      0.57       1.493     0.55      1.422      0.54      1.356   0.53    1.294
 74      0.58    1.560      0.57       1.493     0.55      1.422      0.54      1.356   0.53    1.294
 79      0.58    1.560      0.57       1.493     0.55      1.422      0.54      1.356   0.53    1.294
 84      0.58    1.560      0.57       1.493     0.55      1.422      0.54      1.356   0.53    1.294




                                                    34
Table 2 Poverty rates (fraction of age group with consumption less than $10,000) with
different social security plans.

 G:    $0       $5,000    $10,000     $15,000    $20,000      $0         $5,000   $10,000    $15,000    $20,000

 age           Isoelastic preferences, r=.03, =.05                    Isoelastic preferences, r=.03, =.03

 25    0.239    0.238     0.238       0.237      0.238        0.264      0.262    0.258      0.258      0.258
 29    0.210    0.209     0.207       0.207      0.207        0.228      0.227    0.225      0.225      0.225
 34    0.177    0.176     0.175       0.175      0.175        0.186      0.185    0.179      0.178      0.178
 39    0.158    0.153     0.153       0.153      0.153        0.155      0.154    0.153      0.150      0.150
 44    0.146    0.140     0.143       0.142      0.139        0.141      0.135    0.134      0.134      0.134
 49    0.133    0.127     0.127       0.128      0.128        0.129      0.115    0.115      0.115      0.114
 54    0.120    0.115     0.116       0.117      0.117        0.118      0.106    0.099      0.098      0.098
 59    0.119    0.104     0.103       0.106      0.105        0.112      0.095    0.091      0.093      0.094
 64    0.119    0.061     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.113      0.067    0.000      0.000      0.000
 69    0.123    0.069     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.113      0.067    0.000      0.000      0.000
 74    0.134    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.113      0.067    0.000      0.000      0.000
 79    0.141    0.076     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.113      0.067    0.000      0.000      0.000
 84    0.144    0.081     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.113      0.067    0.000      0.000      0.000

               Quadratic preferences, r=.03, =.03                     Quadratic preferences, r=.03, =.03,
                                                                           no borrowing constraints

 25    0.195    0.195     0.195       0.195      0.195        0.055      0.047    0.036      0.030      0.014
 29    0.186    0.186     0.186       0.186      0.186        0.082      0.068    0.054      0.043      0.030
 34    0.163    0.163     0.163       0.163      0.163        0.116      0.100    0.085      0.068      0.051
 39    0.152    0.152     0.152       0.152      0.152        0.153      0.143    0.125      0.114      0.097
 44    0.149    0.149     0.149       0.149      0.149        0.202      0.187    0.175      0.149      0.134
 49    0.144    0.141     0.138       0.139      0.139        0.247      0.224    0.203      0.183      0.163
 54    0.138    0.129     0.125       0.125      0.126        0.260      0.242    0.221      0.194      0.170
 59    0.147    0.126     0.118       0.123      0.124        0.277      0.259    0.234      0.209      0.192
 64    0.135    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.280      0.264    0.239      0.212      0.197
 69    0.135    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.280      0.264    0.239      0.212      0.197
 74    0.135    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.280      0.264    0.239      0.212      0.197
 79    0.135    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.280      0.264    0.239      0.212      0.197
 84    0.135    0.073     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.280      0.264    0.239      0.212      0.197




                                                         35
                                                         (1) isoelastic, δ=0.05, r=0.03              (2) isoelastic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                                                  400
     consumption, earnings, and assets in $,000




                                                  200

                                                    0

                                                  -200

                                                         (3)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03                  (4)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                                                  400
                                                                                                          borrow ing allow ed
                                                  200

                                                    0

                                                  -200
                                                         20        40         60          80         20         40         60         80

                                                                                               age




Figure 1: Age profiles of consumption, earnings (inclusive of transfers), and assets for different specifications, G=$5,000

                                                                                               36
                               (1) isoelastic, δ=0.05, r=0.03               (2) isoelastic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                         600

                         500

                         400
    consumption, $,000




                         300

                         200


                         600   (3)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03                  (4) quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                         500
                                                                                   borrow ing allow ed

                         400

                         300

                         200

                               0          20          40        60          0            20           40     60

                                                                      age




Figure 2: Consumption profiles under different specifications and alternative social security rules

                                                                     37
                                           (1) isoelastic, δ=0.05, r=0.03              (2) isoelastic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                                  .6


                                  .5
gini coefficient of consumption




                                  .4


                                  .3


                                  .6   (3)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03


                                  .5

                                                                                                    (4) quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                                  .4
                                                                                                        borrow ing allow ed

                                  .3
                                       0              20           40       60         0           20           40            60

                                                                                 age



                                                               38
Figure 3: Consumption inequality for different specifications and social security systems
                     0.8        U S data                                S im ulations


                                  earnings                                                   earnings
                     0.6
  gini coefficient




                     0.4

                                                                                         consum ption w ith alternative
                                           consum ption
                                                                                         social security rules
                     0.2

                           20         40              60     80   20                40               60             80

                                                            age




Figure 4: Actual and simulated inequality of earnings and consumption
                                                             39
                        (1) isoelastic, δ=0.05, r=0.03                    (2) isoelastic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                   .8

                   .7                                                                  G=$20,000

                   .6

                   .5                                    G =$5,000
                                              G=$0
gini coefficient




                   .4
                                                                          0       10       20       30     40
                        (3)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                   .8                                                                      age
                   .7

                   .6
                                              G=$15,000
                   .5
                               G =$10,000

                   .4
                        0       10       20       30          40

                                       age




Figure 5: Gini coefficients for assets excluding social security assets

                                                                     40
                          (1) isoelastic, δ=0.05, r=0.03                            (2) isoelastic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                     .6
                              G =$0
                     .4
                          G =$5,000
                     .2
                                                                                                         G =$20,000
                     0
  gini coefficient




                                                                                    0      10       20        30      40
                     .6    (3)quadratic, δ=0.03, r=0.03
                                                                                                    age

                     .4

                     .2                                                G =$10,000

                                                                G =$15,000
                     0
                          0           10        20         30          40
                                                age
                     20         30         40         50          60




Figure 6: Gini coefficients for total assets, including social security assets

                                                                            41
                                                      0.55
                                                                  inequality with r from 2.5 to 3.5 percent
                                                      0.50


                                                      0.45
                   gini coefficient for consumption
                                                      0.40                 inequality with r=3 percent


                                                      0.35


                                                      0.55                 inequality with r from 1 to 7 percent

                                                      0.50


                                                      0.45

                                                      0.40                 inequality with r=4 percent


                                                      0.35
                                                             20                40              60              80
                                                                                     age


Figure 7: The effects on consumption inequality of a distribution of interest rates




                                                                                    42
